---

title: Method and apparatus for utilizing prescribed aspect(s) of feedback object select operation to indicate user feedback of hypermedia content unit
abstract: A computer implemented method for gathering user feedback of one or more units of hypermedia content. Notice is made available to a user explaining a preestablished mapping between (1) at least one prescribed aspect of an operation of performing a predefined SELECT function to feedback objects and (2) user-indicated opinion of content units. Feedback objects comprise predetermined types of display objects provided to depart content units for different content units. Responsive to a user positioning a cursor upon a feedback object of a current content unit and performing the SELECT function, user-indicated opinion of the current content unit is ascertained by applying the preestablished mapping to the prescribed aspect of how the SELECT function was performed. Storage is initiated for a machine-readable record of the ascertained user-indicated opinion.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07568163&OS=07568163&RS=07568163
owner: Applied Minds, Inc.
number: 07568163
owner_city: Glendale
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050720
---
The invention relates to computer interfaces by which people read and navigate hypermedia documents. More particularly the invention concerns a method and apparatus for using prescribed aspect s of a user s feedback object select operation to indicate the user s feedback of a hypermedia content unit.

Besides the keyboard the mouse is the tool of choice for people that work with computers. The basic functions of a computer mouse are to position a cursor on a display monitor and to select objects using one or more buttons. Through the years hardware engineers have improved on the basic mouse by adding balls wheels optical mechanisms more buttons and variety of other gadgets. In this time software engineers have also done their part developing a variety of mouse functions designed to improve the man machine interface further.

Computer mice have become important tools for users to access Internet Web pages chiefly because most Web content includes graphics that are most conveniently accessed by mouse rather than keyboard. Technically speaking computer mice have become integral tools for using browsers which are software programs that allow users to view and navigate hypertext and hypermedia documents.

In the computing realm hypertext is a user interface paradigm for displaying documents which branch or perform on request. The most frequently discussed form of hypertext document contains automated cross references to other documents called hyperlinks. Selecting a hyperlink causes the computer to display the linked document within a very short period of time. Hypermedia is an extension of the term hypertext in which audio video plain text and non linear hyperlinks intertwine to create a generally non linear medium of information. The World Wide Web is a classic example of hypermedia. For purposes of the present application hypermedia is taken to include hypertext.

Browsers operate upon hypermedia content as follows. Typically a user instructs the browser program to present a particular content page by operating the mouse to position a cursor upon a hyperlink that represents that page and clicking the mouse. The user can also navigate inward to content pages by clicking a forward button or outward using a back button.

Although the foregoing well known systems enjoy widespread commercial success today the inventors have sought to further improve the performance and utility of browsers and related systems.

Broadly the invention concerns a computer implemented method for gathering user feedback of one or more units of hypermedia content. Notice is made available to a user explaining a preestablished mapping between 1 at least one prescribed aspect of an operation of performing a predefined SELECT function to feedback objects and 2 user indicated opinion of content units. Feedback objects comprise predetermined types of display objects provided to depart content units for different content units. Responsive to a user positioning a cursor upon a feedback object of a current content unit and performing the SELECT function user indicated opinion of the current content unit is ascertained by applying the preestablished mapping to the prescribed aspect of how the SELECT function was performed. Storage is initiated for a machine readable record of the ascertained user indicated opinion.

One aspect of the invention concerns a computing system which may be embodied by various hardware components and interconnections with one example being described by the system of . The system includes a computer of various subcomponents each of which may be implemented by one or more hardware devices software devices a portion of one or more hardware or software devices or a combination of the foregoing. The makeup of individual subcomponents is described in greater detail below with reference to an exemplary digital data processing apparatus logic circuit and signal bearing medium.

More particularly the computer includes a processing engine including or coupled to a browser feedback gathering tool pointing device software and various other modules . The browser comprises a software module configured to display various hypermedia content in human readable form. Such content includes pages frames documents or other units of hypermedia content. As an example the hypermedia content may be encoded in markup language such as HTML or another one of many existing markup languages. Without any intended limitation pages of content may also be used to describe any of the foregoing units or sub units of content as well as others familiar to ordinarily skilled artisans. To cite a few specific examples the browser may comprise MICROSOFT INTERNET EXPLORER MOZILLA FIREFOX NETSCAPE NAVIGATOR or another browser compatible with WINDOWS MAC LINUX UNIX or another operating system. The foregoing terms in capital letters are trademarks of their respective owners 

The feedback gathering tool comprises a software module configured to gather user feedback as to content presented by the browser as explained in greater detail below. The tool may be integrated into the engine or it may be a plug in or other add on component that operates in cooperation with the browser

The pointing device software includes drivers or other programming needed to convey a two dimensional cursor position from the pointing device to the engine tool and or other modules . The pointing device software also includes drivers or other programming needed to convey one or more different SELECT functions from the pointing device or another device not shown to the engine tool and or other modules . Optionally the pointing device software may also include programming to provide enhanced pointing device features. Although mouse software is used to provide a tangible example there is no intended limitation and such software as disclosed shall include software corresponding to a variety of other user input devices as listed below.

The pointing device comprises a hardware device operable by a user to convey a two dimensional cursor position and at least one SELECT function to the computer . Although a mouse is used to provide a tangible example a variety of other user input devices may be used to perform the same function such as keyboard trackball eye gaze input system foot pedals joystick voice operated cursor etc. Furthermore cursor motion and SELECT may be effected by one device or separately by different devices. One specific example of a SELECT function is clicking a mouse button.

The display provides a visual output of signals from the computer including output images generated by the browser for viewing by the user. Among other things content of the display includes the browser s depiction of hypermedia content pages and a cursor whose position is controlled by the pointing device . The display may be embodied by a cathode ray tube CRT plasma screen liquid crystal display LCD television screen or any other suitable video presentation device.

The remote computer is an optional component comprising a digital data processing device coupled to the computer by a link . As explained in greater detail below the system may employ the computer to store certain data instead of or in addition to using the computer to store such data. The link may use technology such as telephone Internet Intranet wireless satellite link fiber optic or any other apparatus for conveying digital data conveyance.

As mentioned above data processing entities such as the computer computer engine and tool may be implemented in various forms. One example is a digital data processing apparatus as exemplified by the hardware components and interconnections of the digital data processing apparatus of .

The apparatus includes a processor such as a microprocessor personal computer workstation controller microcontroller state machine or other processing machine coupled to storage . In the present example the storage includes a fast access storage as well as nonvolatile storage . The fast access storage may comprise random access memory RAM and may be used to store the programming instructions executed by the processor . The nonvolatile storage may comprise for example battery backup RAM EEPROM flash PROM one or more magnetic data storage disks such as a hard drive a tape drive or any other suitable storage device. The apparatus also includes an input output such as a line bus cable electromagnetic link or other means for the processor to exchange data with other hardware external to the apparatus .

Despite the specific foregoing description ordinarily skilled artisans having the benefit of this disclosure will recognize that the apparatus discussed above may be implemented in a machine of different construction without departing from the scope of the invention. As a specific example one of the components may be eliminated furthermore the storage and or may be provided on board the processor or even provided externally to the apparatus .

In contrast to the digital data processing apparatus discussed above a different embodiment of the invention uses logic circuitry instead of computer executed instructions to implement processing entities of the system . Depending upon the particular requirements of the application in the areas of speed expense tooling costs and the like this logic may be implemented by constructing an application specific integrated circuit ASIC having thousands of tiny integrated transistors. Such an ASIC may be implemented with CMOS TTL VLSI or another suitable construction. Other alternatives include a digital signal processing chip DSP discrete circuitry such as resistors capacitors diodes inductors and transistors field programmable gate array FPGA programmable logic array PLA programmable logic device PLD and the like. depicts an exemplary form of logic circuitry.

Having described various structural features some operational aspects will now be described. As mentioned above the operational aspect of the disclosure basically involves computer implemented operations of gathering user feedback as to one or more of hypermedia content units.

As an introduction to the operating sequence described below and without any intended limitation whatsoever an illustration is now given to concisely explain a very specific operational embodiment. The scope of the invention is not limited in any way to this particular description.

With reference to this example begins when the user is viewing a World Wide Web page upon the browser window . Among other content of the current web page there is an item of hyperlinked text . The hyperlink qualifies as a feedback object according to the definition . Whenever the user selects the hyperlink by positioning the cursor thereover and clicking the browser leaves the current web page and transitions to the hyperlinked web page. At the moment of clicking the feedback tool consults the preestablished mapping in order to translate the cursor position relative to the hyperlink into the user s supposed opinion of the current web site. In the example of if the user selects the hyperlink in a right zone the mapping indicates that the user was pleased with the current web site. Conversely if the user selects the hyperlink in a left zone the tool concludes that the user was displeased with the current web site. The tool stores a record of the user s opinion either locally at the computer or remotely at the computer .

Thus the disclosed example permits the user to signify his opinion of the current Web page without requiring any more mouse clicks than normal and without requiring a cumbersome graphical user interface GUI .

Wherever the functionality of any operational components of the disclosure is implemented using one or more machine executed program sequences these sequences may be embodied in various forms of signal bearing media. In the context of such a signal bearing media may comprise for example the storage or another signal bearing media such as a magnetic data storage diskette directly or indirectly accessible by a processor . Whether contained in the storage diskette or elsewhere the instructions may be stored on a variety of machine readable data storage media. Some examples include direct access storage e.g. a conventional hard drive redundant array of inexpensive disks RAID or another direct access storage device DASD serial access storage such as magnetic or optical tape electronic non volatile memory e.g. ROM EPROM flash PROM or EEPROM battery backup RAM optical storage e.g. CD ROM WORM DVD digital optical tape paper punch cards or other suitable signal bearing media including analog or digital transmission media and analog and communication links and wireless communications. In one embodiment the machine readable instructions may comprise software object code compiled from a language such as assembly language C etc.

In contrast to the signal bearing medium discussed above some or all functional components may be implemented using logic circuitry instead of using a processor to execute instructions. Such logic circuitry is therefore configured to perform operations to carry out the method of the disclosure. The logic circuitry may be implemented using many different types of circuitry as discussed above and exemplified by the logic circuitry of .

By way of introduction this disclosure discusses different examples of feedback objects and feedback mapping. Basically the feedback objects are different items presented by the browser by which the user can depart the currently displayed content page for a different page. In the example of all hyperlinks such as constitute feedback objects. By selecting the hyperlink for example the user not only leaves the current page but also simultaneously indicates his her opinion of the current page. In the present example the user selects the hyperlink by positioning the cursor over the hyperlink and performing a SELECT function such as clicking one or more mouse buttons tapping the enter or another keyboard key etc.

In one embodiment the user indicates his opinion by the location on the feedback object hyperlink at which the user executes the SELECT function. The predetermined relationship between different SELECT positions and their corresponding meaning user opinion is the feedback mapping. In the present example the user SELECTS a left region of the hyperlink to signify that the user did not like the current page. Conversely the user SELECTS a right region to indicate a positive opinion. The left and right regions can but need not be marked anywhere. Under other embodiments the user s opinion is indicated by other aspects of the SELECT operation than cursor position.

Broadly step defines types of feedback objects and establishes a feedback mapping . In one example these features are built in to the feedback gathering tool so they are defined when the tool is installed designed updated installed re booted or otherwise configured. In a different embodiment the types of feedback objects and feedback mapping are established in whole or part by user input.

In the example given above hyperlinks such as constitute one type of feedback object. In another example the browser s back button and forward button also constitute feedback objects. As another example hyperlinked regions images graphics or other imagery may be defined as feedback objects. Feedback objects may also be defined to include radio buttons check boxes and the like. Furthermore feedback objects may include menu items such as pull down menus with two examples including a web browser s Back and Forward pull down menu entries. Feedback objects may include virtually any subset of the display or browser window.

In one example the tool interprets SELECTION of different regions of the button or as different user opinions. In the example given above the feedback mapping specifies that each feedback object s left region such as indicates the user s negative opinion and the right region such as indicates a positive opinion. Similarly when the user SELECTS a left or right region of the button or the tool interprets this as a negative or positive opinion. In a different example the feedback mapping accommodates more than two opinions such as four and each feedback object has a corresponding number of regions in this example four . In still another example the tool senses user opinion on a continuum such as rating the current content page on a scale of zero to ten or zero to one hundred or zero to a greater number as fine grained as possible considering the limitations of the display screen resolution and mouse performance. In this case the feedback mapping specifies that user SELECTION of a feedback object at its rightmost point indicates one hundred and SELECTING the object at its left most point indicates zero or minus one hundred. Furthermore instead of using right left the feedback mapping may specify a top bottom distinction where SELECTIONS toward the top of feedback objects indicate positive opinions and SELECTIONS toward the bottom of feedback objects indicate negative opinions.

In still another example different feedback mappings may be used for different types of feedback objects. For example hyperlinks may use a left right continuum whereas the back and forward buttons use two distinct regions of up and down. 

In a different embodiment instead of mapping different cursor positions to different user opinions feedback mapping may consider a different aspect of the SELECT operation entirely. For example the feedback mapping may specify different durations of SELECT mapped to different user opinions. For example a longer SELECT e.g. mouse click may indicate greater satisfaction with the current URL or greater curiosity about the linked URL. This variation may be advantageous for limited mobility computer users who experience difficulty controlling the click location with precision but can more easily control click duration.

In still another embodiment feedback mapping may consider still another different aspect of the SELECT operation. Namely user opinion may be indicated by the particular mouse button used to perform the SELECT operation. For example a left click may indicate a positive user feedback while a right click indicates negative user feedback.

Step provides notice available to the user explaining the feedback mapping and the types of feedback objects . Step may be carried out in various ways. For example computer may provide an on demand help screen offline help file read me.txt file or other notice that makes a suitable explanation. In this example the computer makes notice available to the user but does not necessarily provide notice to the user because the user might not ask for it . As another example the computer may present a splash or other advisory screen whenever the browser is started. As another example the computer may display an explanatory mouse over box that selectively appears whenever the user positions the cursor over anything recognized as a feedback object. In contrast to performing step as disclosed notice may be provided by the optional step as discussed below.

In step the browser begins to operate presenting human readable output pages of content from a hypermedia source responsive to user direction through user entry of uniform resource locators URLs or other addresses selecting back forward buttons or making other customary browser inputs. The encoded source may comprise an Internet web page Intranet web page locally stored document or other hypermedia source. Optionally the hypermedia source may employ a markup language such as HTML SGML XML or another markup language. The operation repeats continually as long as the browser is active.

In step the browser determines that the cursor has moved over a feedback object as defined by . At this point step may also provide an optional enhancement to the presentation of the content by the browser . This embodiment is implemented in the case where cursor position is the aspect of the SELECT function used to indicate user opinion. This enhancement is not used for example where SELECT duration is used to indicate user opinion.

In the optional enhancement to step the browser and tool cooperatively display a tentative user opinion whenever the cursor is positioned over a feedback object such as hyperlink prior to user activation of the SELECT function. In one embodiment the foregoing feature may additionally constitute the notice specified by step i.e. they are one in the same alternatively notice may be given separately of this feature.

More particularly whenever components determine when the cursor is positioned over a feedback object the tool responds by utilizing the feedback mapping to translate cursor position into the corresponding user opinion. The tool then instructs the browser to provide a continually updated display of user indicated opinion corresponding to the current cursor position. This aids the user by indicating what his her opinion would be were s he to perform a SELECT action at that cursor position.

In the present example the displayed tentative user opinion indicates that should the user perform a SELECT then s he would enter a negative opinion of the current content page.

With the cursor lying over a feedback object step the tool in step determines whether the user has performed a SELECT function upon any feedback object of the current page. In one example step involves the browser using information supplied by the pointing device software to recognize when the user has positioned the cursor over a feedback object such as the hyperlink and performed a SELECT function such as clicking one or more mouse buttons tapping the enter or another keyboard key etc. The browser also uses information supplied by the pointing device software to recognize the cursor position upon the feedback object at the moment of the SELECT action. The browser provides the tool with a representative signal advising the tool that the user has SELECTED a feedback object. The browser also provides the tool with a representative signal advising the tool of the prescribed aspects of the user s SELECT action such as 1 the position upon the object where SELECTION was made 2 the duration of the SELECT action 2 the mouse button used to SELECT or another indication of user opinion not necessarily related to position within the feedback object.

As a counterpart to step step determines whether the cursor has left the current feedback object. If the cursor is still over the feedback object step continues to examine whether a SELECT has occurred. On the other hand if the cursor has left the current feedback object then step discontinues the tentative opinion display such as that began in step . At this point the display is removed because it is no longer relevant the user has moved the cursor elsewhere.

Similarly when step finds that a SELECT has occurred in the optional embodiment employing the tentative opinion feature then step discontinues the tentative opinion display responsive to the SELECT. At this point the display is removed because the opinion is no longer tentative since the browser is transitioning to the newly selected content page.

Step is omitted for implementations of the routine where user opinion is indicated by a non positional aspect of the SELECT action such as mouse click duration mouse button choice etc.

Responsive notice from step that the user positioned the cursor upon a feedback object and activated a SELECT function the tool then proceeds to determine the user indicated opinion signified by the SELECT action step . Namely the tool applies the feedback mapping to the designated aspect of the SELECT function e.g. cursor position within the feedback object at the moment of SELECT mouse click duration mouse button choice etc. In other words the feedback mapping is used to map the designated characteristic of the SELECT function into a representative user opinion.

The routine correlates the user s opinion with a particular content unit of the hypermedia source. The type of content unit depends upon the manner in which the routine is implemented which may occur in different embodiments. For example when determining the user s opinion step the tool may be programmed to associate that opinion with one of the following content units 1 the current page namely the page of hypermedia content containing the feedback object SELECTED by the user 2 the entire hypermedia document or a logical or functional subset of pages including the current page that contains the feedback object SELECTED by the user 3 the entire Internet or Intranet web site containing the source page with the user selected feedback object 4 a subset of the Internet or Intranet web site containing the user selected feedback object such as a subset of the web site relating to a particular subject matter or 5 another unit.

Thus the user s SELECT operation may convey the user s sentiment about the current hypermedia page as the user leaves that page or a more generalized sentiment concerning some or all of the hypermedia source document regardless of whether the user is leaving or entering a particular hypermedia page. In the illustrated embodiment without any limitation the significance of the user s SELECT operation is preset e.g. fixedly associated with one particular class of content unit depending upon how the routine is written and installed.

Step initiates storage of the user opinion obtained from step . For instance the engine may transmit an instruction to write the user opinion to storage or the engine may perform the storage itself.

Storage may occur locally at the computer remotely at another computer or at another site. Step is performed by the tool the engine browser another module or a combination of the foregoing. Storage may be conducted in the form of any machine readable record such as ASCII file binary file memory address sector XML file document memory register page linked list relational database or any other desired data structure or physical storage construct.

While the foregoing disclosure shows a number of illustrative embodiments it will be apparent to those skilled in the art that various changes and modifications can be made herein without departing from the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. Furthermore although elements of the invention may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated. Additionally ordinarily skilled artisans will recognize that operational sequences must be set forth in some specific order for the purpose of explanation and claiming but the present invention contemplates various changes beyond such specific order.

In addition those of ordinary skill in the relevant art will understand that information and signals may be represented using a variety of different technologies and techniques. For example any data instructions commands information signals bits symbols and chips referenced herein may be represented by voltages currents electromagnetic waves magnetic fields or particles optical fields or particles other items or a combination of the foregoing.

Moreover ordinarily skilled artisans will appreciate that any illustrative logical blocks modules circuits and process steps described herein may be implemented as electronic hardware computer software or combinations of both. To clearly illustrate this interchangeability of hardware and software various illustrative components blocks modules circuits and steps have been described above generally in terms of their functionality. Whether such functionality is implemented as hardware or software depends upon the particular application and design constraints imposed on the overall system. Skilled artisans may implement the described functionality in varying ways for each particular application but such implementation decisions should not be interpreted as causing a departure from the scope of the present invention.

The various illustrative logical blocks modules and circuits described in connection with the embodiments disclosed herein may be implemented or performed with a general purpose processor a digital signal processor DSP an application specific integrated circuit ASIC a field programmable gate array FPGA or other programmable logic device discrete gate or transistor logic discrete hardware components or any combination thereof designed to perform the functions described herein. A general purpose processor may be a microprocessor but in the alternative the processor may be any conventional processor controller microcontroller or state machine. A processor may also be implemented as a combination of computing devices e.g. a combination of a DSP and a microprocessor a plurality of microprocessors one or more microprocessors in conjunction with a DSP core or any other such configuration.

The steps of a method or algorithm described in connection with the embodiments disclosed herein may be embodied directly in hardware in a software module executed by a processor or in a combination of the two. A software module may reside in RAM memory flash memory ROM memory EPROM memory EEPROM memory registers hard disk a removable disk a CD ROM or any other form of storage medium known in the art. An exemplary storage medium is coupled to the processor such the processor can read information from and write information to the storage medium. In the alternative the storage medium may be integral to the processor. The processor and the storage medium may reside in an ASIC.

The previous description of the disclosed embodiments is provided to enable any person skilled in the art to make or use the present invention. Various modifications to these embodiments will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art and the generic principles defined herein may be applied to other embodiments without departing from the spirit or scope of the invention. Thus the present invention is not intended to be limited to the embodiments shown herein but is to be accorded the widest scope consistent with the principles and novel features disclosed herein.

