---

title: Wave shaped vehicle barrier
abstract: A vehicle barrier uses adjacent rows of wave-like sections adapted to be positioned on a ground surface. A section is defined by (i) a planar wall extending angularly upward from the ground surface to the section's peak, and (ii) a concave wall extending angularly downward from the section's peak to the ground surface.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07118305&OS=07118305&RS=07118305
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07118305
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050523
---
The invention described herein was made in the performance of official duties by an employee of the Department of the Navy and may be manufactured used licensed by or for the Government for any governmental purpose without payment of any royalties thereon.

The invention relates generally to vehicle barriers and more particularly to a wave shaped barrier capable of slowing or arresting a moving vehicle as the vehicle encounters the barrier.

Vehicle barriers made from concrete and steel reinforced concrete require planning material construction and heavy equipment to put in place. Once in place it can be difficult to remove or to modify the size and shape of these barriers to meet changing mission protection requirements. Such changes include extending shrinking or moving a protection area. Using current barrier technology entire sections might have to be destroyed to modify the protection area.

Concrete based construction can also require extensive amounts of time and pre deployment site activity thus allowing individuals with diverging social interests time to plan against this type of deployment. In addition the weight of these heavy barriers may limit their use to a certain degree. For example because of their weight concrete based barriers are frequently arranged along a single line. Thus the barriers only offer a single line of defense that if compromised opens the door to easy vehicle entry.

A vehicle barrier is described. The vehicle barrier provides multiple lines of defense against an oncoming vehicle. The vehicle barrier may be a modular vehicle barrier that can be quickly deployed and or moved to accommodate changing protection needs.

In accordance with one implementation a vehicle barrier includes one or more adjacent rows of wave like sections adapted to be positioned on a ground surface. At least one section is defined by i a planar wall extending angularly upward from the ground surface to the section s peak and ii a concave wall extending angularly downward from the section s peak to the ground surface.

Other implementations of the present invention will become more obvious hereinafter in the specification and drawings.

Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to a cross sectional view of a multiple section vehicle barrier in accordance with one implementation of the present invention is shown and is referenced generally by numeral . In general sections of barrier are wave shaped such that a plurality of the sections arranged in an adjacent fashion resemble a series of contiguous waves with alternating peaks and valleys. More specifically a section typically is defined by i a planar wall that extends angularly upward from a wave valley to a wave peak and ii a concave wall that extends from the wave peak to a next successive wave valley. Thus concave wall is somewhat C shaped and for convenience vehicle barrier will be referred to herein as a C wave barrier having multiple C wave sections. The number of C wave sections can be greater or less than that shown as long as at least two peak valley peak trenches are defined.

C wave barrier is positioned on a ground surface referenced by dashed line with the planar walls thereof facing the direction of expected incoming vehicle traffic. In the direction of expected incoming vehicle traffic is referenced by direction arrow . The width of C wave barrier i.e. into and out of the paper can be tailored to a specific application. For larger application widths multiple C wave barriers can be placed in a side by side relationship to form the desired width.

When C wave barrier is positioned in this fashion a wheeled vehicle not shown would approach and encounter C wave barrier from direction . Assuming the vehicle has enough forward momentum to climb the first encountered planar wall the vehicle s front wheel s will become entrenched in the barrier s first peak valley peak trench defined between vertical dashed lines . With a vehicle traveling along direction rotation of wheel s in trench will be as indicated by directional arrow .

The concave shape of concave wall will tend to pull the wheel s deeper into the trench . This action can be enhanced if the exposed surface A of concave wall presents an increased traction surface when wheel s are rotating in direction . For example as illustrated in surface A could have grooves formed therein and extending along the width thereof approximately parallel to ground surface . The shape of grooves is selected such that wheel traction is enhanced when a wheel s are rotating in direction . For example in the illustrated embodiment grooves are shaped such that steps are formed on surface A. Furthermore grooves can be shaped to simultaneously reduce traction when wheel s are rotating in direction opposite that of direction . In this way if the rotational direction of entrenched wheel s were reversed to assume direction the wheel s will be further arrested within trench . Assuming an oncoming vehicle had a great deal of forward momentum to get through or over the first section C wave barrier presents a redundant system such that there is at least one additional C wave section that would function as just described to slow or arrest a moving vehicle.

As illustrated in exemplary C wave barrier uses identically sized barrier sections that can be scaled for a variety of applications. As would be understood by one of ordinary skill in the art such scaling can be simplified by judicious selection of angles i.e. the angle that planar wall makes with ground surface the angles between planar wall and concave wall at the peaks and valleys etc. valley to valley lengths and a radius of curvature of concave wall to yield a standardized set of geometric design ratios. For example one exemplary set of design ratios is as follows 

However it is to be understood that the present invention is not limited to these ratios or to the use of identically sized barrier sections. For example an exemplary C wave barrier shown in utilizes progressively larger barrier sections when viewed along the expected direction of an incoming vehicle.

Another implementation of the present invention is illustrated in where a C wave barrier is similar to barrier described above. However a leading wall of C wave barrier is a non planar contoured wall designed to convert vehicle momentum in direction to vertical movement thereby serving to pop up the vehicle s wheel s to assure entrenchment thereof in one of the barrier s trenches. It is to be understood that the particular contour of leading wall is not a limitation of the present invention. Further leading wall can be added in various locations such as on top of as shown or in place of the first planar wall .

A variety of methods can be used to construct the various C wave barriers described herein. In one implementation the barrier could be a solid structure i.e. the spaces between the barrier s exposed surface and ground surface would be filled with a solid material permanently constructed from for example concrete poured and formed in situ. In this type of construction the sheer weight of the barrier would serve to anchor the barrier to the ground.

The present invention also lends itself to a variety of easily transported and assembled components. For example the barriers described herein could be made from rigid sheet s of metal such as aluminum plate e.g. one continuous sheet formed into multiple C wave sections a separate sheet forming each C wave section as a modular component of a C wave barrier a separate sheet for each planar wall and a separate sheet for each concave wall as modular elements of a C wave section etc. Since this type of barrier is considerably lighter than one made from solid concrete it may need to be anchored to the ground. While a variety of such anchoring systems could be used one such anchoring system will be described by way of example with reference to .

Anchoring system will typically span the width of a C wave barrier section and attach to planar wall and concave wall of each section thereof to form a complete C wave barrier illustrated in . Anchoring system utilizes a plurality of t sections spaced apart and coupled to one another by coupling rods . The number of and spacing between t sections is a design choice that is not a limitation of the present invention. The t section has a vertical member with a lower portion A thereof designed to anchor t section into the ground. An upper portion B is sized and shaped to nest into the interior of a C wave barrier section peak . The t section also has left and right cross members A and B respectively that support and attach to a respective concave wall and planar wall . Attachment can be made by conventional bolts or by other suitable means. Those of t sections forming the outboard ends of anchoring system can also be equipped with a coupling tab that would be used to link an adjacent anchoring system thereto.

The C wave barrier provides a simple and efficient design for slowing and or arresting an oncoming vehicle. The design lends itself to a variety of permanent and temporary constructions. Thus the present invention can be adapted to a variety of applications and changing protection scenarios.

Although the invention has been described relative to specific implementations thereof there are numerous variations and modifications that will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced other than as specifically described.

