---

title: Variable emittance surfaces
abstract: Designs for constructing a surface with variable emittance are described. This is achieved by making a surface where the emissivity varies on a scale smaller than the resolution of a thermal imager viewing the surface. One design utilizes many cylindrical surfaces with their axis parallel and their surfaces nearly in contact. Individual cylinders have the property that when rotated to zero degrees they show a surface with an emissivity of one and when rotated to 180 degrees display a surface with an emissivity of zero. At intermediate angles of rotation a sensor that could resolve individual cylinders would see alternate lines with high and low emittance but a sensor unable to resolve individual cylinders sees a surface with an emittance that depends on the angle the cylinders are rotated. Variable emittance surfaces are expected to be useful for controlling target signature and for making spectral reflectivity measurements using a hyper-spectral radiometer.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07390123&OS=07390123&RS=07390123
owner: United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07390123
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050809
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used sold imported and or licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America.

The invention relates to the remote detection of various objects via the object s emittance and more particularly to varying the object s emittance to identify or camouflage them.

Countermeasures to both visible and thermal sensors such as camouflage and target signature reduction have been of great importance in the modern battlefield. One typical infrared IR camouflage technique involves covering an object with a material cover with or without environmentally controlled subsystems having added extraordinary power requirements . Much effort has been expended in the determination of the materials to be used to comprise the typical IR camouflage covering. One example in the IR camouflage prior art may be found in U.S. Pat. No. 4 156 033 to Earl F. Bienz issued on 22 May 1979. In the Bienz patent there is disclosed applying appropriate foam layers to a tank so as to mask its thermal signature. In the visible and also in the infrared these approaches have had limited success.

Modeling camouflage effectiveness is an area undergoing rapid development where current modeling methodologies consider both the infrared and visible spectrum. Finding targets in the infrared requires target size and apparent temperature difference between the target and the background a summary measure that combines target background physical temperature difference and target background emissivity difference. As current IR sensor technology of which the sensors are commonly called forward looking infrared FLIR sensors matures sensors which respond to apparent temperature difference will be replaced by multi band radiometers and hyper spectral line scanners capable of generating contrasts which can separate these two effects i.e. they can generate a contrast based on the physical temperature differences between the target and the background and a separate contrast based on emissivity differences between the target and the background. Making targets hard to find in the visible is primarily concerned with the development of ever more effective camouflage patterns and with techniques for characterizing the effectiveness of the camouflage for particular terrain.

While the prior art has reported using surface modification devices and techniques none have established a basis for a specific apparatus and technique dedicated to the task of resolving the particular problem at hand. What is needed in this instance is a real time control of 1 the effective emissivity band averaged or spectral in the thermal wavelength region 2 apparent color in the visible wavelength region and 3 camouflage patterns for both thermal and visible wavelength regions.

The problem is that emissivity is a microscopic property of surfaces that can be controlled by painting but it is difficult to imagine an approach for controlling it in fractions of a second. Those skilled in the art know that a thermal imager responds to the area weighted average emissivity averaged over the detector footprint. For a target at tactical ranges that footprint has spatial dimensions that are typically between 10 and 100 cm on a side depending on detector size focal length and target range. The detector footprint is the area on the target seen by a single detector. For a distant target at range R viewed with a sensor with focal length f the dimension of the footprint Dis related the detector dimension D defined as the square root of its area by D R f D 

Accordingly there is a need in the art to have variable emittance surfaces. The present invention addresses this need.

The present invention achieves this and other objectives by making a surface where the effective emissivity varies on a scale smaller than the resolution of a thermal imager viewing the surface. One embodiment utilizes many cylindrical surfaces with their axis parallel and their surfaces nearly in contact. Individual cylinders have the property that when rotated to zero degrees they show a surface with an emissivity of one and when rotated to 180 degrees display a surface with an emissivity of zero. At intermediate angles of rotation a sensor that could resolve individual cylinders would see alternate lines with high and low emittance but a sensor unable to resolve individual cylinders sees a surface with an emittance that depends on the angle the cylinders are rotated. Variable emittance surfaces are expected to be useful for controlling target signature and for making spectral reflectivity measurements using a hyper spectral radiometer.

From the point of view of a thermal sensor the variable emittance surfaces of the invention enable an operator to choose the surface of an object from a continuum of treated surfaces with different spectral emittance and reflectance properties in fractions of a second. The implication is that if the area weighted average emissivity over an area small compared to the detector footprint is appropriately varied then a thermal imaging sensor would have trouble distinguishing this small area from the background.

From the point of view of a thermal sensor the variable emittance surfaces of the invention enables an operator to choose the surface of an object from a continuum of treated surfaces with different spectral emittance and reflectance properties in fractions of a second. However prior to describing the invention in detail the theory of the invention must be described.

Suppose a plane target surface is normal to a sensor line of sight and half the detector footprint on a target falls entirely on a surface with emissivity and the other half falls on a surface with emissivity . For this case the emittance seen by the detector is . More generally if the detector footprint has area A and area Aof the footprint is on a surface with emissivity then the effective emittance seen by the detector is given by

Here the sum in the denominator equals the area A of the detector footprint. Equation 1 asserts the effective emittance seen by a detector is the area weighted average emissivity over the detector footprint.

The designs of the invention for variable emissivity surfaces depend on the validity of Equation 1 . To clarify the meaning of this equation and gain a deeper understanding of it a derivation of this equation will now be provided.

In general the emissivity of a surface depends on the wavelength temperature and the angle at which the sensor looks at the surface.

Notation for the different emissivities is introduced because all the quantities denoted by these symbols can be controlled in fractions of a second by the invention.

Suppose the detector footprint falls on a surface where area dAof the surface has emissivity T and the other part of the footprint falls on a surface with area dAand emissivity T . It is assumed the angles and change negligibly between area dAand dAand for the moment this change is neglected. Let and denote the flux incident on the detector from areas dAand dA. Then 

Equation 4b defines what is meant by the effective directional spectral emittance of a surface with area dA dAseen by a single detector when dAhas one emissivity and dAhas a different emissivity. Comparing 4a and 4b 

Equation 7 and its derivation is based on approximating a surface by a series of plane surface where each plane surface has an emissivity . A more precise expression for effective directional emittance relaxes the plane surface approximation but requires an integral 

The analysis of variable emittance surfaces done here neglects reflections. Reflections of high emissive surfaces seen by the sensor as reflections in low emissive surfaces should be considered in an improved treatment of the subject.

Given this theory then variable emittance surfaces utilizing cylindrical spherical and plane elements are described.

Circular Cross Section. Imagine a cylindrical surface with circular cross section where one side of the cylinder is treated so that it has an emissivity near one and the other side of the cylindrical surface is treated so that it has an emissivity near zero. Suppose also that both sides of the cylinder act as lambertian sources. illustrates an individual cylinder rotated at 0 45 90 135 and 180 degrees.

In the left part of the figure shows an isometric view of a cylinder with a circular cross section while the right part shows a side view of a single cylinder with a circular cross section rotated to different positions. One side of the cylinder has an emissivity of one indicated by black and the other side of the cylinder has an emissivity of zero indicated by white.

Also in at an angle of zero degrees the cylinder surface pointing toward the sensor has an emissivity of one and at 180 degrees the cylinder surface pointing toward the sensor has an emissivity of zero. At intermediate angles when the cylinder is poorly resolved its effective emissivity is gray and varies continuously with rotation angle between one and zero. If the cylinder surface denoted by black had a high spectral emissivity and the cylinder surface denoted by white had a low spectral emissivity then by rotating the cylinder the spectral emissivity would vary continuously between the two extremes as the cylinder was rotated. If the cylinder surface denoted by black had one directional emissivity and the cylinder surface denoted by white had a different directional emissivity then as the cylinder rotated the directional properties of the emissivity would vary continuously between the two extremes.

In the left and right parts of the figure show an isometric view of a triangular prism along with side and top views of a single triangular prism rotated to different positions. Sides AB BC and CA of the prism have emissivities of one one half and zero respectively and are represented in the figure by black and gray respectively. Numbers in the figure refer to the angle of rotation.

Referring to The emittance of these surfaces to a sensor not able to resolve the individual triangular facets is one at zero degrees is 0.75 at sixty degrees and one half at 120 degrees and changes continuously with rotation angle. As the cylinder is rotated further to 240 degrees only surface CA is visible and the effective emittance of the surface changes to zero. Had the surfaces AB BC and CA been treated to have spectral emissivities and then by rotating the cylinder the effective spectral emittance of a surface made up of multiple cylinders as in could be controlled by appropriately rotating the cylinders. Had the surface AB BC and CA been treated to have specific directional emissivities then the effective directional emittance of a surface made up of multiple cylinders could be controlled by appropriately rotating the cylinders.

Referring to the sphere is rotated about a vertical axis through its center. At an angle of zero degrees only that part of the sphere with an emissivity of one is visible to the sensor and at 180 degrees only that part of the sphere with an emissivity of zero is visible to the sensor. At intermediate angles when the sensor is unable to resolve the high and low emissivity parts of the sphere its effective directional gray body emittance varies continuously with rotation angle between one and zero. Had the areas denoted by black and white in the figure been treated to produce surfaces with spectral emissivity and then the effective spectral emittance of a surface covered with two layers of spheres can be continuously varied between these extremes. Similarly had the areas denoted by black and white in the figure been treated to produce surfaces with directional emissivities and then the effective directional emittance of a surface covered with two layers of spheres can be continuously varied between these extremes.

In eight of the spheres are rotated to 90 degrees eight of the spheres are rotated to 45 degrees and eight of the spheres are rotated to 135 degrees. Assuming black corresponds to an emissivity of one and white corresponds to an emissivity of zero the effective emittance of the area contributed by the spheres for a sensor unable to resolve the spheres is about one half. Because the surface is not entirely covered with spheres the effective surface emittance is different from this and depends on the emissivity of the material behind the spheres.

In as the fan blades are successively pulled out so they cover an area of 90 180 270 and 360 degrees the effective gray body emissivity of the area goes from nearly one at zero degrees to nearly zero at 360 degrees. How close comes to zero and one depends on the area of the gray colored sector that houses the fan blades. Had the areas depicted in black and white been characterized by different spectral emissivities and then as more of the fan blades are exposed the effective directional spectral emissivity would morph between and . Had the areas depicted in black and white been characterized with directional spectral emissivities and then by spreading out the fan blades the effective directional spectral emissivity could be controlled between and .

One use of variable emittance surfaces is for measuring spectral emittance of tank surfaces. Since tank surfaces are approximately lambertian a desired property of the variable emittance surface is that it be lambertian. Another desired attribute of the variable emittance surface is that a single layer completely cover the surface since this allows the greatest control of surface properties. A third attribute is the linearity of the relationship between emittance and element rotation angle. A linear relationship is desired for ease in calibrating the surface.

When the sensor moves in a plane perpendicular to the cylinder axis then the radiance seen by the sensor changes with viewing angle because of changes in the relative amount of surfaces Aand Athat are visible. However the cylinders can be arranged so that increases in surface area Acaused by movement in this plane on one cylinder is counterbalanced with decreases in Ain an adjacent cylinder. Similar remarks apply to A. With a modification of the design shown in this geometry allows for a nearly lambertian surface in a plane perpendicular to the cylinder axis. When the sensor moves in a plane that contains the cylinder axis lambertian properties of the variable emittance surface depend mainly on cylinder surface treatment.

This geometry completely covers the surface at multiples of 60 degrees. At other angles small gaps appears between the cylinders and allow the surface behind the cylinders to be seen. Linearity. The relationship between apparent emittance with rotation angle is non linear.

Because this design utilizes three rather than two surfaces it is more versatile then competing designs in controlling surface properties.

When the sensor moves in a plane perpendicular to the axis of the rotation the system can be balanced so that additional white space seen in some spheres is balanced by additional black space seen in other spheres and in this plane the surface is approximately lambertian. If the spheres are rotated to ninety degrees as in individual spheres will approximately make a lambertian surface.

As indicated in a single layer of spheres provides incomplete coverage. This can be compensated for by using two layers of spheres.

Lambertian Properties. The lambertian properties of the surface depend on the surface treatment. This geometry is the same as a flat tank surface and for this reason the properties of this surface may be particularly well matched to a flat tank surface.

Surface Coverage. The geometry shown in this figure has incomplete coverage. However by modifying this geometry to a rectangular or square shape coverage can be increased.

The problem addressed is to measure the spectral emittance of a tank sized object in the field. Spectral ranges of interest are 3 5 and 8 12 . Typically target surfaces to be measured are diffuse rather than spectral reflectors and for reflection angles not too far from the normal are well approximated by lambertian sources. The main interest is in area averaged spectral emissivity. Stated another way there is little interest in how the spectral emittance varies from one small part of the target to another small part of the target. Two hyperspectral imaging devices are available one operates in the 3 5 band and the other operates in the 8 12 band. Blackbody sources with an adjustable temperature are also available. Although more accurate measurements are welcome errors of 10 are acceptable.

The idea of the measurement is to place a variable emittance source on the target area to be measured so that the sensor simultaneously sees the target surface and the variable emittance source. The variable emittance source is adjusted so that the signal seen by the sensor from the target surface matches the signal from the variable emittance source. The sensor sees emitted and reflected radiation from the target and variable emissivity surfaces. It also sees radiation emitted from the atmosphere and for low transmission atmospheric radiation is the dominant radiation seen by the sensor. If the target surface and the variable emittance surface temperature are the same and if they both reflect incident radiation into the sensor the same way then when the signal strength seen by the sensor when it views the target surface matches the signal strength when the sensor views the variable emittance surface it can be concluded that the emittance of the target and the variable emittance surfaces are the same. The spectral emittance properties of the variable emittance surface are known either by modeling or by laboratory measurement. If the sensor is a broadband sensor this procedure measures broadband emittance. If the sensor is a hyperspectral imaging device and the signal strength is matched for each sub band then this procedure measures the directional spectral emittance.

Interest is in the spectral emittance over a substantial part of the tank sized target and transmission considerations dictate that a wide field of view optic on each hyperspectral sensor be used. The range is adjusted so that individual elements of the variable emittance surface are not resolved. The size of the variable emittance surface should be large enough so that it occupies at least sixteen picture elements in the imager.

Having chosen the range an accuracy analysis of the results requires spectral transmission measurements. For wavelengths where the transmission is low atmospheric radiation dominates the signal seen by the sensor and then spectral emittance measurements will either be inaccurate or not possible depending on the wavelength and transmission value. Thus it is important to measure atmospheric spectral transmission and this is done in the following way.

In making these measurements the blackbody must be substantially larger than the detector footprint when the sensor is at range. To reduce the deleterious effects of low transmission it is desirable to make the measurements at the closest practical range and this was one consideration in using a wild field of view optic.

Reflected radiation will be important whenever it is non negligible compared to the emitted radiation. For the purpose of making spectral emittance measurements use a two pronged approach 

One can either measure the target at ambient temperature or at an elevated temperature. For both approaches the variable emittance surface is in intimate thermal contact with the surface to be measured.

Do not exercise the tank and have several large fans blowing on the tank and variable emittance surface. The measurements are made when thermocouples attached to both surfaces indicate that both surfaces are at the same temperature to within 0.1 C. The measurements are done at several values of the variable emittance surface to match the reference and target signals at the wavelengths of interest.

Although the tank has been recently exercised thermocouples on the tank area to be measured indicate that the surface temperature over the region of interest is constant to within 0.1 C. When necessary several fans blow on the tank to reduce the time for this to happen. Electric heating elements are installed in the variable emittance surface and adjusted so that the temperature of the variable emittance surface matches that of the tank surface to within 0.1 C. When this condition is satisfied measurements are done at several values of the variable emittance surface to match reference and target signals at the wavelengths of interest.

Several embodiments for making variable emissivity surfaces have been presented and the attributes of the different designs discussed. The proposed embodiments are capable of varying emittance in fractions of a second. The embodiments can also continuously control reflectance properties of a surface to being near perfectly diffuse to being near perfectly specular in fractions of a second. They can be used to locally control the color of a tank. In the proposed embodiments only a small amount of energy is needed to move elements. For example as shown in a motor or motors coupled to gears and a shaft through the various 3 dimensional surfaces could be used to move the various surfaces as desired. Of course those skilled in the art could engineer any number of ways to move the surfaces in accordance with the teachings of the invention. Of course once moved maintaining a particular color reflective property or emittance requires no additional energy. While various embodiments have been described those skilled in the art also could devise any number of various designs for the variable emittance surfaces of the present invention.

In conclusion the variable emittance surfaces can be used to control vehicle surface characteristics in the visible and infrared. For example in different patterns can be painted on surfaces AB BC and AC. By utilizing a surface made of many triangular prisms a tank operator could chose from three patterns to have a more optimum match to a changing background.

