---

title: Ferroelectric-type nonvolatile semiconductor memory and operation method thereof
abstract: A method of operating a ferroelectric-type nonvolatile semiconductor memory comprising a memory unit having a bit line, a transistor for selection, a sub-memory unit composed of memory cells that are M in number, plate lines that are M in number, and a sense amplifier connected to the bit line; wherein each memory cell comprises a first electrode, a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode; the first electrodes of the memory cells constituting the sub-memory unit are in common with the sub-memory unit; said common first electrode is connected to the bit line through the transistor for selection; and each second electrode is connected to each plate line; said method comprising reading out data stored in the memory cell at a designated address externally designated, latching said data in the sense amplifier, and then outputting said data latched in the sense amplifier.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07002836&OS=07002836&RS=07002836
owner: Sony Corporation
number: 07002836
owner_city: 
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050303
---
This is a continuation application of Ser. No. 10 239 388 filed on Sep. 23 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 882 558 issued Apr. 19 2005 which in turn is a 371 of PCT JP02 002576 filed Jan. 17 2002 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention relates to a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory and an operation method thereof.

In recent years studies are actively made with regard to a mass storage ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory. A ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory to be sometimes abbreviated as nonvolatile memory hereinafter permits fast access and is nonvolatile and it is small in size and consumes low level electric power. Further the ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory is highly impact resistant and it is expected to be used as a main memory in various electronic devices having file storage and resume functions such as a portable computer a cellular phone and a game machine or to be used as a recording medium for recording voices and video images.

The above nonvolatile memory is a fast rewritable nonvolatile memory according to a method in which fast polarization inversion of a ferroelectric thin film and residual polarization thereof are used and a change in an accumulated charge amount in a memory cell capacitor member having a ferroelectric layer is detected. In principle the nonvolatile memory comprises the memory cell and a transistor for selection transistor for switching . The memory cell comprises for example a lower electrode an upper electrode and a ferroelectric layer interposed between them. Data is written into and read out from the above nonvolatile memory by application of a P E hysteresis loop of a ferroelectric material shown in . That is when an external electric field is applied to the ferroelectric layer and then removed the ferroelectric layer exhibits residual polarization. The residual polarization comes to be Pwhen an external electric field in the plus direction is applied and it comes to be Pwhen an external electric field in the minus direction is applied. In this case a case where the residual polarization is in a Pstate see D in is taken as 0 and a case where the residual polarization is in a Pstate see A in is taken as 1 .

For discriminating states of 1 and 0 an external electric field for example in the plus direction is applied to the ferroelectric layer whereby the polarization of the ferroelectric layer comes to be in a C state in FIG. 27. When the data is 0 the polarization state of the ferroelectric layer changes from D to C . When the data is 1 the polarization state of the ferroelectric layer changes from A to C through B . When the data is 0 no polarization inversion takes place in the ferroelectric layer. When the data is 1 polarization inversion takes place in the ferroelectric layer. As a result there is caused a difference in the accumulated charge amount in the memory cell. The transistor for selection in a selected nonvolatile memory is turned on whereby the accumulated charge is detected as a signal current. When the external electric field is changed to 0 after the data is read out the polarization state of the ferroelectric layer comes into a D state in FIG. 27 both when the data is 0 and when the data is 1 . That is when the data is read out the data 1 is once destroyed when the data is 1 therefore an external electric field in the minus direction is applied so that the polarization state is brought into A state through D and E to re write data 1 .

The structure and the operation of a currently mainstream nonvolatile memory are proposed by S. Sheffiled et al in U.S. Pat. No. 4 873 664. The above nonvolatile memory is constituted of two nonvolatile memory cells as shown in an equivalent circuit diagram of . In each nonvolatile memory is surrounded by a dotted line. Each nonvolatile memory is constituted for example of transistors for selection TRand TRand memory cells MCand MC.

Concerning two digit or three digit subscripts for example a subscript 11 is a subscript that should be shown as 1 1 and for example a subscript 111 is a subscript that should be shown as 1 1 1 . For simplified showing the subscripts are shown as two digit or three digit subscripts in some cases. Further a subscript M is used to show for example all of a plurality of memory cells or plate lines and a subscript m is used to show individuals for example of a plurality of the memory cells or the plate lines. A subscript N is used to show for example all of transistors for selection or sub memory units and a subscript n is used to show for example individuals of the transistors for selection or the sub memory units.

Complement data is written into each memory cell and the memory cells store 1 bit. In symbol WL stands for a word line symbol BL stands for a bit line and symbol PL stands for a plate line. When one nonvolatile memory is taken word line WLis connected to a word line decoder driver WD. Bit lines BLand BLare connected to a sense amplifier SA. Further plate line PLis connected to a plate line decoder driver PD.

When stored data is read out in the thus structured nonvolatile memory the word line WLis selected and further the plate line PLis driven. In this case complement data appears in a pair of the bit lines BLand BLas voltages bit line voltages from a pair of the memory cells MCand MCthrough the transistors for selection TRand TR. The voltages bit line voltages in a pair of the bit lines BLand BLare detected with the sense amplifier SA.

One nonvolatile memory occupies a region surrounded by the word line WLand a pair of the bit lines BLand BL. If the word lines and the bit lines are arranged at a smallest pitch therefore the smallest area that one nonvolatile memory can have is 8Fwhen the minimum processable dimension is F. The thus structured nonvolatile memory therefore has a smallest area of 8F.

When it is attempted to increase the capacity of the above structured nonvolatile memory all that can be done relies on conversion of processable dimensions to finer dimensions. Further two transistors for selection and two memory cells are required for constituting one nonvolatile memory. Furthermore it is required to arrange the plate lines at the same pitch as that at which the word lines are arranged. It is therefore almost impossible to arrange nonvolatile memories at the minimum pitch and in reality the area that one nonvolatile memory occupies comes to be much larger than 8F.

Moreover it is also required to arrange the word line decoder drivers WD and the plate line decoder drivers PD at a pitch equivalent to a pitch at which the nonvolatile memories are arranged. In other words two decoder drivers are required for selecting one low address. It is therefore difficult to layout peripheral circuits and the area that the peripheral circuits occupy comes to be large.

One of means for decreasing the area of the nonvolatile memory is disclosed in JP A 9 121032. As shown in an equivalent circuit diagram of the nonvolatile memory disclosed in the above Publication comprises a plurality of memory cells MC for example M 4 ends of which are connected to one end of one transistor for selection TRin parallel and a nonvolatile memory forming a pair with the above nonvolatile memory also comprises a plurality of memory cells MCends of which are connected to one end of one transistor for selection TRin parallel. The other ends of the transistors for selection TRand TRare connected to bit lines BLand BL respectively. The bit lines BLand BLforming a pair are connected to a sense amplifier SA. Further the other ends of the memory cells MCand MC m 1 2 . . . M are connected to a plate line PL and the plate line PLis connected to a plate line decoder driver PD. Further a word line WL is connected to a word line decoder driver WD.

Complement data is stored in a pair of the memory cells MCand MC m 1 2 . . . M . For reading out the data stored for example in the memory cells MCand MC wherein m is one of 1 2 3 and 4 the word line WL is selected and in a state where a voltage of Vis applied to the plate lines PL k m the plate line PLis driven. The above Vis for example a power source voltage. By the above procedure the complement data appears in a pair of the bit lines BLand BLas voltages bit line voltages from a pair of the memory cells MCand MCthrough the transistors for selection TRand TR. And the sense amplifier SA detects the voltages bit line voltages in a pair of the bit lines BLand BL.

A pair of the transistors for selection TRand TRin a pair of the nonvolatile memories occupy a region surrounded by the word line WL and a pair of the bit lines BLand BL. If the word lines and the bit lines are arranged at a smallest pitch therefore a pair of the transistors for selection TRand TRin a pair of the nonvolatile memories have a minimum area of 8F. Since however a pair of the transistors for selection TRand TRare shared by M sets of pairs of the memory cells MCand MC m 1 2 . . . M the number of the transistors for selection TRand TRper bit can be decreased and the layout of the word lines WL is moderate so that the nonvolatile memory can be easily decreased in size. Further with regard to peripheral circuits M bits can be selected with one word line decoder driver WD and M plate line decoder drivers PD. When the above constitution is employed therefore the layout in which the cell area is close to 8Fcan be attained and a chip size almost equivalent to a DRAM can be attained.

The method of writing data in the nonvolatile memory disclosed in JP A 9 121032 will be explained below. The following explanation is based on an assumption that data is written into a pair of the memory cells MCand MC that data 1 is written into the memory cell MCand that data 0 is written into the memory cell MC. shows a waveform of an operation. In parenthesized numerals correspond to numbers of steps to be explained below.

 1 In a standby state the word line and all of the plate lines have 0 volt. Further the bit lines BLand BLare equalized to have 0 volt. It is also assumed that data to be written is held in the sense amplifier SA.

 2 When writing of data is started a high potential V V is applied to the bit line BL and a low potential V 0 volt is applied to the bit line BL. The above Vrefers to a power source voltage.

 3 Then the potential of the word line WL is brought to a high level thereby to bring the transistors for selection TRand TRinto an ON state. A high potential V V is also applied the selected plate line PL and an intermediate potential V V is applied to a non selected plate lines PL k 2 3 4 . By the above procedures in the memory cell MC the potential of the selected plate line PLis a high potential Vand the potential of the bit line BLis a low potential V so that data 0 is written.

 4 Then the potential of the selected plate line PLis changed to a low potential V 0 volt whereby in the memory cell MC the potential of the selected plate line PLis a low potential Vand the potential of the bit line BLis a high potential V so that data 1 is written.

When writing of data is finished the potential of the word line WL is brought to a low level thereby to bring the transistors for selection TRand TRto an OFF state. Then the bit line BLis discharged to a level of 0 volt and the non selected plate lines PL k 2 3 4 are discharged to a level of 0 volt.

In the above writing operation Vis applied to the non selected plate lines PL 2 3 4 . Therefore a voltage of Vis applied to each of the non selected memory cells MCand MC k 2 3 4 . In some data stored in the non selected memory cells MCand MC k 2 3 4 therefore an electric field may work on the ferroelectric layers of the memory cells constituting the non selected memory cells MCand MCin the direction in which the polarization is inversed and the data holding state may be deteriorated by disturbance. The disturbance refers to a phenomenon that an electric field works on the ferroelectric layer in the memory cell constituting the non selected memory cell in the direction in which the polarization is inversed that is held data is deteriorated or destroyed.

As measures to be taken against the above disturbance in the nonvolatile memory disclosed in JP A 9 121032 the memory cells MCand MCin the memory unit composed of the memory cells MCand the memory cells MCare accessed from m 1 to m M consecutively and collectively. By the above procedures the number of disturbances that the memory cells MCand MCsuffer is limited to M 1 times. In this operation data is written into the memory cells consecutively from the memory cells MCand MCin the first place to the memory cells MCand MCin the M th place without particularly external addressing. That is data is written into the memory cells MCand MClocated in the position of m 1 then data is written into the memory cells MCand MClocated in the position of m 2 and this operation is repeated until m M is reached. In this manner the number of disturbances that the memory cells MCand MCsuffer is limited to M 1 times. In reading out of data and re writing of data in the memory cells MCand MC the memory cells MCand MCare similarly accessed consecutively and collectively from m 1 to m M.

The method of decreasing the area of the nonvolatile memory disclosed in JP A 9 121032 is very effective. However writing of data reading out of data and re writing of data are consecutively started in the memory cells located in the first place. It is said that reading out of data and re writing of data in the memory cells MCand MCtake a time period of approximately 100 nanoseconds. Therefore reading out and re writing of data for example in memory cells MCand MClocated in the eighth place take place approximately 0.8 microseconds after the reading out and re writing of data is started. There is therefore involved a problem that reading out and re writing of data in a desired memory cell take a time. Further when writing of data is carried out data are written into all of the memory cells constituting the memory unit. There is therefore involved a problem that writing of data in a desired memory cell takes a time. With an increase in the number of memory cells constituting the memory unit the area efficiency improves but accessing a memory cell comes to be slow on the other hand.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory that permits a prompt access to a desired memory cell while suppressing the influence of disturbance and an operation method thereof.

The method of operating a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory according to a first aspect of the present invention for achieving the above object is concerned with reading out of data and is a method of operating a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory comprising a memory unit having 

the first electrodes of the memory cells constituting the sub memory unit are in common with the sub memory unit said common first electrode is connected to the bit line through the transistor for selection and each second electrode is connected to each plate line 

said method comprising reading out data stored in the memory cell at a designated address externally designated latching said data in the sense amplifier and then outputting said data latched in the sense amplifier.

In explanations to be given hereinafter the memory cell at the designated address will be denoted as MC 1 J M and other memory cell constituting the sub memory unit memory cell other than the memory cell at the designated address will be denoted as MC k J .

In the method of operating a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory according to the first aspect of the present invention to be referred to as nonvolatile memory operation method according to the first aspect of the present invention hereinafter there may be employed a constitution in which after said data latched in the sense amplifier is outputted said data latched in the sense amplifier is re written into said memory cell MCat said designated address and then data stored in other memory cell MCconstituting the sub memory unit is read out without external addressing and is latched in the sense amplifier.

In the above case further there may be employed a constitution in which after the data stored in other memory cell MCconstituting the sub memory unit is read out and latched in the sense amplifier said data latched in the sense amplifier is re written into said other memory cell MC. The above constitution will be referred to as No. 1A constitution for convenience. In the No. 1A constitution the memory cells are accessed in a so called random access manner to read out and re write data. In this case desirably reading out and re writing of the data are carried out consecutively in all other memory cells constituting the sub memory unit without external addressing that is consecutively in the order of the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cell MCin the M th place the memory cell MCin the first place the memory cell MCin the second place . . . the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place . In this manner the disturbance in other memory cells MCcan be reliably prevented.

Alternatively in the above case there may be employed a constitution in which after the data stored in other memory cell MCconstituting the sub memory unit is read out and latched in the sense amplifier said data latched in the sense amplifier is outputted. There may be further employed a constitution in which after the data stored in other memory cell MCconstituting the sub memory unit is read out and latched in the sense amplifier said data latched in the sense amplifier is outputted and then said data latched in the sense amplifier is re written into said other memory cell MC. The above constitution will be referred to as No. 1B constitution . In this No. 1B constitution the memory cells are accessed in a so called sequential access manner to read out output and re write data. In this case desirably reading out outputting and re writing of the data are carried out consecutively in all other memory cells constituting the sub memory unit without external addressing that is consecutively in the order of the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cell MCin the M th place the memory cell MCin the first place the memory cell MCin the second place . . . the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place . In this manner the disturbance in other memory cells MCcan be reliably prevented.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the first aspect of the present invention the No. 1A constitution and the No. 1B constitution may be combined. That is there may be employed a constitution in which the operation method of the No. 1B constitution is carried out consecutively with regard to a predetermined number of memory cells starting in the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place and the operation method of the No. 1A constitution is carried out with regard to the remaining other memory cells. There may be also employed a constitution in which the operation method of the No. 1A constitution is carried out with regard to a predetermined number of memory cells starting in the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place and then the operation method of the No. 1B constitution is carried out with regard to the remaining other memory cells.

The method of operating a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory according to a second aspect of the present invention for achieving the above object is concerned with writing of data and is a method of operating a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory comprising a memory unit having 

the first electrodes of the memory cells constituting the sub memory unit are in common with the sub memory unit said common first electrode is connected to the bit line through the transistor for selection and each second electrode is connected to each plate line 

said method comprising latching in the sense amplifier data to be written and writing said latched data into the memory cell at a designated address externally designated.

In the method of operating a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory according to the second aspect of the present invention to be referred to as nonvolatile memory operation method according to the second aspect of the present invention hereinafter there may be employed a constitution in which after said data latched in the sense amplifier is written into the memory cell MCat said designated address data to be written is latched in the sense amplifier and then written into other memory cell MCconstituting the sub memory unit without external addressing. The above constitution will be referred to as a No. 2A constitution for convenience. In the No. 2A constitution data are written into all the memory cells constituting the sub memory unit. In this case preferably writing of the data is carried out consecutively in all other memory cells constituting the sub memory unit without external addressing that is consecutively in the order of the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cell MCin the M th place the memory cell MCin the first place the memory cell MCin the second place . . . the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place .

Alternatively in the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the second aspect of the present invention there may be employed a constitution in which after said data latched in the sense amplifier is written into said memory cell MCat said designated address data stored in other memory cell MCconstituting the sub memory unit is read out without external addressing latched in the sense amplifier and then re written into said other memory cell MC. The above constitution will be referred to as a No. 2B constitution for convenience. In the No. 2B constitution data is written only into the memory cell MCat the designated address and in other memory cell MC reading out and re writing of data are carried out. In this case preferably reading out and re writing of data are carried out consecutively in all other memory cells MCconstituting the sub memory unit without external addressing that is consecutively in the order of the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cell MCin the M th place the memory cell MCin the first place the memory cell MCin the second place . . . the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place . In this manner the disturbance in other memory cells MCcan be reliably prevented.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the second aspect of the present invention the No. 2A constitution and the No. 2B constitution may be combined. That is there may be employed a constitution in which the operation method of the No. 2B constitution is carried out consecutively with regard to a predetermined number of memory cells starting in the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place and then the operation method of the No. 2A constitution is carried out with regard to the remaining other memory cells. There is also employed a constitution in which the operation method of the No. 2A constitution is carried out with regard to a predetermined number of memory cells starting in the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place and the operation method of the No. 2B constitution is carried out with regard to the remaining other memory cells.

A ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory of the present invention for achieving the above object comprises a memory unit having 

the first electrodes of the memory cells constituting the sub memory unit are in common with the sub memory unit said common first electrode is connected to the bit line through the transistor for selection and each second electrode is connected to each plate line 

 F a designated plate line address register for storing a plate line address externally designated and

 G a plate line address counter for consecutively incrementing a plate line address which designates the plate line.

Preferably the ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory of the present invention to be sometimes referred to as nonvolatile memory of the present invention hereinafter further comprises a comparator that is connected to the designated plate line address register and the plate line address counter and is for comparing a value of a designated plate line address stored in the designated plate line address register and a value of a plate line address in the plate line address counter.

The nonvolatile memory in the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the first or second aspect of the present invention may be a nonvolatile memory comprising a first memory unit and a second memory unit 

 C 1 first sub memory unit s that are N in number each of which is composed of first memory cells that are M M 2 in number and

 D 1 plate lines that are M in number each plate line being shared with each first memory cell constituting the sub memory unit s that are N in number and

 C 2 second sub memory unit s that are N in number each of which is composed of second memory cells that are M M 2 in number and

 D 2 the plate lines that are M in number each plate line being shared with each second memory cell constituting the sub memory unit s that are N in number said plate lines being shared with the plate lines that are M in number and constitute said first memory unit and

wherein in the first memory unit the first electrodes of the first memory cells constituting the first sub memory unit in the n th place n 1 2 . . . N are in common with the n th place first sub memory unit said common first electrode is connected to the first bit line through the n th place first transistor for selection and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line 

and further wherein in the second memory unit the first electrodes of the second memory cells constituting the n th place second sub memory unit are in common with the n th place second sub memory unit said common first electrode is connected to the second bit line through the n th place second transistor for selection and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line.

In the nonvolatile memory of the present invention the memory unit may be constituted of the above two memory units first memory unit and second memory unit as well.

In the above constitution in the operation method according to the first aspect of the present invention the following constitution may be employed. When data stored in the first memory cell is read out the first transistor for selection is brought into an ON state the second transistor for selection is brought into an OFF state and a reference potential is applied to the second bit line and when data stored in the second memory cell is read out the second transistor for selection is brought into an ON state the first transistor for selection is brought into an OFF state and a reference potential is applied to the first bit line.

The operation method according to the first aspect of the present invention may employ a constitution in which the m th place first memory cell m 1 2 . . . M constituting the n th place first sub memory unit and the m th place second memory cell constituting the n th place second sub memory unit are formed as a pair and complement data is read out from them.

In the above constitution in the operation method according to the second aspect of the present invention the following constitution may be employed. When data is written into the first memory cell the first transistor for selection is brought into an ON state and the second transistor for selection is brought into an OFF state and when data is written into the second memory cell the second transistor for selection is brought into an ON state and the first transistor for selection is brought into an OFF state.

The operation method according to the second aspect of the present invention may employ a constitution in which the m th place first memory cell m 1 2 . . . M constituting the n th place first sub memory unit and the m th place second memory cell constituting the n th place second sub memory unit are formed as a pair and complement data is written into them.

In the nonvolatile memory or in the nonvolatile memory for the operation method provided by the present invention these will be sometimes simply generically referred to as the present invention hereinafter for accomplishing a further higher integration degree there may be employed a constitution in which nonvolatile memories are stacked or there may be employed a constitution in which the first memory unit constituting the nonvolatile memory and the first memory unit constituting the nonvolatile memory contiguous to the above nonvolatile memory in the extending direction of the first bit line are stacked through an insulating interlayer and the second memory unit constituting the nonvolatile memory and the second memory unit constituting the nonvolatile memory contiguous to the above nonvolatile memory in the extending direction of the second bit line are stacked through the insulating interlayer. Alternatively there may be also employed a constitution in which the first sub memory units constituting the first memory unit are stacked one on another each on the other through an insulating interlayer and the second sub memory units constituting the second memory unit are stacked one on another each on the other through the insulating interlayer. Alternatively there may be also employed a constitution in which the first sub memory units constituting the first memory unit and the second sub memory units constituting the second memory unit are stacked one on another through an insulating interlayer.

In the present invention it is sufficient to satisfy M 2 and the actual value of M includes exponents of 2 2 4 8 16 32 . . . . Further it is sufficient to satisfy N 1 and the actual value of N includes exponents of 2 1 2 4 8 . . . .

The material for constituting the ferroelectric layer in the present invention includes bismuth layer compounds more specifically a Bi containing layer structured perovskite type ferroelectric material. The Bi containing layer structured perovskite type ferroelectric material comes under so called non stoichiometric compounds and shows tolerance of compositional deviations in both sites of a metal element and anions O etc. . Further it is not a rare case that the above material having a composition deviated from its stoichiometric composition to some extent exhibits optimum electric characteristics. The Bi containing layer structured perovskite type ferroelectric material can be expressed for example by the general formula BiO ABO wherein A is one metal selected from the group consisting of metals such as Bi Pb Ba Sr Ca Na K Cd etc. and B is one metal selected from the group consisting of Ti Nb Ta W Mo Fe Co and Cr or a combination of a plurality of these metals combined in any amount ratio and m is an integer of 1 or more.

Alternatively the material for constituting the ferroelectric layer preferably contains as a main crystal phase a crystal phase represented by the formula 1 Bi Sr Sr Bi Nb O 1 wherein 0.9 X 1.0 0.7 Y 1.0 0 Z 1.0 and 8.7 d 9.3.

Otherwise the material for constituting the ferroelectric layer preferably contains as a main crystal phase a crystal phase represented by the formula 2 BiSrTaO 2 wherein X Y 3 0.7 Y 1.3 and 8.7 d 9.3.

In the above case more preferably the material for constituting the ferroelectric layer preferably contains as a main crystal phase at least 85 of a crystal phase represented by the formula 1 or 2 . In the above formula 1 Bi Sr means that Sr occupies the site that Bi should have occupied in a crystal structure and that the Bi Sr amount ratio is X 1 X . Further Sr Bi means that Bi occupies the site that Sr should have occupied in a crystal structure and that the Sr Bi amount ratio is Y 1 Y . The material for constituting the ferroelectric layer and containing as a main crystal phase the crystal phase of the above formula 1 or 2 may contain an oxide of Bi oxides of Ta and Nb and composite oxides of Bi Ta and Nb to some extent.

Alternatively the material for constituting the ferroelectric layer may contain a crystal phase represented by the formula 3 Bi Sr Ca Ba Ta Nb O 3 wherein 1.7 X 2.5 0.6 Y 1.2 0 Z 1.0 and 8.0 d 10.0. Sr Ca Ba stands for one element selected from the group consisting of Sr Ca and Ba. When the above material for the ferroelectric layer having the above formulae is expressed by a stoichiometric composition the composition includes BiSrTaO BiSrNbO BiBaTaOand BiSrTaNbO. Otherwise the material for constituting the ferroelectric layer also includes BiSrTiO BiTiOand BiPbTaO. In these cases the amount ratio of the metal elements may be varied to such an extent that the crystal structure does not change. That is the above material may have a composition deviated from its stoichiometric composition in both sites of metal elements and oxygen element.

Further the material for constituting the ferroelectric layer includes PbTiO lead titanate zirconate PZT Pb Zr Ti Owherein 0

For forming the ferroelectric layer a ferroelectric thin film is formed and in a step to come thereafter the ferroelectric thin film is patterned. In some cases it is not required to pattern the ferroelectric thin film. The ferroelectric thin film can be formed by a method suitable for a material that is used to constitute the ferroelectric thin film such as an MOCVD method a pulse laser abrasion method a sputtering method a sol gel method an MOD metal organic decomposition method using a bismuth organic metal compound bismuth alkoxide compound having a bismuth oxygen bond as a raw material and an LSMCD liquid source mist chemical deposition method. Further the ferroelectric thin film can be patterned for example by an anisotropic ion etching RIE method.

In the present invention the material for constituting the first electrode and second electrode includes for example Ir IrO SrIrO Ru RuO SrRuO Pt Pt IrO Pt RuO Pd a Pt Ti stacked structure a Pt Ta stacked structure a Pt Ti Ta stacked structure LaSrCoO LSCO a Pt LSCO stacked structure and YBaCuO. The value of the above X is in the range of 0 X

In the present invention the material for constituting the insulating interlayer includes silicon oxide SiO silicon nitride SiN SiON SOG NSG BPSG PSG BSG and LTO.

In the nonvolatile memory of the present invention there may be employed a constitution in which the first electrode is formed below the ferroelectric layer and the second electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer that is the first electrode corresponds to the lower electrode and the second electrode corresponds to the upper electrode or there may be employed a constitution in which the first electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer and the second electrode is formed below the ferroelectric layer that is the first electrode corresponds to the upper electrode and the second electrode corresponds to the lower electrode . There may be employed a constitution in which the plate line extends from the second electrode or the plate line is formed separately from the second electrode and is connected to the second electrode. In the latter case the wiring material for constituting the plate line includes for example aluminum and an aluminum containing alloy. The structure in which the first electrodes are in common specifically includes a structure in which the first electrode in the form of stripes is formed and the ferroelectric layer is formed on the entire surface of the striped first electrode. In the above structure an overlapping region of the first electrode the ferroelectric layer and the second electrode corresponds to a memory cell. The structure in which the first electrodes are in common includes a structure in which the ferroelectric layers are formed on predetermined regions of the first electrode and the second electrodes are formed on the ferroelectric layers and a structure in which the first electrodes are formed in predetermined surface regions of a wiring layer the ferroelectric layers are formed on the first electrodes and the second electrodes are formed on the ferroelectric layers although the above structure shall not be limited thereto.

The transistor for selection transistor for switching can be constituted for example of a known MIS type FET or a MOS type FET. The material for constituting the bit line includes an impurity doped polysilicon and a refractory metal material. The common first electrode and the transistor for selection can be electrically connected through a contact hole made in an insulating layer formed between the common first electrode and the transistor for selection or through a contact hole made in the insulating layer and a wiring layer formed on the insulating layer. The material for constituting the insulating layer includes silicon oxide SiO silicon nitride SiN SiON SOG NSG BPSG PSG BSG and LTO.

For the sense amplifier a known latch circuit can be employed and for the designated plate line address register the plate line address counter and the comparator a known register counter and comparator can be employed.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the first aspect of the present invention data stored in a memory cell at a designated address externally designated is read out and latched in the sense amplifier and then said data latched in the sense amplifier is outputted. In the nonvolatile memory operation method according to.the second aspect of the present invention data to be written is latched in the sense amplifier and then said data is written into a memory cell at a designated address externally designated. Therefore a desired memory cell can be accessed promptly. In the Nos. 1A 1B 2A and 2B constitutions of the present invention data are written or re written into other memory cells so that the disturbance in the other memory cells can be reliably suppressed.

Example 1 is concerned with the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the first aspect of the present invention and the nonvolatile memory of the present invention more specifically concerned with the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the No. 1A constitution. shows a flow chart of the nonvolatile memory operation method of a nonvolatile memory in Example 1. shows an equivalent circuit diagram of the nonvolatile memory in Example 1 and shows a schematic partial cross sectional view of a memory unit.

The nonvolatile memory shown in comprises a memory unit having A a bit line BL B a transistor for selection TR C a sub memory unit SMUcomposed of memory cells MCthat are M M 2 M 8 in Example 1 in number D plate lines PLthat are M M 8 in Example 1 in number and E a sense amplifier SAconnected to the bit line BL. also shows a sub memory unit SMUthat is contiguous to the sub memory unit SMUand shares a word line WL and the plate lines PL.

Each memory cell MCcomprises a first electrode lower electrode a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode upper electrode . The first electrodes of the memory cells MCconstituting the sub memory unit SMUare in common with the sub memory unit SMU. The common first electrode to be called common node CN is connected to the bit line BLthrough the transistor for selection TR and each second electrode is connected to each plate line PL.

Further the above nonvolatile memory has a designated plate line address register for storing a plate line address externally designated a plate line address counter for consecutively incrementing a plate line address which designates the plate line and a comparator . The comparator is connected to the designated plate line address register and the plate line address counter and is for comparing a value of a designated plate line address stored in the designated plate line address register and a value of a plate line address in the plate line address counter . The designated plate line address register is constituted of a known register the plate line address counter is constituted of a known 2 bit cyclic counter and the comparator is constituted of a known comparator.

The above nonvolatile memory further comprises a command decoder for receiving and decoding an external command a unit address register a unit controller a unit decoder a word line decoder driver WD and a plate line decoder driver PD. The command decoder is connected to the unit controller the designated plate line address register the plate line address counter and the unit address register . The unit address register is connected to the unit decoder . Further the plate line address counter is connected to the plate line decoder driver PD the comparator is connected to the unit controller the unit controller is connected to the unit decoder and the unit decoder is connected to the word line decoder driver WD and the plate line decoder driver PD. The word line WL is connected to the word line decoder driver WD and the plate lines PLthat are M in number are connected to the plate line decoder driver PD. These components can be constituted of known circuits.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method in Example 1 a memory cell at a designated address J 1 J M that is externally designated will be denoted as a memory cell MC. An address designated sub memory unit will be denoted as a sub memory unit SMU. In Example 1 data stored in the memory cell MCat an address externally designated is read out and latched in the sense amplifier SA and then the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted to an outside.

In Example 1 further after the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis re written into the memory cell MCat the address externally designated. Then data stored in other memory cell MC k J constituting the sub memory unit SMUis read out without external addressing without externally designating any address and latched in the sense amplifier SA. Then the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis re written into the other memory cell MC. In Example 1 the memory cells are accessed in a so called random access manner to read out and re write data.

The operation method in Example 1 will be explained hereinafter with reference to and showing operation waveforms. Commands and executed contents in the following explanation are as follows. Each command is inputted synchronously with a clock and determined by a combination of 0 and 1 to be inputted to a plurality of predetermined input pins of an integrated circuit constituting the command decoder . The address includes an RAS address for selecting a sub memory unit and a plate line and further a memory cell constituting the sub memory unit in the row direction and a CAS address for selecting a sense amplifier in the column direction and these addresses are selected and used depending upon each command.

ACT command . . . a command for reading out data from a memory cell MCdesignated at an address AD 1 j M which is a higher component of the RAS address and allowing the sense amplifier to latch the data.

RAS INC command . . . a command for re writing data latched in the sense amplifier into the memory cell MCdesignated at the address AD 1 j M which is a higher component of the RAS address then incrementing the address reading out data stored in the memory cell at the incremented address and allowing the sense amplifier to latch the data. Data is outputted by executing READ command and data is re written by executing WRITE command thereafter.

READ command . . . a command for outputting data corresponding to the CAS address inputted concurrently with the command from a data group latched in the sense amplifier to an outside. This command is inputted after ACT command or RAS INC command.

RESTORE command . . . a command for re writing the data latched in the sense amplifier into the memory cell MCdesignated at the address AD then incrementing the address reading out data in the memory cell at the incremented address and allowing the sense amplifier to latch the data.

WRITE command . . . a command for allowing a desired sense amplifier to latch data from an outside according to the CAS address. This command is inputted after ACT command or RAS INC command and data in the selected sense amplifier is updated. Data that has been read out is retained in a non selected sense amplifier.

NOP command . . . NO OPERATION command for advancing a clock when the execution of a previously inputted command is not finished in 1 clock. Further this command is also usable for burst transfer. That is after READ command data in each sense amplifier is consecutively burst outputted while incrementing the CAS address. After WRITE command data is burst written into each sense amplifier while incrementing the CAS address.

First ACT command is inputted to the command decoder and an address RAS address which designates a sub memory unit and a memory cell is inputted together. The RAS address is separated to a higher component and a lower component with a shift register not shown . The higher component for designating an address ADof a memory cell MCis latched in the designated plate line address register and the plate line address counter . On the other hand the lower component for designating an address of a sub memory unit SMUis latched in the unit address register . The higher component for designating the address of the memory cell MC which is latched in the designated plate line address register will be referred to as an address J the higher component for designating the address of the memory cell MC which is latched in the plate line address counter will be referred to as an address j J and the lower component for designating a sub memory unit SMU which is latched in the unit address register will be referred to as an address L .

Further upon receipt of a signal from the command decoder the unit controller transmits a signal to the unit decoder to activate the unit decoder . In addition upon receipt of a signal from the unit address register the unit decoder selects the sub memory unit SMU. On the other hand a signal from the plate line address counter is transmitted to the plate line decoder driver PD. By the above operation the word line decoder driver WD and the plate line decoder driver PD are activated and the plate line PLis selected by the plate line decoder drive PD.

And data stored in the memory cell MCdesignated at the address AD specifically the memory cell MC is read out and latched in the sense amplifier SA. A specific operation will be explained later.

In the above steps a plurality of sub memory units and memory cells connected to one word line and one plate line may be selected. That is memory cells MC MC MC. . . in sub memory units SMU SMU SMU. . . may be selected. By the above operation data in the memory cells MC MC MC. . . are latched in the sense amplifiers SA SA SA. . . .

Then READ command is inputted to the command decoder and the CAS address for designating the sense amplifier SAis also inputted together. According to the above command and the CAS address an instruction is transmitted to the sense amplifier SAthrough a line not shown and the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted to an outside.

When the data for the memory cells MC MC. . . are latched in the sense amplifiers SA SA. . . then NOP command is inputted whereby data latched in these sense amplifiers are consecutively burst transferred with a counter not shown . An access between these sense amplifiers and an outside can be made by an access method completely similar to a method in a conventional synchronous DRAM etc. although it is not shown.

After completion of date output to an outside RESTORE command is inputted. By this operation first the data latched in the sense amplif ier SAis re written into the memory cell MCat the designated address which is specifically the memory cell MC . The specific operation thereof will be described later. In reality RESTORE command is not completed in 1 clock so that NOP command for advancing a clock is executed.

Then the data stored in other memory cell MC k J constituting the sub memory unit SMUis read out without external addressing without externally designating any address and latched in the sense amplifier SA. And the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis re written into the other memory cell MC. Specifically the plate line address counter is incremented the value of the plate line address counter and the value of the designated plate line address register are compared and if the values are the same the operation is finished. If the values are not the same it is judged whether or not the value of the plate line address counter is over the value of M . If it is over the value of M the value of the plate line address counter is re set to be 1 and data in a memory cell MC corresponding to memory cell MC at a designated address ADis read out and latched in the sense amplifier SA. The plate line address counter is incremented so that it is no longer required to externally designate the address of the memory cell.

The operation of the above Step is carried out with regard to all of the other memory cells MCconstituting the sub memory unit SMUwithout external addressing without externally designating any address . That is data are read out from and re written into the memory cells consecutively in the order of the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cell MCin the M th place the memory cell MCin the first place the memory cell MCin the second place . . . the memory cell MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place. In Example 1 the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis not outputted to an outside.

Upon completion of the operation the comparator notifies the unit controller to that effect and the unit controller deactivates the unit decoder and brings the word lines WL and all of the plate lines PLback to a non selected state.

By the above steps any memory cell can be rapidly accessed and re writing with regard to all the data stored in other memory cells in one sub memory unit can be executed once.

In the above case the worst value of the number of times of the disturbances is as follows. That is P is designated as an address a memory cell MC 1 P M is selected by an access with ACT command and re writing is performed in other memory cells by RESTORE command that follows. In this case the number of times of the disturbances to the memory cell MCis M 1 times. Then P 1 is designated as an address a memory cell MCis selected by an access with ACT command and re writing is performed in other memory cells by RESTORE command that follows. In this case re writing is performed in the memory cell MCafter the memory cell MCreceives disturbances M 1 times. In the above case therefore the memory cell MCreceives disturbances 2 M 1 times after the data is re written and before the data is re written again. Almost no deterioration of data by disturbances takes place as far as the number of times of the disturbances is as described above. Therefore a random access to a memory cell can be performed and at the same time the disturbances can be suppressed.

The operation of reading out and re writing of data in the nonvolatile memory of Example 1 will be explained below with reference to showing waveforms. As an example it is assumed that data will be read out from the memory cell MCconnected to the plate line PLand re written into the memory cell MC. In the waveforms in the drawing parenthesized numerals correspond to Nos. of steps to be explained below.

 1A In Step before ACT command is inputted that is in a standby state the bit line the word line and all of the plate lines have 0 volt. Further the common node CNalso has 0 volt and is in a floating state.

 2A In Step upon the input of ACT command the word line decoder driver WD and the plate line decoder driver PD are activated and the plate line PLis also selected. In Step then reading out of data is started. That is a high potential V is applied to the selected plate line PL. In this case if data 1 has been stored in the selected memory cell MC polarization inversion takes place in the ferroelectric layer an accumulated charge amount increases and the potential of the common node CNincreases. If data 0 has been stored in the selected memory cell MC no polarization inversion takes place in the ferroelectric layer and the potential of the common node CNhardly increases. That is the common node CNis coupled with a plurality of non selected plate lines PL k 2 3 . . . M through the ferroelectric layers of the non selected memory cells MC so that the potential of the common node CNis maintained at a level relatively close to 0 volt. In this manner a change is caused on the potential of the common node CNdepending upon data stored in the selected memory cell MC.

 3A Then the bit line BLis brought into a floating state and the word line WL is brought into a high level whereby the transistor for selection TRis brought into an ON state. By this operation the potential that is caused on the common first electrode common node CN on the basis of the data stored in the selected memory cell MCappears in the bit line BL and latched in the sense amplifier SA.

 4A Then the word line WL is brought into a low level thereby to bring the transistor for selection TRinto an OFF state and the common node CNand the bit line BLin the sub memory unit SMUis disconnected.

 5A Then the sense amplifier SAconnected to the bit line BLis activated to amplify the data and the operation of reading out of the data is completed. By READ command in Step the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted to an outside.

By the above operation the data stored in the selected memory cell MCis once destroyed so that the data is re written.

 6A For the above purpose first the potential of the non selected plate lines PL k 2 3 . . . M are brought to V V in Step .

 7A Then the word line WL is brought into a high level to bring the transistor for selection TRinto an ON state. By this operation the potential of the common node CNcomes to be equal to the potential of the bit line BL. That is when the data stored in the selected memory cell MCis 1 the potential of the common node CNcomes to be V V when data stored in the selected memory cell MCis 0 the potential of the common node CNcomes to be V 0 volt . Since the potential of the selected plate line PLremains V V data 0 is re written into the selected memory cell MCwhen the common node CNis 0 volt.

 8A Then the potential of the selected plate line PLis brought into V 0 volt . By this operation when the data stored in the selected memory cell MCis 1 data 1 is re written since the potential of the common node CNis V V . When the selected memory cell MChas data 0 already re written no change is caused in the selected memory cell MC.

 10A Finally the non selected plate lines PLare brought into 0 volt to bring the transistor for selection TRinto an OFF state.

For reading out data from other memory cell MC k 2 3 . . . M and re writing the data a nearly similar operation can be repeatedly carried out on the basis of RESTORE command.

The method of producing the nonvolatile memory in Example 1 will be explained hereinafter. Nonvolatile memories in other Examples or variants thereof can be also produced by substantially the same method.

First a MOS type transistor that is to work as a transistor for selection in a nonvolatile memory is formed in a semiconductor substrate . For this purpose a device isolation region having for example a LOCOS structure is formed by a known method. The device isolation region may have a trench structure or may have a combination of a LOCOS structure and a trench structure. Then the surface of the semiconductor substrate is oxidized for example by a pyrogenic method to form a gate insulating layer . Then a polysilicon layer doped with an impurity is formed on the entire surface by a CVD method and then patterned to form a gate electrode . The gate electrode is also to work as a word line WL. The gate electrode can be constituted of polycide or metal silicide in place of a polysilicon layer. Then the semiconductor substrate is ion implanted to form an LDD structure. Then an SiOlayer is formed on the entire surface by a CVD method and the SiOlayer is etched back to form gate side walls not shown on side walls of the gate electrode . Then the semiconductor substrate is ion implanted and an implanted impurity is annealed for activation to form the source drain regions .

Then a lower insulating layer made of SiOis formed by a CVD method and then an opening portion is made through the lower insulating layer above one source drain region by an RIE method. And a polysilicon layer doped with an impurity is formed on the lower insulating layer and inside the above opening portion whereby a contact hole can be formed. Then the polysilicon layer on the lower insulating layer is patterned to form the bit line BL. Then an upper insulating layer made of BPSG is formed on the entire surface by a CVD method. After the formation of the upper insulating layer made of BPSG preferably the upper insulating layer is reflowed in a nitrogen gas atmosphere for example at 900 C. for 20 minutes. Further desirably the top surface of the upper insulating layer is chemically and mechanically polished by a chemical mechanical polishing method CMP method to flatten the upper insulating layer. The lower insulating layer and the upper insulating layer will be collectively referred to as insulating layer .

Then an opening portion is formed through the insulating layer above the other source drain region by an RIE method and then the opening portion is filled with polysilicon doped with an impurity to complete a contact hole . The bit line BLL is extending on the lower insulating layer leftward and rightward in the drawing such that it is not in contact with the contact hole .

The contact hole can be also formed by filling the opening portion made through the insulating layer for example with a metal wiring material made of a refractory metal or metal silicide such as tungsten Ti Pt Pd Cu TiW TiNW WSior MoSi. The top surface of the contact hole may be nearly at the same level as the level of the surface of the insulating layer or the top portion of the contact hole may be extending on the surface of the insulating layer . Table 1 below shows conditions of forming the contact hole by filling the opening portion with tungsten. Before filing the opening portion with tungsten preferably a Ti layer and a TiN layer are consecutively formed on the insulating layer and inside the opening portion by for example a magnetron sputtering method. The reason for forming the above Ti layer and the above TiN layer is that a ohmic low contact resistance is obtained that damage that may be caused on the semiconductor substrate by a blanket tungsten CVD method is prevented and that the adhesion of tungsten is improved.

Then desirably an adhesion layer not shown made of TiN is formed on the insulating layer . Then a first electrode material layer for forming a first electrode lower electrode made of Ir is formed on the adhesion layer for example by a sputtering method and the first electrode material layer and the adhesion layer are patterned by photolithography and a dry etching method whereby the first electrode common node CN can be obtained.

Then a ferroelectric thin film made of a Bi containing layer structured perovskite type ferroelectric material specifically BiSrTaOfor example is formed on the entire surface for example by an MOCVD method. Then the ferroelectric thin film is dried in air at 250 C. and then heat treated in an oxygen gas atmosphere at 750 C. for 1 hour to promote crystallization of the ferroelectric material.

Then an IrOlayer and a Pt layer are consecutively formed on the entire surface by sputtering methods and then the Pt layer the IrOlayer and the ferroelectric thin film are consecutively patterned by photolithography and a dry etching technique to form the second electrodes that are also to work as a plate line PLand the ferroelectric layer . When the etching damages the ferroelectric layer the ferroelectric layer can be heat treated at a temperature required for recovery from the damage. Thereafter an upper insulating layer A is formed on the insulating layer and the memory cells.

Each second electrode is not necessarily required to work as a plate line PL. In such a case after the upper insulating layer is formed on the insulating layer and the memory cells the plate line PLcan be formed on the upper insulating layer and the second electrode and the plate line PLcan be connected through a contact hole via hole made through the upper insulating layer. Further the ferroelectric thin film may not be patterned.

Table 2 below shows a condition of forming a ferroelectric thin film made of BiSrTaO. In Table 2 thd stands for tetramethylheptanedione. Further source materials shown in Table 2 are in the form of a solution thereof in a solvent containing tetrahydrofuran THF as a main component.

Alternatively a ferroelectric thin film made of BiSrTaO9 can be formed on the entire surface by a pulse laser abrasion method a sol gel method or an RF sputtering method as well. Tables 3 4 and 5 below show forming conditions in these cases. When a ferroelectric thin film having a large thickness is formed by a sol gel method spin coating and drying can be repeated as required or spin coating and calcining or annealing can be repeated as required.

Table 6 below shows a condition of forming PZT or PLZT when a ferroelectric layer is formed of PZT or PLZT by a magnetron sputtering method. Otherwise a ferroelectric layer made of PZT or PLZT can be formed by a reactive sputtering method an electron beam deposition method a sol gel method or an MOCVD method.

Further a ferroelectric layer made of PZT or PLZT can be formed by a pulse laser abrasion method as well. Table 7 shows forming a condition in this case.

The nonvolatile memory operation method of Example 2 is a variant of the nonvolatile memory operation method explained in Example 1. Further the nonvolatile memory of Example 2 is a variant of the nonvolatile memory of Example 1. As shown in an equivalent circuit diagram of the nonvolatile memory of Example 2 comprises a first memory unit and a second memory unit.

 C 1 first sub memory unit s SMUthat are N in number each of which is composed of first memory cells MCthat are M M 2 M 8 in Example 2 in number and

 D 1 plate lines PLthat are M in number each plate line PLbeing shared with each first memory cell MCconstituting each of the sub memory unit s SMUthat are N in number.

 C 2 second sub memory unit s SMUthat are N in number each of which is composed of second memory cells MCthat are M in number and

 D 2 the plate lines PLthat are M in number each plate line PLbeing shared with each second memory cell MCconstituting each of the sub memory unit s SMUthat are N in number said plate lines being shared with the plate lines PLconstituting the first memory unit.

Each memory cell MCcomprises a first electrode lower electrode a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode upper electrode . In the first memory unit the first electrodes of the first memory cells MCconstituting the first sub memory unit SMUin the n th place n 1 2 . . . N are in common shown as common node CN with the n th place first sub memory unit SMU. The above common first electrode common node CNL1 is connected to the first bit line BLthrough the n th place first transistor for selection TR and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line PL. Further in the second memory unit the first electrodes of the second memory cells MCconstituting the n th place second sub memory unit SMUare in common shown as common node CN with the n th place second sub memory unit SMU. The above common first electrode common node CN is connected to the second bit line BLthrough the n th place second transistor for selection TR and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line PL. The n th place first transistor for selection TRand the n th place second transistor for selection TRare connected to the same word line WL.

Any other constitution of the nonvolatile memory of Example 2 can be the same as that of the nonvolatile memory of Example 1 so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted.

In the nonvolatile memory of Example 2 in a pair of the m th place m 1 2 . . . M first memory cell MCconstituting the n th place first sub memory unit SMUand the m th place second memory cell MCconstituting the n th place second sub memory unit SMU 1 bit for constituting complement data is read out and 1 bit for constituting the complement data is re written.

The nonvolatile memory operation method of reading out and re writing of data in the nonvolatile memory of Example 2 will be explained below. Steps of reading out and re writing of data can be the same as Step to Step in Example 1 so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted. As an example it is assumed that data is read out from and re written into the memory cells MC MC that share the plate line PL i.e. forms a pair . It is assumed that the first memory cell MChas data 1 stored therein and that the second memory cell MChas data 0 stored therein. shows operation waveforms. In parenthesized numerals correspond to Nos. of steps to be explained below.

 1B In an initial state all of the bit lines all of the word lines and all of the plate lines have 0 volt. Further the common nodes CN and CNalso have 0 volt and are in a floating state.

 2B For starting to read out the data the word line WL is brought into a high level thereby to bring the first transistor for selection TRand the second transistor for selection TRinto an ON state. By the above operation the common node CNof the first sub memory unit SMUis connected to the first bit line BL and the common node CNof the second sub memory unit SMUis connected to the second bit line BL. The first bit line BLand the second bit line BLare kept in a floating state.

 3B Then V V is applied to the selected plate line PL. The non selected plate lines PLare kept at a level of V 0 volt . In this case since the selected first memory cell MChas data 1 already written therein polarization inversion in the ferroelectric layer takes place and the potential of the common node CNand further the potential of the first bit line BLincrease. On the other hand since the selected second memory cell MChas data 0 already written therein no polarization inversion in the ferroelectric layer takes place and the potential of the common node CNand further the potential of the second bit line BLare somewhat higher than 0 volt. By the above operation a potential difference is caused between the first bit line BLand the second bit line BL.

 4B Then the word line WL is brought into a low level thereby to bring the first transistor for selection TRand the second transistor for selection TRinto an OFF state the common node CNand the first bit line BLin the sub memory unit SMUare disconnected and the common node CNand the second bit line BLin the sub memory unit SMUare disconnected.

 5B Then the sense amplifier SAis activated to decide data such data is read out and outputted to an outside and the first bit line BLLand the second bit line BLare charged and discharged.

 6B When re writing of the data is started the first transistor for selection TRand the second transistor for selection TRare in an OFF state. Further the plate line PLconnected to the selected first and second memory cells MCand MChas high potential V V applied thereto. In this state an intermediate potential V V is applied to the plate lines PLconnected to the non selected memory cells MCand MC. Since the data to be re written into the selected first memory cell MCis 1 the first bit line BLhas a high potential V V and since the data to be re written into the selected second memory cell MCis 0 the second bit line BLhas a low potential V 0 volt .

 7B Then the word line WL is brought to a high level to bring the first transistor for selection TRand the second transistor for selection TRinto an ON state so that the common node CNand the first bit line BLof the sub memory unit SMUare connected to each other through the first transistor for selection TR and that the common node CNand the second bit line BLof the sub memory unit SMUare connected to each other through the second transistor for selection TR.

When a high potential V V is applied to the first bit line BLin step 6B and when the first transistor for selection TRis brought into an ON state and the common node CNand the first bit line BLare connected to each other through the first transistor for selection TRin step 7B data is not written into the selected first memory cell MC since the selected plate line PLhas a high potential V V applied thereto. Then in step 8B a low potential Vis applied to the selected plate line PL so that data 1 is re written into the selected first memory cell MC.

On the other hand when the second bit line BLhas a low potential Vapplied thereto in step 6B and when the second transistor for selection TRis brought into an ON state and the common node CNand the second bit line BLare connected to each other through the second transistor for selection TRin step B data 0 is re written into the selected second memory cell MC since the selected plate line PLhas a high potential Vapplied thereto. Then in step 8B a low potential V 0 volt is applied to the selected plate line PL while data 0 stored in the selected second memory cell MCsuffers no change.

 10B Finally the plate lines PLare brought to a level of 0 volt and the first and second transistors for selection TRand TRare brought into an OFF state.

Thereafter steps 1B to 10B are carried out consecutively with regard to the memory cells MC MC m 2 3 . . . 8 . However no data is outputted to an outside.

The nonvolatile memory operation method of Example 3 is also a variant of the nonvolatile memory operation method explained in Example 1. Further the nonvolatile memory of Example 3 is a variant of the nonvolatile memory of Example 2. In the nonvolatile memory in Example 3 as shown in the equivalent circuit diagram of the first transistor for selection TRis connected to the first word line WL the second transistor for selection TRis connected to the second word line WL and these are independently controlled with the word line decoder driver WD. The constitution of the nonvolatile memory of Example 3 is the same as that of the nonvolatile memory of Example 2 except for the above points.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method in Example 3 for reading out data stored in the first memory cell MC the first transistor for selection TRis brought into an ON state the second transistor for selection TRis brought into an OFF state and a reference potential is applied to the second bit line BL. For reading out data stored in the second memory cell MC the second transistor for selection TRis brought into an ON state the first transistor for selection TRis brought into an OFF state and a reference potential is applied to the first bit line BL.

The nonvolatile memory operation method for reading out and re writing of data in the nonvolatile memory of Example 3 will be explained below. Since however the steps of reading out and re writing of data can be the same as Step to Step in Example 1 so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted. As an example it is assumed that data is read out from and re written into the memory cells MC. The memory cells MC MC share the plate line PL i.e. forms a pair . As operation waveforms those shown in are employed. In parenthesized numerals correspond to Nos. of steps to be explained below in which alphabet B following parenthesized numerals in corresponds to C following numerals in Nos. of steps in the following explanation.

 1C In an initial state all of the bit lines all of the word lines and all of the plate lines have 0 volt. Further the common nodes CNand CNhave 0 volt and are in a floating state.

 2C When reading out of the data is started the word line WLis brought into a high level thereby to bring the first transistor for selection TRinto an ON state. By this operation the common node CNof the first sub memory unit SMUis connected to the first bit line BL. The first bit line BLand the second bit line BLare kept in a floating state.

 3C Then V V is applied to the selected plate line PL. The non selected plate lines PLare kept at V 0 volt . In this case the selected memory cell MChas data 1 already written therein polarization inversion in the ferroelectric layer takes place and the potential of the common node CNof the sub memory unit SMUand further the potential of the first bit line BLincrease. When the selected memory cell MChas data 0 already written therein no polarization inversion in the ferroelectric layer takes place and the potential of the common node CNof the sub memory unit SMUand further the potential of the first bit line BLslightly increase to be somewhat higher than 0 volt. On the other hand with a dummy cell or the like a reference potential that is intermediate between a bit line potential for data 1 and a bit line potential for data 0 is applied to the second bit line BL.

 4C Then the word line WLis brought into a low level to bring the first transistor for selection TRinto an OFF state and the common node CNand the first bit line BLare disconnected.

 5C Then the sense amplifier SAis activated to decide data said data is read out and outputted to an outside and the first bit line BLis charged and discharged.

 6C when re writing of the data is started the first transistor for selection TRis in an OFF state. Further the plate line PLconnected to the selected memory cell MChas a high potential V V applied thereto. In the above state an intermediate potential V V is applied to the plate lines PLconnected to the non selected memory cells MC. When the data to be re written into the selected memory cell MCis 1 the first bit line BLhas a high potential V V and when the data to be re written is 0 the first bit line BLhas a low potential V 0 volt .

 7C Then the first transistor for selection TRis brought into an ON state and the common node CNand the first bit line BLare connected to each other through the first transistor for selection TR.

When the first bit line BLhas a low potential V 0 volt applied thereto in step 6C and when the first transistor for selection TRis brought into an ON state and the conmon node CNand the first bit line BLare connected to each other through the first transistor for selection TRin step C data 0 is re written into the selected memory cell MC since the selected plate line PLhas a high potential V V applied thereto. Then in step 8C even if a low potential V 0 volt is applied to the selected plate line PL data 0 written into the selected memory cell MCsuffers no change.

On the other hand when the first bit line BLhas a high potential Vapplied thereto in step 6C and when the first transistor for selection TRis brought into an ON state and the common node CNand the first bit line BLare connected to each other through the first transistor for selection TRin step 7C no data is written into the selected memory cell MC since the selected plate line PLhas a high potential. Vapplied thereto. Then in step 8C a low potential 0 volt is applied to the selected plate line PL whereby data 1 is re written into the selected memory cell MC.

 10C Finally the non selected plate lines PLare brought into a level of 0 volt and the first transistor for selection TRis brought into an OFF state.

Thereafter steps 1C to 10C are carried out consecutively with regard to the memory cells MC MC MC m 2 3 . . . 8 . However no data is outputted to an outside.

Example 4 is also concerned with the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the first aspect of the present invention and the nonvolatile memory of the present invention and more specifically to the nonvolatile memory operation method according to No. 1B constitution. shows a flow chart of the nonvolatile memory operation method of Example 4. While Example 4 uses a nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in there may be used a nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in or .

In the nonvolatile memory operation method of Example 4 it is assumed that the memory cell at a designated address J 1 J M externally designated is a memory cell MC. Further it is assumed that the address designated sub memory unit is a sub memory unit SMU. In Example 4 data is read out from the memory cell SMUat the address externally designated and is latched in the sense amplifier SA and then the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted to an outside.

In Example 4 further after the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted to an outside the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis re written into the memory cell MCat the address externally designated. Then the data stored in other memory cell MC k J constituting the sub memory unit SMUis read out without external addressing without externally designating any address and is latched in the sense amplifier SA and the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted to an outside. Then the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis re written into other memory cell MC. In Example 4 the memory cells are sequentially accessed to read out output and re write the data.

The operation method of Example 4 will be explained below with reference to . Since the operation waveforms can be substantially the same as those shown in so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted.

First ACT command is inputted to the command decoder and an address RAS address designating a sub memory unit and a memory cell is inputted together. The RAS address is separated into a higher component and a lower component with a shift register not shown . The higher component for designating the address ADof the memory cells MCand MCis latched in the designated plate line address register and the plate line address counter . On the other hand the lower component for designating the address of the sub memory units SMUand SMUis latched in the unit address register . The above higher component for designating the address of the memory cells MCand MC which is latched in the designated plate line address register will be referred to as an address J the higher component for designating the address of the memory cells MCand MC which is latched in the plate line address counter will be referred to as an address j J and the lower component for designating the address of the sub memory units SMUand SMU which is latched in the unit address register will be referred to as an address L .

Further upon receipt of a signal from the command decoder the unit controller transmits a signal to the unit decoder to activate the unit decoder . In addition the unit decoder receives a signal from the unit address register and selects the sub memory units SMUand SMU. On the other hand a signal from the plate line address counter is transmitted to the plate line decoder driver PD. By the above operation the word line decoder driver WD and the plate line decoder driver PD are activated and the plate line PLis selected by the plate line decoder driver PD.

And the data stored in the memory cells MCand MC specifically the memory cells MCand MC designated by the address ADis read out and latched in the sense amplifier SA.

In the above steps a plurality of sub memory units and memory cells connected to the same word line and the same plate line can be selected. That is memory cells MC MC MC MC MC MC. . . in sub memory units SMU SMU SMU SMU SMU SMU. . . may be selected. By the above operation the data in the memory cells MC MC MC MC MC MC. . . are latched in the sense amplifiers SA SA SA. . . .

Then READ command is inputted to the command decoder and the CAS address for designating the sense amplifier SAis inputted together. According to the above command and the CAS address an instruction is transmitted to the sense amplifier SAthrough a line not shown and the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted to an outside.

When the data in the memory cells MC MC MC MC. . . are latched in the sense amplifiers SA SA. . . NOP command is inputted whereby the data latched in these sense amplifiers are burst transferred with a counter not shown . While an access of the above sense amplifiers to an outside is not shown there can be employed an access method completely similar to that of a conventional synchronous DRAM or the like.

After completion of data output to an outside RAS INC command is inputted. By this operation first the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis re written into the memory cells MCand MC specifically the memory cells MCand MC at the designated address.

Then data stored in other memory cells MCand MC k J constituting the sub memory unit SMUis read out without external addressing without externally designating any address and latched in the sense amplifier SA. Specifically the plate line address counter is incremented and the value of the plate line address counter and the value of the designated plate line address register are compared with the comparator . If the values are the same the operation is finished. If the values are not the same it is judged whether or not the value of the plate line address counter is over the value of M . If it is over the value of M the value of the plate line address counter is re set to be 1 and the data in the memory cells MCand MC corresponding to memory cells MCand MC at the designated address ADis read out and latched in the sense amplifier SA. The plate line address counter is incremented so that it is no longer required to externally designate the address of the memory cell.

Thereafter the operations of Step and steps thereafter are repeated. That is the operations of from Step to Step are carried out in all of other memory cells MCand MCconstituting the sub memory units SMUand SMUwithout external addressing without externally designating any address . That is the data are read out from and re written into the memory cells consecutively in the order of the memory cells MCand MCin the J 1 th place the memory cells MCand MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cells MCand MCin the M th place the memory cells MCand MCin the first place the memory cells MCand MCin the second place . . . the memory cells MCand MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cells MCand MCin the J 1 th place. In Example 4 the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis outputted to an outside unlike Example 2.

In the end of the operation the comparator notifies the unit controller to that effect and the unit controller deactivates the unit decoder and brings all of the word lines WL and the plate lines PLback to a non selected state.

By the above steps any memory cell can be rapidly accessed. Further all of data stored in other memory cells in the same sub memory unit can be outputted to an outside and all of such data can be re written into such other memory cells once.

Example 5 is concerned with the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the second aspect of the present invention and the nonvolatile memory of the present invention. More specifically it is concerned with the nonvolatile memory operation method according to No. 2A constitution. shows a flow chart of the nonvolatile memory operation method of Example 5. While Example 5 uses a nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in there can be used a nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in or . shows operation waveforms. In parenthesized numerals correspond to Nos. of steps to be explained later.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method in Example 5 data to be written is latched in the sense amplifier SA and then the data is written into memory cells MCand MCat a designated address J 1 J M externally designated. Then data to be written is latched in the sense amplifier and then the data is written into other memory cells MCand MCconstituting the sub memory units SMUand SMUwithout external addressing without externally designating any address . In Example 5 data are written into all of the memory cells MCand MCconstituting the sub memory units SMUand SMU. In all of other memory cells constituting the sub memory units SMUand SMU further data are written into the memory cells consecutively i.e. in the order of the memory cells MCand MCin the J 1 th place the memory cells MCand MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cells MCand MCin the M th place the memory cells MCand MCin the first place the memory cells MCand MCin the second place . . . the memory cells MCand MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cells MCand MCin the J 1 th place without external addressing without externally designating any address .

The operation method in Example 5 will be explained below with reference to and showing operation waveforms.

First ACT command is inputted to the command decoder and an address RAS address for designating a sub memory unit and a memory cell is inputted together. The above RAS address is separated into a higher component and a lower component with a shift register not shown . The higher component for designating the address ADof the memory cells MCand MCis latched in the designated plate line address register and the plate line address counter . The lower component for designating the address of the sub memory units SMUand SMUis latched in the unit address register . The higher component designating the address ADof the memory cells MCand MC which is latched in the designated plate line address register will be referred to as an address J the higher component designating the address of the memory cells MCand MC which is latched in the plate line address counter will be referred to as an address j J and the lower component designating the address of the sub memory unit SMUand SMU which is latched in the unit address register will be referred to as an address L . And data stored in the memory cells MCand MCdesignated by the address ADis read out and latched in the sense amplifier SA.

Further upon input of WRITE command the command decoder transmits a signal to a sense amplifier control circuit not shown and executes the process of latching data from an outside in the sense amplifier SA. That is update of data in the sense amplifier SAis performed.

In the above steps a plurality of sub memory units and memory cells connected to the same word line and the same plate line may be selected. That is there may be employed a constitution in which first data in a plurality of sense amplifiers are latched according to ACT command and burst writing in the sense amplifiers is performed according to NOP command after WRITE command.

Then RAS INC command is inputted to the command decoder and according to the above command the unit controller which has received a signal from the command decoder transmits a signal to the unit decoder to activate the unit decoder . In addition the unit decoder which has received a signal from the unit address register selects the sub memory units SMUand SMU. A signal from the plate line address counter is transmitted to the plate line decoder driver PD. By the above operation the word line decoder driver WD and the plate line decoder driver PD are activated and further the plate line PLis selected by the plate line decoder driver PD. And the data latched in the sense amplifier SAis written into the memory cells MCand MC.

Then data are written into other memory cells MCand MC specifically MCand MC constituting the sub memory units SMUand SMUwithout external addressing without externally designating any address . Specifically the plate line address counter is incremented and the value of the plate line address counter and the value of the designated plate line address register are compared with the comparator . If the values are the same the operation is finished. If the values are not the same it is judged whether or not the value of the plate line address counter is over the value of M . If it is over the value of M the value of the plate line address counter is re set to be 1 . And data from the memory cell is latched in the sense amplifier SA. That is data is once read out into the sense amplifier and then the data is written into the memory cell.

The operations of the above Step to Step are performed in all of other memory cells MCand MCconstituting the sub memory units SMUand SMUwithout external addressing without externally designating any address . That is data are written into the memory cells consecutively in the order of the memory cells MCand MCin the J 1 th place the memory cells MCand MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cells MCand MCin the M th place the memory cells MCand MCin the first place the memory cells MCand MCin the second place . . . the memory cells MCand MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cells MCand MCin the J 1 th place.

In the end of the operation the comparator notifies the unit controller to that effect and the unit controller deactivates the unit decoder and brings the word lines WL and all of the plate lines PLback to a non selected state.

By the above steps any memory cell can be rapidly accessed. Further data can be written into other memory cells in the same sub memory unit.

The operation of writing data into the nonvolatile memory in Example 5 will be explained below with reference to showing operation waveforms. As an example it is assumed that data 1 and data 0 are written into the memory cells MCand MC respectively connected to the plate line PL. In the drawing showing operation waveforms parenthesized numerals correspond to Nos. of steps to be explained below.

 1 In a standby state the word line and all of the plate lines have 0 volt. Further the bit lines BLand BLare equalized to have 0 volt. The sense amplifier SAhas data to be written.

 2 When writing of data in Step is started a high potential V V is applied to the bit line BL and a low potential V 0 volt is applied to the bit line BL. The above Vis a power source voltage.

 3 Then the word line WL is brought into a high level thereby to bring the transistors for selection TRand TRinto an ON state. At the same time a high potential V V is applied to the selected plate line PL and an intermediate potential V V is applied to the non selected plate lines PL k 2 3 . . . 8 . By this operation the selected plate line PLhas a high potential Vand the bit line BLhas a low potential V so that data 0 is written into the memory cell MC.

 4 Then the selected plate line PLis brought to a level of a low potential V 0 volt . By this operation the selected plate line PLhas a low potential Vand the bit line BLhas a high potential V so that data 1 is written into the memory cell MC.

 5 Then the word line WL is brought into a low level to bring the transistors for selection TRand TRinto an OFF state. Then the bit line BLis discharged to 0 volt and the non selected plate lines PL k 2 3 . . . 8 are discharged to 0 volt.

 6 Thereafter the operations in steps 1 to 5 are performed with regard to the memory cells MC MC m 2 3 . . . 8 .

Example 6 is also concerned with the nonvolatile memory operation method according to the second aspect of the present invention and the nonvolatile memory of the present invention. More specifically it is concerned with the nonvolatile memory operation method according to No. 2B constitution. shows a flow chart of the nonvolatile memory operation method of Example 6. While Example 6 also uses a nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in there may be used a nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in or .

In the nonvolatile memory operation method in Example 6 data latched in the sense amplifier SAis written into the memory cells MCand MCat the designated address data stored in other memory cells MCand MCconstituting a sub memory unit are read out without external addressing without externally designating any address and latched in the sense amplifier SA and then the data latched in the sense amplifier SAare re written into the other memory cells MCand MC. In Example 6 data is written only into the memory cells MCand MCat the designated address and reading out and re writing of data are carried out in the other memory cells MCand MC. In all of the other memory cells constituting the sub memory units SMUand SMU data are read out from and re written into the memory cells consecutively that is in the order of the memory cells MCand MCin the J 1 th place the memory cells MCand MCin the J 2 th place . . . the memory cells MCand MCin the M th place the memory cells MCand MCin the first place the memory cells MCand MCin the second place . . . the memory cells MCand MCin the J 2 th place and the memory cells MCand MCin the J 1 th place.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method in Example 6 substantially Step and Step in Example 5 and Step in Example 1 can be consecutively carried out as shown in the flow chart of so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted.

While the present invention is explained with reference to Examples hereinabove the present invention shall not be limited thereto. The structures of the nonvolatile memories the materials used the various forming conditions the circuit constitutions the operation methods etc. which are explained in Examples are give for an illustrative purpose and may be changed or altered as required.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method explained in each of Examples 1 to 4 No. 1A constitution and No. 1B constitution may be combined. In this case it is made possible to drive a nonvolatile memory flexibly and at high degrees of freedom. That is there may be employed a constitution in which the operation method according to No. 1B constitution is carried out with regard to a predetermined number of memory cells starting at the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place and then the operation method according to No. 1A constitution is carried out with regard to the remaining other memory cells. Specifically RAS INC command is executed a predetermined or desired number of times and then RESTORE command is executed with regard to the remaining other memory cells. Alternatively there may be employed a constitution in which the operation method according to No. 1A constitution is carried out with regard to a predetermined number of memory cells starting at the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place and the operation method according to No. 1B constitution is carried out with regard to the remaining other memory cells. Specifically the execution of RESTORE command is discontinued in the middle of the operation and RAS INC command is executed with regard to the remaining other memory cells.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method explained in each of Examples 5 and 6 No. 2A constitution and No. 2B constitution may be combined. In this case it is made possible to drive a nonvolatile memory flexibly and at high degrees of freedom. That is there may be employed a constitution in which the operation method according to No. 2B constitution is carried out with regard to a predetermined number of memory cells starting at the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place and then the operation method according to No. 2A constitution is carried out with regard to the remaining other memory cells. Specifically RAS INC command is executed a predetermined or desired number of times and then RESTORE command is executed with regard to the remaining other memory cells. Alternatively there may be employed a constitution in which the operation method according to No. 2A constitution is carried out with regard to a predetermined number of memory cells starting at the memory cell MCin the J 1 th place and the operation method according to No. 2B constitution is carried out with regard to the remaining other memory cells. Specifically the execution of RESTORE command is discontinued in the middle of the operation and RAS INC command is executed with regard to the remaining other memory cells.

Various variants of structure of a nonvolatile memory will be explained below while these nonvolatile memories can be operated by operation methods similar to the operation methods explained in Examples so that detailed explanations of the operation methods are omitted. In showing of suffixes L designating an address of a sub memory unit is omitted. In and further showing of the command decoder etc. is omitted.

For example a nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in has a constitution in which a first memory unit and a first memory unit constituting a nonvolatile memory contiguous to the above nonvolatile memory in the extending direction of the first bit line BLare stacked with an insulating interlayer interposed between them and a second memory unit constituting the nonvolatile memory and a second memory unit constituting the nonvolatile memory contiguous to the above nonvolatile memory in the extending direction of the second bit line BLare stacked with the insulating interlayer interposed between them. shows a schematic partial cross sectional view of the above nonvolatile memory. In however the first memory units alone are shown. The second memory units are contiguous to the first memory units in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of . In addition is added to reference numerals that indicate elements of the first memory unit constituting the nonvolatile memory and being contiguous in the extending direction of the first bit line BL.

More specifically in the nonvolatile memory shown in a transistor for selection TR TR constituted of a MOS type FET is formed in an active region surrounded by a device isolation region formed in a p type silicon semiconductor substrate and made of a LOCOS structure a shallow trench structure or a combination of a LOCOS structure and a shallow trench structure. The transistor for selection TR TR comprises a gate insulating layer formed on the surface of the silicon semiconductor substrate and made for example of a silicon oxide film a gate electrode which also works as a word line WL WL formed on the gate insulating layer and source drain regions that are formed in the active region of the silicon semiconductor substrate and contain an n type impurity.

And the bit line BLis formed on a lower insulating layer formed on the entire surface and the bit line BLis connected to one source drain region of the transistor for selection TR TR through a contact hole made through the lower insulating layer. Further an upper insulating layer is formed on the lower insulating layer including the bit line BL. In the drawings the lower insulating layer and the upper insulating layer are collectively shown as an insulating layer . Further the bit line BLis extending leftward and rightward on so as not to be in contact with a contact hole to be described later.

A first electrode lower electrode is formed on the insulating layer a ferroelectric layer is formed on the first electrode a second electrode upper electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer and these constitute the memory cells MC. The first electrodes are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode is connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The common first electrode is shown as a common node CN. The ferroelectric layer is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode .

Further an insulating interlayer is formed on the memory cells MCand the insulating layer . A first electrode lower electrode is formed on the insulating interlayer a ferroelectric layer is formed on the first electrode a second electrode upper electrode is formed on the ferroelectric and these constitute the memory cells MC . The first electrodes are in common with the memory cells MC and have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode is connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for selection TR through a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the insulating layer and a contact hole formed in the opening portion made through the insulating layer . The common first electrode is shown as a common node CN . The ferroelectric layer is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode . Further an upper insulating layer A is formed on the memory cells MC and the insulating interlayer .

The word line WL WL is extending in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of . Further the second electrodes are shared with the memory cells MC MC contiguous in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of and also works as a plate line PL. Further the memory cells MCand the memory cells MC are aligned in the perpendicular direction. Such a structure serves to decrease the area that the memory cells occupy and can improve the degree of integration.

In the nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in gate electrodes of transistors for selection TR TR connected to sub memory units SMUand SMU are connected to a word line WL and gate electrodes of transistors for selection TRand TR connected to sub memory units SMUand SMU are connected to a word line WL. In the nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in gate electrodes of transistors for selection TR TR TRand TR connected to sub memory units SMU SMU SMUand SMU are connected to word lines WL WL WLand WL.

 B 1 first transistor s for selection TRthat are N N 1 specifically N 2 in a shown example in number 

 C 1 first sub memory unit s SMUthat are N N 1 N 2 in the shown example in number each of which is composed of first memory cells MC n 1 2 . . . N that are M M 2 M 8 in the shown example in number and

 D 1 plate lines PLthat are M in number each plate line PLbeing shared with each first memory cell MC m 1 2 . . . M constituting each of the sub memory units SMUthat are N in number.

 C 2 second sub memory unit s SMUthat are N in number each of which is composed of second memory cells MCthat are M in number and

 D 2 the plate lines PLthat are M in number each plate line PLbeing shared with each second memory cell MCconstituting each of the sub memory units SMUthat are N in number said plate lines being shared with the plate lines PLthat are M in number and constitute said first memory unit MU.

In the schematic partial cross sectional view of the above second bit line BL the above second transistors for selection TRand TRand the above second memory unit MU2 are contiguous to the first bit line BL the first transistors for selection TRand TRand the first memory unit MUin the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of .

Each memory cell MC m 1 2 . . . M n 1 2 . . . N and in a shown example m 1 2 . . . 8 and n 1 2 comprises a first electrode lower electrodes a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode upper electrodes . In the first memory unit MU the first electrodes of the first cell MCconstituting the first sub memory unit SMUin the n th place n 1 2 . . . N are in common with the n th place first sub memory unit SMU. The above common first electrode to be sometimes referred to as common node CN is connected to the first bit line BLthrough the n th place first transistor for selection TR and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line PL. In the second memory unit MU the first electrodes of the second memory cell MCconstituting the n th place second sub memory unit SMUare in common with the n th place second sub memory unit SMU. The above common first electrode to be sometimes referred to as common node CN is connected to the second bit line BLthrough the n th place second transistor for selection TR and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line PL.

The number of the memory cells for constituting the memory unit of the nonvolatile memory is not limited to 8 and it can be 2 M M 1 2 3 . . . . Preferably it is an exponent of 2 2 4 8 16 32 . . . .

The plate line PLin the memory cells MC MC MCand MCis shared with these memory cells and is connected to the plate line decoder driver PD. Further the gate electrode of the first transistor for selection TRand the gate electrode of the second transistor for selection TRare connected to the word line WL the gate electrode of the first transistor for selection TRand the gate electrode of the second transistor for selection TRare connected to the word line WL and the word lines WLand WLare connected to the word line decoder driver WD. Further the first bit line BLand the second bit line BLare connected to the sense amplifier SA.

In the nonvolatile memory shown in the first sub memory units SMUand SMUconstituting the first memory unit MUare stacked with an insulating interlayer interposed between them and the second sub memory units SMUand SMUconstituting the second memory unit MUare stacked with the insulating interlayer interposed between them. That is the first place sub memory unit SMUand the second place sub memory unit SMU which constitute the first memory unit MU are stacked with the insulating interlayer interposed between them. Further the first place sub memory unit SMUand the second place sub memory unit SMU which constitute the second memory unit MU are also stacked with the insulating interlayer interposed between them. Such a structure can serve to improve the degree of integration.

Particulars of the nonvolatile memory shown in will be explained. The following explanation addresses the first memory unit MU while the second memory unit MUalso has a similar structure.

More specifically in the nonvolatile memory. shown in each of the first transistors for selection TRand TRconstituted of a MOS type FET each is formed in an active region surrounded by a device isolation region formed in a p type silicon semiconductor substrate and made of a LOCOS structure a shallow trench structure or a combination of a LOCOS structure and a shallow trench structure. The first transistor for selection TR TRcomprises a gate insulating layer formed on the surface of the silicon semiconductor substrate and made for example of a silicon oxide film a gate electrode which also works as a word line WL WL2 formed on the gate insulating layer and source drain regions that are formed in the active region of the silicon semiconductor substrate and contain an n type impurity.

And the bit line BLis formed on a lower insulating layer formed on the entire surface and the bit line BLis connected to one source drain region of the transistor for selection TR TRthrough a contact hole made through the lower insulating layer. Further an upper insulating layer is formed on the lower insulating layer including the bit line BL. In the drawing the lower insulating layer and the upper insulating layer are collectively shown as an insulating layer . Further the bit line BLis extending leftward and rightward on so as not to be in contact with a contact hole to be described later.

A first electrode lower electrode is formed on the insulating layer a ferroelectric layer is formed on the first electrode a second electrode upper electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer and these constitute the memory cells MCand further constitute the first place sub memory unit SMU. The first electrodes are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode is connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The common first electrode is shown as a common node CN. The ferroelectric layer is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode .

Further an insulating interlayer is formed on the memory cells MC sub memory unit SMU and the insulating layer . A first electrode lower electrode is formed on the insulating interlayer a ferroelectric layer is formed on the first electrode a second electrode upper electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer and these constitute the memory cells MCand further constitute the second place sub memory unit SMU. The first electrodes are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode is connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole formed in an opening portion made through the insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the insulating layer and a contact hole made in an. opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The common first electrode is shown as a common node CN. The ferroelectric layer is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode . Further an upper insulating layer A is formed on the memory cells MCand the insulating interlayer .

The word lines WLand WLare extending in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of . Further the second electrode is shared with the memory cell MCof the first place sub memory unit SMUthat is contiguous in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of and constitute the second memory unit MU and the second electrode also works as a plate line PL. Further the second electrode is also shared with the memory cell MCof the second place sub memory unit SMUthat is contiguous in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of and constitute the second memory unit MU and the second electrode also works as a plate line PL. The plate lines PLshared by the memory cells MC MC MCand MCare extending in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of and are connected together through a contact hole in a region not shown . Further the memory cell MCand the memory cell MCare aligned in the perpendicular direction. The above structure can serve to decrease the area that the memory cells occupy and it can improve the degree of integration.

In the nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in the gate electrodes of the transistors for selection TRand TRconnected to the sub memory units SMUand SMUare connected to a word line WL the gate electrodes of the transistors for selection TRand TRconnected to the sub memory units SMUand SMUare connected to a word line WL the gate electrodes of the transistors for selection TRand TRconnected to the sub memory units SMUand SMUare connected to a word line WL and the gate electrodes of the transistors for selection TRand TRconnected to the sub memory units SMUand SMUare connected to a word line WL. In the nonvolatile memory having an equivalent circuit diagram shown in the gate electrodes of transistors for selection TR TR TR TR TR TR TRand TRconnected to the sub memory units SMU SMU SMU SMU SMU SMU SMUand SMUare connected to word lines WL WL WL WL WL WL WL and WL. omit showing of a sense amplifier SA to which the first bit line BLand second bit line BLare connected.

In the above nonvolatile memory the sub memory unit SMU SMU SMUand SMUconstituting the first memory unit MUare stacked forming four stages. Although not shown the sub memory unit SMU SMU SMUand SMUconstituting the second memory unit MU2 are also stacked forming four stages.

 B 1 first transistor s for selection TR TR TR TRand TR that are N N 1 specifically N 4 in a shown embodiment in number 

 C 1 first sub memory unit s SMU SMU SMU SMUand SMU that are N in number each of which is composed of first memory cells MC MC MC MCand MC that are M M 2 M 8 in number and

 D 1 plate lines PLthat are M in number each plate line PLbeing shared with each first memory cell MC MC MC MCand MC constituting each of the sub memory units SMU that are N in number.

 C 2 second sub memory unit s SMU SMU SMU SMUand SMU that are N in number each of which is composed of second memory cells MC MC MC MCand MC that are M in number and

 D 2 the plate lines PLthat are M in number each plate line PLbeing shared with each second memory cell MC MC MC MCand MCm constituting each of the sub memory units SMUthat are N in number said plate lines being shared with the plate lines PLthat are M in number and constitute said first memory unit.

That is in the above nonvolatile memory the sub memory units constituting the memory unit have a constitution of four layers. The number of the memory cells constituting each sub memory unit is not limited to 8 and the number of the memory cells constituting each memory unit is not limited to 32 either.

Each memory cell comprises a first electrode a ferroelectric and a second electrode. Specifically each of the memory cell MCand the memory cell MCcomprises a first electrode a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode . Further each of the memory cell MCand the memory cell MCcomprises a first electrode a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode . Further each of the memory cell MCand the memory cell MCcomprises a first electrode a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode . Each of the memory cell MCand the memory cell MCcomprises a first electrode a ferroelectric and a second electrode .

In the first memory unit MU the first electrodes of the first memory cells MCconstituting the first sub memory unit SMUin the n th place n 1 2 . . . N are in common with the n th place first sub memory unit SMU the above common first electrode is connected to the first bit line BLthrough the n th place first transistor for selection TR and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line PL.

In the second memory unit MU the first electrodes of the second memory cells MCconstituting the n th place second sub memory unit SMUare in common with the n th place second sub memory unit SMU and the above common first electrode is connected to the second bit line BLthrough the n th place second transistor for selection TR and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line PL.

More specifically in the nonvolatile memory shown in each of first transistors for selection TR TR TRand TRconstituted of a MOS type FET each is formed in an active region surrounded by a device isolation region formed in a p type silicon semiconductor substrate and made of a LOCOS structure a shallow trench structure or a combination of a LOCOS structure and a shallow trench structure. The first transistor for selection TR TR TR TRcomprises a gate insulating layer formed on the surface of the silicon semiconductor substrate and made for example of a silicon oxide film a gate electrode which also works as a word line WL WL WL WL formed on the gate insulating layer and source drain regions that are formed in the active region of the silicon semiconductor substrate and contain an n type impurity.

A bit line BLis formed on a lower insulating layer formed on the entire surface and the bit line BLis connected to one source drain region of each of the first place and second place first transistors for selection TRand TRand one source drain region of each of the third place and fourth place first transistors for selection TRand TRthrough a contact hole made through the lower insulating layer. Further an upper insulating layer is formed on the lower insulating layer including the bit line BL. The bit line BLis extending leftward and rightward on so as not to be in contact with a contact hole to be described later.

A first electrode lower electrode is formed on the insulating layer a ferroelectric layer is formed on the first electrode a second electrode upper electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer and these constitute the memory cells Mcand constitute the sub memory unit SMC. The first electrodes are in common with the sub memory unit SMCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode is connected to the other source drain region of the first place first transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The above common first electrode is shown as a common node CN. The ferroelectric is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode .

Further a first insulating interlayer is formed on the sub memory unit SMCand the insulating layer . A first electrode lower electrode is formed on the first insulating interlayer a ferroelectric layer is formed on the first electrode a second electrode upper electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer and these constitute the memory cells MCand the sub memory unit SMU. The first electrodes are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode is connected to the other source drain region of the second place first transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the first insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the insulating layer and a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The above common first electrode is shown as a common node CN. The ferroelectric is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode .

Further a second insulating interlayer is formed on the sub memory unit SMCand the first insulating interlayer . A first electrode lower electrode is formed on the second insulating interlayer a ferroelectric layer is formed on the first electrode a second electrode upper electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer and these constitute the memory cells MCand the sub memory unit SMU. The first electrodes are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode is connected to the other source drain region of the third place first transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the second insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the first insulating interlayer a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the first insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the insulating layer and a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The above common first electrode is shown as a common node CN. The ferroelectric is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode .

Further a third insulating interlayer is formed on the sub memory unit SMCand the second insulating interlayer . A first electrode lower electrode is formed on the third insulating interlayer a ferroelectric layer is formed on the first electrode a second electrode upper electrode is formed on the ferroelectric and these constitute the memory cells MCand the sub memory unit SMU. The first electrodes are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode is connected to the other source drain region of the fourth place first transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the third insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the second insulating interlayer a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the second insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the first insulating interlayer a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the first insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the insulating layer and a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The above common first electrode will be sometimes referred to as a common node CN. The ferroelectric is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode . Further an upper insulating layer A is formed on the memory cell MCand the third insulating interlayer .

The word lines WL WL WLand WLare extending in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of . Further the second electrode is shared with each memory cell MCcontiguous in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of and also works as a plate line PL. Further each of the second electrodes and is also shared with each of the memory cells MC MCand MCcontiguous in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of and also works as a plate line PL. The plate lines PLshared by the memory cells MC MC MC MC MC MC MCand MCare extending in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of and connected together through a contact hole in a region not shown . Further the memory cell MCthe memory cell MC the memory cell MCand the memory cell MCare aligned in the perpendicular direction. Such a structure can serve to further decrease the area that the memory cells occupy and it can further improve the degree of integration.

In the above nonvolatile memory the first place transistors for selection TRand Rare connected to the word line WL the second place transistors for selection TRand TRare connected to the word line WL the third place transistors for selection TRand TRare connected to the word line WL and the fourth place transistors for selection TRand TRare connected to the word line WL.

Complement data is written into the memory cells MCand MCsharing the plate line PL the memory cells MCand MCsharing the plate line PL the memory cells MCand MCsharing the plate line PLand the memory cells MCand MCsharing the plate line PL whereby 1 bit is stored and 32 bits are stored in one memory unit access unit see the equivalent circuit diagram in . The structure of the second transistors for selection TR TR TRand TRand the structure of the memory cells MC MC MCand MCare the same as structures shown in and these are contiguous in the direction perpendicular to the paper surface of . Alternatively eight transistors for selection TRto TRand TRto TRand 64 memory cells MCto MCand MCto MCconstitute one memory unit access unit 1 bit is stored in each memory cell and 64 bits are stored in the memory unit see the equivalent circuit diagram of .

The word lines WL WL WLand WLare connected to the word line decoder driver WD. The bit lines BLand BLare connected to the sense amplifier not shown . Further the plate line PLis connected to the plate line decoder driver PD.

In an actual nonvolatile memory a set of the above nonvolatile memories for storing 32 bits or 64 bits each are arranged in the form an array as an access unit.

The nonvolatile memory shown in differs from the nonvolatile memory shown in in that the second electrode plate line is shared with or common in the memory cell MCof the first place sub memory unit SMUand the memory cell MCof the second place sub memory unit SMUand that the second electrode plate line is shared with or common in the memory cell MCof the third place sub memory unit SMUand the memory cell MCof the fourth place sub memory unit SMU. Further the second electrode plate line is shared with or common in the memory cell MCof the first place sub memory unit SMUand the memory cell MCof the second place sub memory unit SMU and the second electrode plate line is shared with or common in the memory cell MCof the third place sub memory unit SMUand the memory cell MCof the fourth place sub memory unit SMU.

circle around 1 memory cells MC m 1 2 3 . . . 7 8 comprising a first electrode A a ferroelectric layer A and a second electrode specifically MC MC MC. . . MCand MC sub memory unit SMU 

circle around 2 memory cells MC m 1 2 3 . . . 7 8 comprising a first electrode B a ferroelectric layer B and a second electrode specifically MC MC MC. . . MCand MC sub memory unit SMU 

circle around 3 memory cells MC m 1 2 3 . . . 7 8 comprising a first electrode A a ferroelectric layer A and a second electrode specifically MC MC MC. . . MCand MC sub memory unit SMU and

circle around 4 memory cells MC m 1 2 3 . . . 7 8 comprising a first electrode B a ferroelectric layer B and a second electrode specifically MC MC MC. . . MCand MC sub memory unit SMU 

That is in the nonvolatile memory shown in the sub memory units constituting each memory unit have a constitution of 4 layers. The number of the memory cells constituting each memory unit is not limited to 8 and the number of memory cells constituting the nonvolatile memory is not limited to 32 either.

The structure of the transistors for selection TR TR TR TR TR TR TRand TRis the same as the structure of the nonvolatile memory shown in so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted.

The first electrode A is formed on an insulating layer the ferroelectric layer A is formed on the first electrode A the second electrode is formed on the ferroelectric A and these constitute the memory cells MC. The first electrodes A are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode A is connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The ferroelectric layer A is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode .

Further the ferroelectric layer B is formed on the memory cells MCand the insulating layer and the first electrode B is formed thereon. The first electrode B the ferroelectric B and the second electrode constitute the memory cells MC. The first electrodes B are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode B is connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The ferroelectric layer B is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the first electrode B.

Further an insulating interlayer is formed on the memory cells MCand the insulating layer . The first electrode A is formed on the insulating interlayer the ferroelectric layer A is formed on the first electrode A the second electrode is formed on the ferroelectric layer A and these constitute the memory cells MC. The first electrodes A are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode A is connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the insulating layer and a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The ferroelectric layer A is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the second electrode .

Further the ferroelectric layer B is formed on the memory cells MCand the insulating interlayer and the first electrode B is formed thereon. The first electrode B the ferroelectric layer B and the second electrode constitute the memory cells MC. The first electrodes B are in common with the memory cells MCand have a stripe shaped plan form. The first electrode B is connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for selection TRthrough a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating interlayer a pad portion formed on the insulating layer and a contact hole made in an opening portion formed through the insulating layer . The ferroelectric layer B is formed so as to have nearly the same pattern as that of the first electrode B. Further an upper insulating layer A is formed on the memory cells MCand the insulating interlayer .

The memory cells MC the memory cells MC the memory cells MCand the memory cell MCare aligned in the perpendicular direction. Such a structure can serve to further decrease the area that the memory cells occupy and can further improve the degree of integration.

The memory unit MUcan be similarly constituted. The nonvolatile memory shown in has an equivalent circuit diagram similar to that shown in or . Further the word lines WL1 to WLor the word line WLto WLand the plate line PLcan be substantially structurally the same as that of the nonvolatile memory shown in so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted.

Further a variant of the nonvolatile memory shown in may be employed for example as shown in in which the first electrode is formed as an upper electrode and the second electrode is formed as a lower electrode. The above structure can be applied to the other nonvolatile memories. In reference numerals A and B indicate a lower layer and an upper layer of the first insulating layer and reference numerals A and B indicate a lower layer and an upper layer of the upper insulating layer.

Further a so called gain cell type ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory can be employed. shows an equivalent circuit diagram of a gain cell type nonvolatile memory. The gain cell type nonvolatile memory has a memory unit MU which comprises a bit line BL a transistor for writing in TR a sub memory unit SMU composed of memory cells MCthat are M M 2 for example M 8 in number and plate lines PLthat are M in number. Each memory cell MCcomprises a first electrode a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode . The first electrodes of the memory cells MCconstituting the sub memory unit SMU are in common with the sub memory unit SMU the above common first electrode to be sometimes referred to as common node CN hereinafter is connected to the bit line BL through the transistor for writing in TR and each second electrode is connected to each plate line PL. The number M of the memory cells constituting the sub memory unit SMU of the nonvolatile memory is not limited to 8 and it is generally sufficient to satisfy M 2. It is preferably an exponent of 2 M 2 4 8 16 32 . . . .

Further the above nonvolatile memory has a transistor for detection TRand a transistor for read out TR. One end of the transistor for detection TRis connected to a wiring for example a power source line made of an impurity layer having a predetermined potential V and the other end thereof is connected to the bit line BL through the transistor for read out TR. When data stored in each memory cell MCis read out the transistor for read out TRis brought into a conduction state and the operation of the transistor for detection TRis controlled on the basis of a potential that occurs in the common first electrode common node CN due to the data stored in each memory cell MC. The transistor for writing in TR the transistor for detection TRand the transistor for read out TRconstitute the transistor for selection.

Specifically the various transistors are constituted of MOS type FETs. One source drain region of the transistor for writing in TRis connected to the bit line BL and the other source drain region thereof is connected to the common first electrode common node CN . Further one source drain region of the transistor for detection TRis connected to a wiring having a predetermined potential V and the other source drain region thereof is connected to one source drain region of the transistor for read out TR. More specifically the other source drain region of the transistor for detection TRand one source drain region of the transistor for read out TRoccupy one source drain region. Further the other source drain region of the transistor for read out TRis connected to the bit line BL. Further the first electrode common node CN or the other source drain region of the transistor for writing in TR is connected to a gate portion of the transistor for detection TRthrough a word line WL. Further a word line WLconstituting the transistor for writing in TRand a word line WLconstituting the transistor for read out TRare connected to the word line decoder driver WD. Each plate line PLis connected to the plate line decoder driver PD. Further the bit line BL is connected to the sense amplifier SA.

The operation of writing data into the above nonvolatile memory will be explained below. As an example it is assumed that data is written into a memory cell MCconnected to a plate line PL. shows operation waveforms. In and to be referred to later parenthesized numerals correspond to Nos. of steps to be explained below.

 1D In a standby state the bit line the word line and all of the plate lines have 0 volt. Further the common node CN has 0 volt and is in a floating state.

 2D When writing of data is started the potential of the selected plate line PLis brought to V and the potential of the non selected platelines PL k 2 3 . . . 8 is brought to V. By this operation the potential of the common node CN in a floating state increases approximately close to Vdue to a coupling with the plate line PL. When data 1 is written into the selected memory cell MC the potential of the bit line BL is brought to V and when data 0 is written the potential of the bit line BL is brought to 0 volt.

 3D Then the transistor for writing in TRis brought into an ON state. By this operation the potential of the common node CN comes to be Vwhen data 1 is written into the selected memory cell MC and it comes to be 0 volt when data 0 is written. The selected plate line PLin a state where it has Vapplied thereto. When the potential of the common node CN is 0 volt therefore data 0 is written into the selected memory cell MC. When the potential of the common node CN is V no data is written into the selected memory cell MC.

 4D Then the potential of the selected plate line PLis brought to 0 volt. When the potential of the common node CN is V data 1 is written into the selected memory cell MC. When the selected memory cell MChas data 0 already written therein no change takes place in the selected memory cell MC.

 6D Further the non selected plate lines PLare brought to 0 volt and the transistor for writing in TRis brought into an OFF state.

When data is written into other memory cell MC k 2 3 . . . 8 a similar operation is repeated. In the above writing operation a disturbance of Vtakes place in the non selected memory cell MC. However destruction of data in the non selected memory cell MCcan be reliably prevented by properly setting the value of V.

The operation of reading out and re writing of data in the above nonvolatile memory will be explained below. As an example it is assumed that data is read out from and re written into the memory cell MCconnected to the plate line PL.

 1E In a standby state the bit line the word line and all of the plate lines have 0 volt. Further the common node CN has 0 volt and is in a floating state.

 2E When data is read out Vis applied to the selected plate line PL. In this case if data 1 is stored in the selected memory cell MC polarization inversion takes place in the ferroelectric layer an accumulated charge amount increases and the potential of the common node CN increases. When data 0 is stored in the selected memory cell MC no polarization inversion takes place in the ferroelectric layer and the potential of the common node CN hardly increases. That is the common node CN is coupled with a plurality of non selected plate lines PLthrough the ferroelectric layers so that the potential of the common node CN is held at a level relatively close to 0 volt. In this manner a change takes place in the common node CN depending upon data stored in the selected memory cell MC. Therefore the ferroelectric layer of the selected memory cell MCcan be provided with an electric field sufficient for polarization inversion.

 3E Then the bit line BL is brought into a floating state and the transistor for read out TRis brought into an ON state. By this operation the operation of the transistor for detection TRis controlled on the basis of a potential that is caused in the common first electrode common node CN due to data stored in the selected memory cell MC. Specifically since one source drain region of the transistor for detection TRis connected to a wiring having a predetermined potential V an electric current flows to the bit line BL from the above wiring through the transistor for detection TRand the transistor for read out TR and the potential of the bit line BL increases. In this case the potential of the bit line BL comes to be approximately V V in which Vis a threshold value of the transistor for detection TRand Vis a potential of gate portion of the transistor for detection TR i.e. potential of the common node CN . When the transistor for detection TRis a depression type NMOSFET the threshold value Vis a negative value. In such a constitution stabilized sense signal amount can be secured regardless of the size of a load on the bit line BL. The transistor for detection TRmay be formed of PMOSFET.

 5E Then the sense amplifier SA connected to the bit line BL is activated to amplify the data and the operation of reading out of data is completed.

By the above operation the data stored in the selected memory cell is once destroyed so that the operation of re writing data is carried out.

 6E For the above purpose first the potential of each non selected plate lines PL k 2 3 . . . 8 are brought to V.

 7E Then the transistor for writing in TRis brought into an ON state. By this operation the potential of the common node CN comes to be equal to the potential of the bit line BL. That is when data stored in the selected memory cell MCis 1 the potential of the common node CN comes to be V and when data stored in the selected memory cell MCis 0 the potential of the common node CN comes to be 0 volt. The selected plate line PLcontinues having a potential of V. When the potential of the common node CN is 0 volt therefore data 0 is re written into the selected memory cell MC.

 8E Then the potential of the selected plate line PLis brought to 0 volt. By this operation when data stored in the selected memory cell MCis 1 data 1 is re written since the potential of the common node CN is V. When the selected memory cell MChas data 0 already written therein no change takes place in the selected memory cell.

 10E Finally the non selected plate lines PLare brought to 0 volt and the transistor for writing in TRis brought into an OFF state.

When reading out and re writing of date in other memory cell MC k 2 3 . . . 8 is carried out the above operation is repeated.

In the above step 2E the number M of the memory cells constituting the sub memory unit SMU is required to be such a number that the ferroelectric layer of the selected memory cell is provided with a sufficiently large electric field to cause reliable polarization inversion. That is if the value of M is too small when Vis applied to the selected plate line PLin the above step 2E the potential of the first electrode in a floating state comes to increase to a great extent due to a coupling of the second electrode and the first electrode and no sufficient electric field is formed between the second electrode and the first electrode so that no polarization inversion takes place in the ferroelectric layer. On the other hand the potential called signal potential that appears in the first electrode has a value obtained by dividing an accumulated charge amount with a load capacitance. If the value of M is too large therefore the potential that appears in the first electrode comes to be too low. Desirably the value of M satisfies 2 M 128 preferably satisfies 4 M 32.

Alternatively shows an equivalent circuit diagram of a variant of the gain cell type nonvolatile memory. The gain cell type nonvolatile memory shown in comprises a bit line BL a transistor for writing in TR sub memory units SMUand SMUthat are N N 2 for example N 2 in number and each of which is composed of memory cells MCthat are M M 2 for example M 8 in number transistors for switching TRand TRthat are N in number and plate lines PLthat are M in number and shared with the memory cells MCand MCconstituting the sub memory units SMUand SMUthat are N in number.

Each memory cell MCcomprises a first electrode a ferroelectric layer and a second electrode . The first electrodes of the memory cells MC MCconstituting the sub memory unit SMU SMUin the n th place n 1 2 . . . N n 1 or 2 are in common with the n th place sub memory unit SMU SMU. The above common first electrode common node CN CN is connected to the bit line BL through the n th place transistor for switching TR TRand the transistor for writing in TR and each second electrode is connected to each shared plate line PL. The number M of the memory cells constituting the sub memory unit SMU SMUof the nonvolatile memory is not limited to 8 and generally it is sufficient to satisfy M 2. It is preferably an exponent of 2 M 2 4 8 16 32 . . . . The number of N is not limited to 2 either and it can be for example an exponent of 2 2 4 8 . . . .

Further the above nonvolatile memory has a transistor for detection TRand a transistor for read out TR. The transistor for writing in TR the transistor for detection TRand the transistor for read out TRconstitute the transistor for selection. One end of the transistor for detection TRis connected to a wiring power source line made of an impurity layer having a predetermined potential V and the other end thereof is connected to the bit line BL through the transistor for read out TR. When data stored in the memory cells MCand MCconstituting the sub memory units SMUand SMUis read out the n th place transistors TRand TRfor switching and the transistor for read out TRare brought into a conduction state and the operation of the transistor for detection TRis controlled on the basis of a potential that occurs in the common first electrodes common nodes CNand CN due to data stored in the memory cells MCand MC.

Specifically the various transistors are constituted of MOS type FETs. One source drain region of the transistor for writing in TRis connected to the bit line BL the other source drain region thereof is connected to one source drain region of one end of each of the transistors for switching TRand TR. The other source drain region of the transistor for switching TR TRis connected to the common first electrode common node CN CN constituting the sub memory unit SMU SMU. Further one source drain region of the transistor for detection TRis connected to a wiring having a predetermined potential V and the other source drain region thereof is connected to one source drain region of the transistor for read out TR. The other source drain region of the transistor for read out TRis connected to the bit line BL. The common first electrode constituting each of the sub memory units SMUand SMU common nodes CNand CNor the other source drain region of the transistor for writing in TR is connected to the gate portion of the transistor for detection TR. The other source drain region of the transistor for detection TRand the one source drain region of the transistor for read out TRoccupy one source drain region. Further the word line WLconstituting the transistor for writing in TR the word line WLconstituting the transistor for read out TRR and the word line WLand WLconstituting the transistors for switching TR TRare connected to the word line decoder driver WD. Each plate line PLis connected to the plate line decoder driver PD and the bit line BL is connected to the sense amplifier SA.

The structure of each of the sub memory units SMUand SMUcan be substantially the same as the structure of the sub memory unit SMU explained with reference to so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted. The common first electrode common node CN constituting the sub memory unit SMUis connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for switching TRthrough a contact hole made through the insulating layer and the common first electrode common node CN constituting the sub memory unit SMUis connected to the other source drain region of the transistor for switching TRthrough a contact hole made through the insulating layer . Further one source drain region of the transistor for writing in TRand the other source drain region of the transistor for read out TRare connected to the bit line BL formed on a lower insulating layer through a contact hole formed through the lower insulating layer. Further one source drain region of the transistor for switching TR TR the other source drain region of the transistor for writing in TRand the gate portion word line WL of the transistor for detection TRare connected to a secondary bit line formed on the lower insulating layer through a contact hole formed through the lower insulating layer. The above secondary bit line is extending on the lower insulating layer and is connected to the bit line BL. The above explained structure can be nearly the same for example as the structure of the nonvolatile memory shown in .

In the above nonvolatile memory a plurality of sub memory units are provided so that the cell area per bit can be further decreased as compared with the nonvolatile memory explained with reference to . That is in principle the size occupation area of the nonvolatile memory is determined depending upon the pitch and number value of M of the plate lines PLin one direction and the above size is determined depending upon the pitch and number value of N of the common nodes CN in the direction at right angles with the above direction. The area size of the region that the nonvolatile memory occupies in a semiconductor substrate is mainly determined depending upon the area size that the transistors for switching TRand TRoccupy. The transistor for writing in TR the transistor for read out TRand the transistor for detection TRcan be formed in an empty region of the semiconductor substrate. The area of the empty region increases with an increase in the number N of the sub memory units and the number M of the memory cells constituting the sub memory unit. When the transistor for writing in TR the transistor for read out TRand the transistor for detection TRare formed in the empty region of the semiconductor substrate as described above therefore the semiconductor substrate can be remarkably effectively used.

Writing reading out and re writing of data in the above nonvolatile memory can be operated in the same manner as in the operation of writing reading out and re writing of data in the nonvolatile memory explained with reference to in a state where the sub memory units SMUand SMUare properly selected with the transistors for switching TRand TR so that a detailed explanation thereof is omitted.

In the gain cell type nonvolatile memory the predetermined potential of the wiring to which one end of the transistor for detection is connected is not limited to V and the wiring may be grounded. That is the predetermined potential of the wiring to which one end of the transistor for detection is connected may be 0 volt. In this case however when a potential V appears in the bit line in reading out data in the selected memory cell the potential of the bit line is required to be 0 volt in re writing and when 0 volt is appears in the bit line in reading out data in the selected memory cell the potential of the bit line is required to be Vin re writing. For this purpose there can be employed a constitution in which a kind of switching circuit inversion circuit formed of transistors TR TR TRand TRas shown in is provided between the bit lines and the transistors TRand TRare brought into an ON state when data is read out and the transistors TRand TRare brought into an ON state when data is re written.

In the gain cell type nonvolatile memory the operation of the transistor for detection is controlled on the basis of a potential that occurs in the common first electrode due to data stored in each memory cell. Since the first electrodes are in common with the memory cells that are M in number the first electrodes are in a state where a kind of additional load capacitance is added to the first electrodes. As a result when a voltage is applied to the plate line in reading out data an increase in the potential of the first electrode can be inhibited and a sufficient potential difference is caused between the first electrode and the second electrode. As a result polarization inversion reliably takes place in the ferroelectric layer.

In the nonvolatile memory of the present invention or the nonvolatile memory in the nonvolatile memory operation method of the present invention when nonvolatile memories are stacked or when memory units are stacked or when sub memory units are stacked preferably the crystallization temperature of the ferroelectric layer constituting the memory cell of the nonvolatile memory memory unit or sub memory unit these will be generally referred to as memory unit and the like hereinafter that are positioned at an upper stage is lower than the crystallization temperature of the ferroelectric layer constituting the memory cell of the memory unit and the like that are positioned at a lower stage. The crystallization temperature of the ferroelectric layer constituting the memory cell can be investigated for example by means of an X ray diffraction apparatus or a surface scanning electron microscope. Specifically the crystallization temperatures of the ferroelectric layers can be determined as follows. For example a ferroelectric material layer is formed and then heat treated at various heat treatment temperatures for crystallization of the ferroelectric material layer and the heat treated ferroelectric material layer is subjected to X ray diffraction analysis to evaluate a diffraction pattern strength height of diffraction peak characteristic of the ferroelectric material.

Meanwhile when a ferroelectric type nonvolatile semiconductor memory having a constitution of stacked memory unit and the like is produced it is required to carry out heat treatments to be referred to as crystallization heat treatment hereinafter for crystallization of the ferroelectric layer or a ferroelectric thin film constituting the ferroelectric layer as many times as the number of stages of the stacked memory unit and the like. As a result a memory unit and the like in a lower position undergoes the crystallization heat treatment for a longer period of time and a memory unit and the like in a higher position undergoes the crystallization heat treatment for a shorter period of time. When an optimum crystallization heat treatment is carried out on the memory unit and the like in a higher position the memory unit and the like in a lower position may suffer an excess heat load and may deteriorate in properties. It is conceivable to employ a method in which multi staged memory unit and the like are formed and then subjected to the crystallization heat treatment once. However the ferroelectric layers are caused to have a great change in volume or the ferroelectric layers highly possibly cause degassing and there is liable to be a problem that the ferroelectric layers undergo cracking or peeling. It is therefore arranged that the crystallization temperature of the ferroelectric layer constituting the memory unit and the like in a higher position is lower than the crystallization temperature of the ferroelectric layer constituting the memory unit and the like in a lower position. In this case even if the crystallization heat treatments are carried out as many times as the number of stages of the memory unit and the like there is caused no problem that the memory cells constituting the memory unit and the like in a lower position deteriorate in properties. Further with regard to the memory cells constituting the memory unit and the like in each stage the crystallization heat treatment can be carried out under optimum conditions and a nonvolatile memory excellent in properties can be obtained. Table 8 below shows crystallization temperatures of typical materials for constituting the ferroelectric layer while the material for constituting the ferroelectric layer shall not be limited thereto. With regard to the already explained various materials for constituting the ferroelectric layer the crystallization temperature can be varied by deviating the compositions thereof from their stoichiometric compositions.

In the nonvolatile memory operation method of the present invention data is read out from a memory cell at a designated address externally designated or data is written into such a memory cell so that a desired memory cell can be readily accessed. Further in some constitutions of the present invention data is written or re written into other memory cell so that the disturbance in other memory cell can be reliably suppressed. Furthermore since the nonvolatile memory is constituted of memory units comprised of a plurality of memory cells each the cell area per bit can be decreased.

