---

title: Efficient integrated digital video transcoding
abstract: Efficient integrated digital video transcoding is described. In one aspect, an integrated transcoder receives an encoded bitstream. The integrated transcoder transcodes the encoded bitstream by partially decoding the encoded bitstream based on a first transform associated with a first media data format. The decoding operations generate an intermediate data stream. The integrated transcoder then encodes the intermediate data stream using a second transform associated with a second media data format. The first and second transforms are not the same.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08447121&OS=08447121&RS=08447121
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 08447121
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050914
---
Digital video content is typically generated to target a specific data format. A video data format generally conforms to a specific video coding standard or a proprietary coding algorithm with a specific bit rate spatial resolution frame rate etc. Such coding standards include MPEG 2 and WINDOWS Media Video WMV . Most existing digital video contents are coded according to the MPEG 2 data format. WMV is widely accepted as a qualified codec in the streaming realm being widely deployed throughout the Internet adopted by the HD DVD consortium and currently being considered as a SMPTE standard. Different video coding standards provide varying compression capabilities and visual quality.

Transcoding refers to the general process of converting one compressed bitstream into another compressed one. To match a device s capabilities and distribution networks it is often desirable to convert a bitstream in one coding format to another coding format such as from MPEG 2 to WMV to H.264 or even to a scalable format. Transcoding may also be utilized to achieve some specific functionality such as VCR like functionality logo insertion or enhanced error resilience capability of the bitstream for transmission over wireless channels.

This Summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the detailed description. This Summary is not intended to identify key features or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

In view of the above efficient integrated digital video transcoding is described. In one aspect an integrated transcoder receives an encoded bitstream. The integrated transcoder transcodes the encoded bitstream by partially decoding the encoded bitstream based on a first set of compression techniques associated with a first media data format. The decoding operations generate an intermediate data stream. The integrated transcoder then encodes the intermediate data stream using a second set of compression techniques associated with a second media data format. The first and second sets of compression techniques are not the same.

For purposes of discussion and illustration color is used in the figures to present the following conventions. A blue solid arrow represents pixel domain signal with respect to real or residual picture data. A red solid arrow represents signal in the DCT domain. An orange dashed arrow represents motion information.

Systems and methods for efficient digital video transcoding are described below in reference to . These systems and methods utilize information in the input bitstream to allow an application to dynamically control error propagation and thereby selectively control speed and quality of video bitstream transcoding. This selective control allows an application to seamlessly scale from close loop transcoding high speed transcoding profile to open loop high quality transcoding profile transcoding schemes. In contrast to conventional transcoding architectures e.g. the CPDT of and the CDDT of the architectures for efficient digital video transcoding are integrated and that they combined different types of Discrete Cosine Transforms DCTs or DCT like transforms into one transcoding module. The systems and methods for efficient video transcoding implement requantization with a fast lookup table and provide fine drifting control mechanisms using a triple threshold algorithm.

In one implementation where efficient digital video transcoding transcodes a bitstream data format e.g. MPEG 2 etc. to WMV the high quality profile transcoding operations support advanced coding features of WMV. In one implementation high speed profile transcoding operations implement arbitrary resolution two stage downscaling e.g. when transcoding from high definition HD to standard definition SD . In such two stage downscaling operations part of the downscaling ratio is efficiently achieved in the DCT domain while downscaling ratio operations are implemented in the spatial domain at a substantially reduced resolution.

For purposes of description and exemplary illustration system is described with respect to transcoding from MPEG 2 to WMV with bit rate reduction spatial resolution reduction and their combination. Many existing digital video contents are coded according to the MPEG 2 data format. WMV is widely accepted as a qualified codec in the streaming realm being widely deployed throughout the Internet adopted by the HD DVD Consortium and currently being considered as a SMPTE standard.

MPEG 2 and WMV provide varying compression and visual quality capabilities. For example the compression techniques respectively used by MPEG 2 and WMV are very different. For instance the motion vector MV precision and motion compensation MC filtering techniques are different. In MPEG 2 motion precision is only up to half pixel accuracy and the interpolation method is bilinear filtering. In contrast in WMV the motion precision can go up to quarter pixel accuracy and two interpolation methods namely bilinear filtering and bicubic filtering are supported. Moreover there is a rounding control parameter involved in the filtering process. Use of WMV may result in up to a 50 reduction in video bit rate with negligible visual quality loss as compared to an MPEG 2 bit rate.

In another example transforms used by MPEG 2 and WMV are different. For instance MPEG 2 uses standard DCT IDCT and the transform size is fixed to 8 8. In contrast WMV uses integer transforms VC1 T where the elements of transform kernel matrix are all small integers. Additionally transform size can be altered using WMV from blocks to blocks using either 8 8 8 4 4 8 and 4 4. MPEG 2 does not support frame level optimization. Whereas WMV supports various frame level syntaxes for performance optimization. WMV supports many other advanced coding features such as intensity compensation range reduction and dynamic resolution change etc.

In view of the above to provide bit rate reduction without resolution change the filtering process bridging the MPEG 2 decoder and the WMV encoder shown in is an all pass filter i.e. not in effect . Therefore the input to the encoder for frame i 1 is expressed as 1 

In this implementation WMV coding efficiency of gains result from finer motion precision. In WMV quarter pixel motion precision is allowed beside the common half pixel precision as in MPEG 2. Moreover WMV allows better but more complex interpolation known as bicubic interpolation for MC filtering. Bilinear interpolation is used for MPEG 2 in the MC module MC for half pixel MC. The bilinear interpolation method similar to that used in WMV with the exception that the MPEG 2 bilinear interpolation does not have rounding control. To achieve high speed half pixel motion accuracy can be implemented in the encoder portion. One reason for this is the lack of the absolute original frame i.e. bitstream input data BS IN is already compressed . Thus in this example it is difficult to obtain a more accurate yet meaningful motion vector. On the other hand the motion information obtained from MPEG 2 decoder i.e. MV MV can be reused directly. Since there is no resolution change there is no MV precision loss with this assumption. If the encoder is further restricted to use bilinear interpolation and force the rounding control parameter to be always off then under the reasonable assumption that motion compensation is a linear operation and ignoring the rounding error i.e. MC MC Equation 1 is simplified as follows 2 According to Equation 2 the reference CPDT transcoder in can be simplified. Such a simplified architecture is described below in reference to . Prior to describing the simplified architecture an exemplary system for efficient digital video transcoding is first described. An Exemplary System

Although not required efficient digital video transcoding is described in the general context of computer program instructions being executed by a computing device such as a personal computer. Program modules generally include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. While the systems and methods are described in the foregoing context acts and operations described hereinafter may also be implemented in hardware.

In this implementation system includes a general purpose computing device . Computing device represents any type of computing device such as a personal computer a laptop a server handheld or mobile computing device etc. Computing device includes program modules and program data to transcode an encoded bitstream in a first data format e.g. MPEG 2 to a bitstream encoded into a different data formats e.g. WMV . Program modules include for example efficient digital video transcoding module transcoding module and other program modules . Transcoding module transcodes encoded media e.g. MPEG 2 media into transcoded media e.g. WMV media . Other program modules include for example an operating system and an application utilizing the video bitstream transcoding capabilities of transcoding module etc. In one implementation the application is part of the operating system. In one implementation transcoding module exposes its transcoding capabilities to the application via an Application Programming Interface API .

Please note that the WMV transform is different from the one used in MPEG 2. In MPEG 2 standard floating point DCT IDCT is used whereas the integer transform whose energy packing property is akin to DCT is adopted in WMV. As a result the IDCT in the MPEG 2 decoder and the VC1 T in WMV encoder do not cancel out each other. The integer transform in WMV is different from the integer implementation of DCT IDCT. The integer transform in WMV is carefully designed with all the transform coefficients to be small integers. Conventional transcoders are not integrated to transcode a bitstream encoded with respect to a first transform to a second transform that is not the same as the first transform.

Equation 3 in combination with equations 4 and 5 which are described below indicate how two different transforms are implemented into a scaling component of transcoding module . In one implementation the accuracy of VC1 T is 16 bit accuracy which is very suitable for MMX implementation. As a result the codec complexity can be significantly reduced.

To verify that TC and CT are very close to diagonal matrices if we apply the approximation then Equation 4 becomes an element wise scaling of matrix B. That is circumflex over B BoS 5 where diag diag 

Equation 5 shows that the VC1 T in WMV encoder and the IDCT in MPEG 2 decoder can be merged. Consequently the architecture in can be further simplified to the one shown in . Detailed comparison reveals that the two DCT IDCT modules are replaced by two VC1 T and inverse VC1 T modules. In one implementation a simple scaling module is also added. Two switches are embedded along with and an activity mask in this architecture. These embedded components as described below are used for dynamic control of the complexity of transcoding coating operations of transcoder . At this point these components are connected. The 16 bit arithmetic property of the WMV transform lends itself to parallel processing for PC and DSP. In view of this computation complexities are significantly reduced. Moreover since all the elements of the scaling matrix S are substantially close in proximity with respect to one another this computation and one implementation is replaced by a scalar multiplication.

More particularly conventional cascaded transcoder architectures e.g. the architectures of lack complexity flexibility. With respect to computation savings the most that such conventional architecture can achieve is through MV reuse and mode mapping. On the other hand accumulated residue error compensation architectures for example the architecture of and the architectures of as described below have built in scalability in terms of complexity. TABLE 2 shows exemplary meanings of switches in .

After transcoding module of has implemented drift free simplification an application can dynamically trade off between the complexity and the quality to accelerate transcoding speed. In this implementation quality can be traded for speed and vice versa. In other words some drifting error may be allowed in the further simplified transcoder. With this strategy the drifting error introduced in the faster method is limited and fully controllable. Based on this consideration three switches SS and S are provided in the architectures of and . The switches are used only to the residue error compensation based architectures. The switches selectively skip some time consuming operations to reduce complexity substantially while introducing only a small amount of error. The meanings of various switches are summarized in TABLE 2. Computational decisions associated with these switches are efficiently obtained according to criteria described below with respect to each switch.

Switch Scontrols when requantization error of a block should be accumulated into the residue error buffer. As compared to a standard reconstruction selector the role of switch Sis improved by adopting a fast lookup table based requantization process and by providing a finer drifting control mechanism via a triple threshold algorithm. As a result all observations made with respect to switch Sare considered. For example in one implementation the DCT domain energy difference may be utilized as the indicator.

Switch Scontrols when the most time consuming module MC of the accumulated residue error. In one implementation switch Sis on. A binary activity mask is created for the reference frame. Each element of the activity mask corresponds to the activeness of an 8 8 block as determined by

Switch Sperforms early detection to determine whether block error should be encoded. This is especially useful in transrating applications where the encoder applies a coarser quantization step size. In this implementation if the input signal the sum of the MC of accumulated residue error and the reconstructed residue from MPEG 2 decoder is weaker than a threshold then switch Sis turned off so that no error will be encoded.

In one implementation thresholds for the switches S S and Sare adjusted such that earlier reference frames are processed with higher quality and at slower speed. This is because the purpose of the switches is to achieve a better trade off between quality and speed and because of the predictive coding nature.

If bit rate change is not significant or the input source quality is not very high the architecture of substantially optimizes bit rate reduction when converting MPEG 2 bitstreams to WMV bitstreams. On the other hand input source may be of high quality and high quality output may be desired also speed of transcoding may be a moderate requirement e.g. real time . A high quality profile transcoder such as the cascaded pixel domain transcoder CDPT of with MV refinement meets these criteria. With this architecture we can turn on all the advanced coding features of the WMV encoder to ensure highest coding efficiency can be achieved.

In conventional media transcoding systems there are generally three sources of errors for transcoding with spatial resolution downscaling. These errors are as follows 

Let D denote the down sampling filtering. Referring to the architecture of input to the VC 1 encoder for frame i 1 is derived as follows 6 Assume that MC MC mv mv MV 2. With the approximation that 7 Equation 6 is simplified to the following 8 

The first term in Equation 8 D circumflex over r refers to the downscaling process of the decoded MPEG 2 residue signal. This first term can be determined using spatial domain low pass filtering and decimation. However use of DCT domain downscaling to obtain this term results in a reduction of complexity and better PSNR and visual quality. DCT domain downscaling results are substantially better than results obtained through spatial domain bi linear filtering or spatial domain 7 tap filtering with coefficients 1 0 9 16 9 0 1 32. In this implementation DCT domain downscaling retains only the top left 4 4 low frequency DCT coefficients. That is applying a standard 4 4 IDCT on the DCT coefficients retained will result in a spatially 2 1 downscaled image i.e. transcoded media of .

The second term in Equation 8 MC circumflex over b tilde over b mv implies requantization error compensation on a downscaled resolution. In this implementation the MC in MPEG 2 decoder and the MC in WMV encoder are merged to a single MC process that operates on accumulated requantization errors at the reduced resolution.

For example let circumflex over B circumflex over B circumflex over B and circumflex over B represent the four 4 4 low frequency sub blocks of B B B and B respectively Cbe the 4 4 standard IDCT transform matrix Tbe the integer WMV transform matrix and further let T T T where Tand Tare 8 4 matrices. In this scenario circumflex over B is directly calculated from circumflex over B circumflex over B circumflex over B and circumflex over B using the following equation circumflex over B After some manipulation circumflex over B is more efficiently calculated as follows wherein 2 2 In one implementation both C and D of the above equation are pre computed. The final results are normalized with N.

Compared to a conventional drift low transcoder with drifting error compensation in reduced resolution the transcoders of do not include a mixed block processing module. This is because WMV supports Intra coding mode for 8 8 blocks in an Inter coded macroblock. In other words an Intra MB at the original resolution is mapped into an Intra 8 8 block of an Inter MB at the reduced resolution. In view of this the MB mode mapping rule becomes very simple as shown immediately below 

Simplified DCT domain 2 1 resolution downscaling transcoding architecture is substantially drifting free for P frames. This is a result of the four MV coding mode. The only cause of drifting error as compared with a CPDT architecture with downscaling filtering is the rounding of MVs from quarter resolution to half resolution which ensures mv mv and the non commutative property of MC and downscaling. Any such remaining errors are negligible due to the low pass downscaling filtering e.g. achieved in the DCT domain or in the pixel domain .

Although WMV supports four MV coding mode it is typically only intended for coding P frames. As a result system implements the architecture of when there are no B frames in the input MPEG 2 stream or the B frames are to be discarded during the transcoder towards a lower temporal resolution. One reason for this is that WMV allows only one MV per MB for B frames. In such a scenario transcoding module composes a new motion vector from the four MVs associated with the MBs at the original resolution. Each of the previously mentioned MV composition methods is compatible. In one implementation transcoding module implements median filtering. As described incorrect MV will lead to wrong motion compensated prediction. To make matters worse no matter how the requantization error is compensated and no matter how high the bit rate goes perfect results are difficult to obtain if not re doing the motion compensation based on the new MVs. Therefore we provide an architecture that allows such motion errors to be compensated.

Again referring to the architecture of input to the VC 1 encoder for frame i 1 which is assumed to be a B frame is derived as follows 9 with the approximation that 10 

The two terms in the square brackets in Equation 12 compensate for the motion errors caused by inconsistent MVs i.e. mvis different from mv or caused by different MC filtering methods between MPEG 2 and WMV. The corresponding modules for this purpose are highlighted and grouped into a light yellow block in .

As to the MC Intra to Inter or Inter to Intra conversion can be applied. This is because the MPEG 2 decoder reconstructed the B frame and the reference frames. In this implementation this conversion is done in the mixed block processing module in . Two mode composition methods are possible. And one implementation the dominant mode is selected as the composed mode. For example if the modes of the four MBs at the original resolution are two bi directional prediction mode one backward prediction mode and one forward prediction mode then bi directional prediction mode is selected as the mode for the MB at the reduced resolution. In another implementation the mode that will lead to the largest error is selected. In view of this example suppose using the backward mode will cause largest error. In this scenario the backward mode is chosen such that the error can be compensated. Results show that the latter technique offers slightly better quality as compared to the former mode selection technique.

An exemplary architecture according to Equation 12 is shown in . There are four frame level switches specifically for this architecture as shown in TABLE 3.

The four frame level switches ensure different coding paths for different frame types. Specifically the architecture does not perform residue error accumulation for B frames S does not perform MV error compensation for I and P frames S and does not reconstruct reference frames if there is no B frames to be generated S . Please note the frame level switch Scan be turned into block level switch since the MV error needs to be compensated only when the corresponding four original MVs are significantly inconsistent.

More particularly switch Sis closed only for I frames or P frames Switch Sis closed only for P frames and switch Sis closed only for B frames. The resulting architecture is not as complex as the reference cascaded pixel domain transcoder of . One reason for this is that the explicit pixel domain downscaling process is avoided. Instead pixel domain downscaling is implicitly achieved in the DCT domain by simply discarding the high DCT coefficients. This architecture has excellent complexity scalability achieved by utilizing various switches as described above with respect to TABLE 2.

For applications that demand ultra fast transcoding speed the architecture of can be configured into an open loop one by turn off all the switches. This open loop architecture can be further optimized by merging the dequantization process of MPEG 2 and the requantization process of WMV. The inverse zig zag scan module inside VLD of MPEG 2 can also be combined with the one in WMV encoder.

With respect to chrominance components in MPEG 2 and in WMV the MV and the coding mode of chrominance components UV are derived from those of luminance component Y . If all the four MBs at the original resolution that correspond to the MB at the reduced resolution have consistent coding mode i.e. all Inter coded or all Intra coded there is no problem. However if it is not case problems result due to different derivation rules of MPEG 2 and WMV. In MPEG 2 the UV blocks are Inter coded when the MB is coded with Inter mode. However in WMV the UV blocks are Inter coded only when the MB is coded with Inter mode and there are less than three Intra coded 8 8 Y blocks. This issue exists for both P frames and B frames. Transcoding module of addresses these problems as follows 

Using error concealment operations to handle mode conversion for chrominance component error introduced into a current frame is negligible and can be ignored although it may cause color drifting in subsequent frames. Drifting for the chrominance component is typically caused by incorrect motion. To address this and improve quality in one implementation transcoding module uses reconstruction based compensation for the chrominance component i.e. always applying the light yellow module for the chrominance component .

For high bit rate there is an approximate formula between coding bits B and quantization step QP which is also used in MPEG 2 TM 5 rate control method.

An exemplary detailed rate control algorithm based on Equation 14 is shown in TABLE 5 where the meanings of various symbols in the algorithm presented in TABLE 5 are defined in following TABLE 6.

Conversion of contents from HD resolution to SD resolution for example to support legacy SD receivers players is useful. Typical resolutions of HD format are 1920 1080i and 1280 720p while those for SD are 720 480i 720 480p for NTSC. The horizontal and vertical downscaling ratios from 1920 1080i to 720 480i are 8 3 and 9 4 respectively. To keep the aspect ratio the final downscaling ratio is chosen to be 8 3 and the resulting picture size is 720 404. Similarly for 1280 720p to 720 480p the downscaling ratio is chosen to be 16 9 and the resulting picture size is 720 404. Black banners are inserted to make a full 720 480 picture by the decoder player instead of being padded into the bitstream .

According to digital signal processing theory a substantially optimal downscaling methodology for a downscaling ratio m n would be to first up sample the signal by n fold i.e. insert n 1 zeros between every original samples apply a low pass filter e.g. a sinc function with many taps and then decimate the resulting signal by m fold. Performing such operations any spectrum aliasing introduced by the down scaling would be maximally suppressed. However this process would also be very computationally expensive and difficult to implement with in real time because the input signal is high definition. To reduce this computational complexity a novel two stage downscaling strategy is implemented.

Referring to system implements two stage downscaling operations to achieve any arbitrary downscaling target. Results of the first stage downscaling are embedded into the decoding loop. This reduces the complexity of the decoding operations. For example to achieve an 8 3 downscale ratio downscaling operations are first implemented to downscale by 2 1. The results of this first stage downscaling are input into the decoding loop wherein second stage downscaling is performed in the spatial domain. In this example second stage downscaling operations downscale by 4 3 to achieve an 8 3 downscale ratio. In another example a downscale ratio of 16 9 is achieved by system by applying 4 3 downscaling twice in two stages . This two stage downscaling methodology utilizes the previously discussed DCT domain downscaling strategy and then fully embeds the first stage downscaling results into the decoding loop. Since resolution is significantly reduced after the first stage downscaling we can continue to apply the optimal downscaling method on the pixel domain.

At block the data decoded according to the first set of compression techniques is encoded with a second set of compression techniques. In one implementation procedure is implemented within a non integrated transcoding architecture such as that shown and described with respect to . In this implementation the second set of compression techniques is the same as the first set of compression techniques. In another implementation procedure is implemented within an integrated transcoding architecture such as that shown and described with respect to and . In this other implementation the second set of compression techniques is not the same as the first set of compression techniques. For example in one implementation the first set of compression techniques is associated with MPEG 2 and the second set of compression techniques is associated with WMV.

The methods and systems described herein are operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use include but are not limited to personal computers server computers multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and so on. Compact or subset versions of the framework may also be implemented in clients of limited resources such as handheld computers or other computing devices. The invention is practiced in a networked computing environment where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network.

With reference to an exemplary system providing efficient digital video transcoding architecture includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer implementing for example initiator operations associated with computing device of . Components of computer may include but are not limited to processing unit s a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures may include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

A computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer including both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer .

Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or a direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of the any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

System memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that they are at least different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick graphics pen and pad satellite dish scanner etc. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . In this implementation a monitor or other type of user interface device is also connected to the system bus via an interface for example such as a video interface .

The computer operates in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . In one implementation remote computer represents computing device of a responder as shown in . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and as a function of its particular implementation may include many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device . The network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Although the above sections describe efficient digital video transcoding architectures in language specific to structural features and or methodological operations or actions the implementations defined in the appended claims are not necessarily limited to the specific features or actions described. Rather the specific features and operations of the described efficient integrated digital video transcoding architecture are disclosed as exemplary forms of implementing the claimed subject matter.

For example in one implementation the described fast and high quality transcoding systems and methodologies including transcoding arbitrary sized downscaling and rate reduction are used for MPEG 2 to MPEG 4 transcoding and MPEG 4 to WMV transcoding. For instance the simplified closed loop DCT domain transcoder in can be used to transcode MPEG 4 to WMV. One difference between MPEG 2 IS 13818 Part. 2 is that MPEG 2 only utilizes half pixel element pel MV precison and bilinear interpolation in MC there is such a same mode half pel bilinear in WMV. However MPEG 4 supports both half pel and quarter pel MV precision as well as interpolation for quarter pel positions different from that in WMV . To address this difference when pel MV is used by MPEG 4 video then the transcoding process is the same as MPEG 2 to WMV transcoding as described above. Additionally when pel MV is contained in MPEG 4 video then error is introduced due to different interpolation methods in MC as described above with respect to . Additionally the simplified 2 1 downscaling transcoder with full drift compensation described above with respect to is applicable to MPEG 4 to WMV 2 1 downsized transcoding independent of change. Moreover high quality transcoding including the above described rate reduction and arbitrarily downscaling transcoding operations of are effective for MPEG 4 to WMV transcoding.

