---

title: Method and system for facilitating automated interaction of marketable retail orders and professional trading interest at passively determined prices
abstract: A method and system for an automated trading network that continuously collects invisible, anonymous, binding orders and indications of interest to buy and sell specific equity securities at variable, passively determined prices and, then, executes trades based on these collected orders and indications. In general, the binding orders are collected from retail broker-dealers and the binding indications are collected from institutions. The variable, passively determined, non-discrete prices can be linked to the National Best Bid or Offer (NBBO) for each security, or some other prevailing market indicator, at the time a trade is executed. In an embodiment of the method and system, marketable retail orders which match with one or more collected institutional indications, are routed from a Dynamic Order Router (DOR) at each broker-dealer to a Central Order-Match Box (COMB) to be executed against the one or more matched collected institutional indications. The COMB also manages most other aspects of transactions in the method and system and continuously executes trades against the collected institutional indications at improved prices relative to the NBBO.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07627516&OS=07627516&RS=07627516
owner: D. E. Shaw & Company
number: 07627516
owner_city: New York
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051014
---
This application is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 565 444 filed May 5 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 035 819 which claims the benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 155 643 filed Sep. 24 1999. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 565 444 is hereby incorporated by reference as if repeated herein in their entirety including the drawings.

The present invention is directed to a network for the electronic trading of financial instruments and in particular a system and method for automatically executing marketable retail orders against standing professional trading interest at passively determined prices.

Traders and investors who desire to buy or sell securities place orders with brokers who trade on the floor of organized stock exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange NYSE or the American Stock Exchange Amex they send orders to over the counter OTC market makers trading on the NASDAQ market and they utilize crossing networks electronic communications networks ECNs and other electronic trading systems such as Reuters Instinet ITG Inc. s Portfolio System for Institutional Trading POSIT and Optimark Technologies Inc. s OptiMark . While many exchanges and electronic trading systems offer broker dealers and institutional investors collectively institutions institutional investors institutional clients professional market participants and professional investors the opportunity to trade directly or indirectly with other professional market participants these trading venues either completely disallow or severely curtail opportunities for efficient interaction between institutional orders and many of the orders generated by retail investors. Specifically while institutional investors participating in markets which receive retail order flow can often interact with retail non marketable orders the opportunity to interact with retail marketable orders either does not exist at all for reasons identified below or requires the manual services of a human broker rendering the process so cost prohibitive as to make it impractical for professional market participants interested in sustained interaction with these orders. Retail marketable orders consist of post open market orders and marketable limit orders that is buy limit orders priced at or above the current best offer and sell limit orders priced at or below the current best bid which are generally executed immediately at prevailing best bids or offers. Retail non marketable orders consist of all other order types for example pre open orders that is orders entered outside normal market hours non marketable limit orders that is buy limit orders priced below the current best offer and sell limit orders priced above the current best bid market on close orders and so forth. Retail non marketable orders are typically not subject to immediate execution.

In the case of non exchange listed that is NASDAQ securities and of exchange listed securities traded in the OTC market that is Third Market securities both retail marketable orders and retail non marketable orders have historically been executed by OTC market makers acting in a principal capacity pursuant to order routing and remuneration arrangements with retail brokerage firms or they have been internalized by retail brokerage firms routing these orders to specialist or dealer affiliates which execute them in a principal capacity. Regulatory changes enacted by the Securities and Exchange Commission SEC in recent years have made it possible for some of these orders to interact with trading interest other than that of the market maker or dealer to whom they were routed for execution. Specifically the SEC now requires market makers as well as exchange specialists and other dealers to 1 display certain customer limit orders in their public quotations where they are visible to and sometimes accessed by other market participants and 2 desist from trading ahead of unexecuted orders in their possession by buying or selling any security as principal at a price which would satisfy an unexecuted customer order in that security. However while these regulations sometimes result in retail non marketable orders being executed against retail marketable orders or against trading interest from other professional investors it remains the case today that retail marketable orders received by OTC market makers and other dealers are rarely if ever available for execution against the trading interest of other professional market participants.

In the case of exchange listed securities executed on the NYSE or Amex interaction between the large generally block size orders of professional market participants which are typically greater than 10 000 shares in size and retail marketable orders is theoretically possible but requires the services of a human floor broker who must physically stand in the crowd at the trading post for a security on the exchange floor in order to compete with the public limit order book and other floor brokers for the opportunity to interact with incoming retail marketable orders on the opposite side of the market. It should be noted that the only strategy for interaction with retail marketable orders on the exchange floor available to professional market participants that does not require the services of a floor broker involves the placement of large publicly displayed limit orders. Because such orders often result in highly adverse market impact to the market participant placing the orders they are impractical as a mechanism for interaction with marketable retail orders and are therefore never utilized for this purpose. In the absence of extant or expected block size contra trading interest by another broker floor brokers working large orders are generally not willing to stand at a trading post on the exchange floor for an extended period solely to compete for small retail marketable orders. Thus while it is possible in theory for a professional market participant to interact at favorable terms with individual retail marketable orders on the floor of the NYSE or Amex through the services of a human floor broker there is currently no automated or cost effective way to accumulate large aggregate positions over an extended period by interacting with hundreds or thousands of small retail orders.

Although they are individually small about 600 shares in size on average the trades of retail investors represent a potential source of substantial aggregate liquidity approximately 40 of total share volume in NYSE and NASDAQ issues is retail and approximately 50 of retail orders in NYSE and NASDAQ stocks are marketable. Moreover because the relatively small marketable orders placed by retail investors generally result in negligible market impact or price slippage and are typically information less that is the orders are not normally motivated by informed predictions regarding short term price movements they are highly attractive to professional market participants as a source of liquidity for securities transactions. However given the above described limitations on 1 simple access to retail marketable orders as for example in the case of internalized orders or orders routed to OTC market makers for execution and 2 efficient access to such orders where simple access is not structurally disallowed as for example on the floor of the NYSE and Amex a crossing network is needed which facilitates continuous fully electronic anonymous automated and non display based interaction between professional market participants and retail marketable orders. Such a network would fill an important niche not only by effectively disintermediating existing specialists and OTC market makers for many orders thereby giving other professional market participants the opportunity to interact directly with these retail marketable orders at favorable prices but also by automating the otherwise prohibitively labor intensive process of accumulating sizeable aggregate positions via a large number of small transactions with retail counterparts.

An embodiment of the present invention is directed to a computerized trading network the System that collects from broker dealers institutions such as pension funds and mutual funds and other professional market participants invisible anonymous binding indications of interest to buy and sell specific equity securities at passively determined non discrete prices. In the System the passively determined non discrete prices may be linked to the National Best Bid or Offer NBBO for each security or some other prevailing market indicator. In one embodiment of the present invention these prices will always be equal to the midpoint of the current NBBO at the time of trade. In embodiments of the present invention the System continuously routes from retail brokerage firms collectively retail brokerage firms brokers brokerages broker dealers and brokerage participants marketable retail orders which satisfy the institutional indications to a central facility specifically to a Central Order Match Box COMB which maintains a master institutional indications file executes retail and institutional trades and manages most other aspects of transactions on the System where they are immediately and continuously executed against the institutional indications. This is in contrast to existing systems such as POSIT which accumulate institutional trade indications only and then execute the accumulated trade indications at predetermined times. For example POSIT compares all of the accumulated orders to determine matches and then executes the marketable orders at set times during the trading day that is every hour on the hour from 10 00 AM to 3 00 PM Eastern time.

Embodiments of the present invention are expected to be very attractive both to retail brokerage firm participants and institutional clients. By interacting anonymously with generally information less retail trading interest upstream of traditional execution points that is OTC market makers exchanges ECNs and so forth institutions will for the first time enjoy automated electronic access to marketable retail orders which represent an attractive new source of substantial market liquidity. In an embodiment of the present invention both retail marketable orders and offsetting institutional indications can be executed at prices inside the quoted NBBO spread that is at prices between the national best bid and national best offer . In this embodiment retail brokerage firms would through the use of the System provide their customers with executions evidencing on average a high degree of price improvement relative to other market centers. In addition pursuant to a remuneration arrangement with the System sponsor the retail brokerage firms would realize a greater portion of the intrinsic economic value of their marketable retail order flow. The impending decimalization of U.S. equity markets which is likely to result in five cent trading increments for most NYSE NASDAQ and Amex securities by Jul. 3 2000 and penny increments by Jan. 2 2001 will further enhance the attractiveness of embodiments of the present invention. The narrower average spreads which should result from this transition to smaller decimal trading increments are likely to decrease the liquidity available at the NBBO and reduce or eliminate traditional remuneration for retail order flow by Third Market and NASDAQ dealers. By facilitating access to a steady stream of retail liquidity for institutions and providing a relatively stable source of order flow remuneration for retail brokerages embodiments of the present invention will be particularly compelling in the decimal trading environment. It should be noted that while the System is designed primarily to facilitate the continuous and immediate interaction without waiting for set times between institutional trading interest and retail marketable orders the System could also permit similar continuous immediate automatic and fully electronic institution to institution crosses. These institution to institution crosses will generally occur at the midpoint of the NBBO whenever institutional clients willing to transact with non retail trading interest enter two or more offsetting institutional indications.

In an embodiment of the present invention the indications of interest are entered into the System by institutional clients and can include for example the following information side buy or sell security symbol number of shares and maximum or minimum price optional . For as long as an indication or a residual portion thereof is active in the System the indication represents the submitting institution s willingness to interact with offsetting retail marketable orders and at the submitting institutions option offsetting institutional indications at the midpoint of the NBBO. This interaction would result in trades for the institution on the specified side of the specified symbol up to an aggregate quantity equal to the specified or remaining number of shares.

Transactions on the System are also subject to any limits specified by the submitting institution governing the maximum or minimum price at which it is willing to transact. For example an institutional indication to buy 50 000 shares of IBM up to 132 signifies the submitting institution s willingness to buy up to a total of 50 000 shares of IBM at the variable midpoint of the NBBO as long as it never transacts at a price greater than 132 . This indication would therefore be active when for example the NBBO for IBM is 131 131 in which market the institution would buy from counter parties at 131 11 16 the market midpoint but would be inactive when for example the NBBO for IBM is 132 132 since the midpoint of this market 132 7 16 exceeds the institutional indication s price limit of 132 . An inactive indication present in the System would not result in any trades just as if the indication did not exist at all. It should be noted that price limits for indications are strictly optional and they are included and specified at the sole discretion of institutional clients submitting indications. An indication submitted without an associated price limit would simply represent the submitting institution s willingness to trade at the midpoint of the NBBO whatever this price happens to be on the specified side of the specified symbol up to the specified number of shares. Unless explicitly indicated otherwise all indications used in the following descriptions of various embodiments of the present invention can be assumed to be active.

Each institution can submit indications in more than one security and can cancel or modify its unexecuted indications electronically at any time. Indications entered into the System are not displayed on any terminal or in any quotation they are completely invisible to all System and other market participants including under normal operating conditions the System sponsor. Moreover the anonymity of institutional clients is preserved throughout the clearance and settlement process by having the System sponsor serve as counter party for all transactions executed on the System. For example in the case of a match between an institutional indication and a retail order the System sponsor will always buy from the retail brokerage firm and immediately sell to the institutional investor or vice versa. In the case of a match between two institutional indications the System sponsor will always buy from one institution and immediately sell to the other institution.

In an embodiment of the present invention institutional indications are entered electronically from institutional client sites via a graphical user interface or other communications interface collectively Institutional Interface II connected to the COMB by communications links. For example these communications links can include but are not limited to the following leased telecommunication lines dedicated data lines the Internet wireless communication systems digital subscriber lines radio frequencies cable and the like. Retail orders are selectively diverted to the System for immediate execution against institutional indications through a network of specially designed hardware and software modules called Dynamic Order Routers DORs which are integrated into the internal order handling systems of participating retail brokerage firms and connected to the COMB by communications links. The COMB dynamically updates information to all DORs regarding the symbol and side of offsetting marketable retail orders it seeks in order to satisfy institutional indications already resident in the System. When a DOR sees a retail order in a symbol side for which the COMB has no interest it does nothing allowing the order to be routed to some other execution point pursuant to the brokerage firm s primary order routing matrix. When a DOR sees a marketable retail order in a symbol and side for which the COMB does have interest it dynamically queries the COMB for final instructions. The COMB immediately responds with instructions to 1 route the order to the System for execution against an existing institutional indication or 2 decline the order or do nothing in which case the order will automatically be routed to its default execution point pursuant to the brokerage firm s primary order routing matrix. In embodiments of the present invention non marketable orders are never routed to the System for execution and marketable orders are only routed to the System to satisfy existing institutional trading interest already present in the System. As a result all retail orders routed to the System are executed immediately against one or more offsetting institutional indications. For each transaction the System generates appropriate execution reports and transmits these to the retail and institutional parties to the transaction as well as to a Self Regulatory Organization and other industry reporting systems for the purpose of complying with applicable trade reporting and processing procedures.

In a representative embodiment of the present invention DOR modules can be integrated directly into the internal order handling system of participating brokerages. The present invention is not however limited to such an embodiment. A participating brokerage firm might for example prefer to interact with the System not through a direct interface to its internal order handling system but rather through an interface between the System and a third party order routing service bureau such as ADP or Beta Systems ECN or other order flow aggregator which is already routing receiving or otherwise processing the retail brokerage firm s orders. The present invention is intended to contemplate any such integration which would provide the System with access to a brokerage firm s marketable retail orders.

The embodiments of the present invention are also intended to represent any crossing network which facilitates continuous as opposed to periodic or call based fully electronic anonymous automated non display based interaction between professional market participants and retail marketable orders. In an embodiment of the present invention in order to minimize the near term disruption of existing business relationships between the retail brokerage firms and the OTC market makers exchanges and other trading venues to which these retail brokerage firms currently route retail orders for execution the network will divert for immediate execution on the System only those binding retail marketable orders for which the System has binding professional trading interest already in hand that is binding indications allowing all other retail orders to flow to other execution points. Binding orders and binding indications represent firm commitments by originating parties to trade securities where the commitments do not require additional confirmation or approval from the originating party in order to execute a trade based on the firm commitment as long as the binding order or binding indication remains active. The present invention is offers from originating parties to trade securities where the offers do not require additional confirmation or approval from the originating party in order to execute a trade based on the firm offer. not however limited to such an embodiment that is to a crossing network based on selective diversion of marketable retail orders. Specifically the present invention can be represented by any crossing network which facilitates the interaction of retail marketable orders and professional trading interest in a manner substantially similar to one described in this application. Therefore the present invention contemplates covering OTC market maker ECN national or regional stock exchange or other execution point systems which allow professional market participants to interact immediately continuously electronically anonymously automatically and without display of their trading interest with retail marketable orders routed to that execution point. For example one contemplated embodiment of the present invention involves a system for an OTC market maker that matches incoming retail marketable orders with third party institutional orders in a manner substantially similar to that described in this application. This system allows the market maker to collect risk free commission revenue from institutional clients for any institutional shares executed against retail order flow in this manner while handling non matched marketable retail orders in the traditional manner that is interacting them with offsetting limit orders on the market maker s book and or committing capital to execute them as principal . It should be noted that such an embodiment of the present invention would not require any selective diversion of retail order flow to the system. This is because retail brokerages would already be routing orders using traditional static order routing criteria such as symbol order size and order type to the OTC market maker for execution.

The present invention is described below in the context of trading equity securities. However the invention is not so limited and can be easily adapted to allow the trading of other liquid assets such as options bonds derivatives and the like. Accordingly where the context permits the terms securities stock and shares when used herein includes other instruments that can be traded such as for example options bonds and derivatives. The terms buy and sell include where appropriate bid and offer etc.

In embodiments of the present invention intended users of the System are typically on the one hand professional investors such as institutional investors for example a pension fund manager market makers and the institutional agency and or proprietary trading desks of broker dealers and on the other hand retail brokerage firms. As used herein the term institution and all other equivalent terms as defined in the Background section of this application refers to any non retail person or entity that wishes to make a trade and retail brokerage means any source of retail orders.

Referring now to the drawings illustrates a functional block diagram of the overall architecture for a crossing network in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. A Central Order Match Box COMB executes retail orders and institutional indications transmitted to the COMB from various retail brokerage firms and institutional investors. In an embodiment of the present invention retail orders are selectively routed to the COMB by Dynamic Order Routers DOR integrated into the internal order handling system of participant brokerage firms and connected to the COMB via for example leased telephone lines the Internet or other suitable communications system not shown . Institutional Interface II software allows institutional investors to submit modify and cancel indications on the System as well as to receive trade and other status reports from the COMB . IIs are similarly connected to the COMB via communication links such as leased telephone lines the Internet or other suitable communications system not shown . In an embodiment of the present invention II is implemented as a Financial Information Exchange FIX based application programming interface API and or a graphical user interface GUI for use by the institutional investors.

In an embodiment of the present invention the COMB maintains master indications file and uses this to inform the order selection mechanism in each of the DOR modules. In this embodiment of the present invention the COMB automatically matches and then executes retail orders received from the DORs and institutional indications received from the IIs . In embodiments of the present invention matching involves pairing a retail order with at least one opposite side institutional indication for each security where for example an opposite side match would be defined by a buy order with a sell indication for a stock A or a sell order with a buy indication for the stock A. Matching can also involve pairing two or more opposite side institutional indications for each security. These trades are executed using information received from data feeds which provide real time quotes last sale and other trading information for each security being traded on the System. Following the execution of each order the COMB sends execution reports to the brokerages and institutions involved in the order and then reports the retail and institutional trades to the relevant stock market consolidated tapes for example NASDAQ .

In another embodiment of the present invention one method of implementing the indirect routing is for the DOR module using instructions from the COMB to selectively tag certain orders for example by entering a special character in the order string or otherwise modifying a field in the order s message format for routing to the COMB . The DOR module is generally connected to the input retail order stream prior to the brokerage order routing system in order to tag the selected orders before they enter the brokerage order routing system and receive default routing assignments to alternative execution points. The internal brokerage order routing system can be modified to route all tagged orders to the COMB via connection for execution. Untagged orders are always routed by the brokerage order routing system to alternative execution points such as national stock exchanges regional exchanges and OTC market makers pursuant to existing business relationships between participant brokerages and those other execution points. The COMB immediately executes any orders it receives and sends trade reports back to the originating brokerage firms via the same communications link. In an embodiment of the present invention which incorporates indirect routing the DOR has an associated DOR interest list not shown which can list for example the symbol and side of marketable retail orders the COMB seeks for execution against institutional indications already resident in the System. The interest list can be updated dynamically by the COMB as trades are executed. In an embodiment of the present invention the DOR compares each retail order from the input retail order stream with the DOR interest list. A potential match exists when for example a retail marketable sell order for security XYZ is received and a sell XYZ entry exists on the DOR interest list reflecting the presence of an institutional buy indication in XYZ in the COMB . If a potential match is found the DOR immediately queries the COMB for final instructions on how to proceed with regard to this order via the connection . The COMB responds via the connection with final instructions to for example tag the retail order to be transmitted to the COMB . In this case the tagged retail order continues to the brokerage order routing system where it is routed to the COMB via the connection . Once the COMB receives the tagged retail order the tagged retail order is immediately executed against an offsetting institutional indication. A report of the executed trade is then transmitted back to the brokerage order routing system via connection .

In other embodiments of the present invention the COMB may be connected to a series of DOR modules through at various retail brokerage firms as well as to a series of institutional clients using IIs through to submit orders. A high level view of this constellation of participants is illustrated in .

In an embodiment of the present invention institutional clients will utilize the II for example a FIX protocol based Application Programming Interface or Graphical User Interface to communicate with the COMB . The II is used to enter modify and cancel indications and serves as the mechanism used by the COMB to communicate various trade and status reports to institutional clients. Through possible business arrangements with other trading system data and technology vendors third party terminals or electronic interfaces may also be used by institutional clients to communicate with the COMB . Indications entered into the COMB by institutional clients will be completely invisible to all other System clients and market participants. These indications will not be displayed on any screen terminal or quotation or otherwise communicated to any person or entity excepting of course for an institutional client s ability to view its own indications in the COMB in any way. In the normal course of business these indications will also not be viewed by the staff and associated persons of the System sponsor. In the event of a force majeure or other special situation however System technical staff may be required to view some indications for the purpose of assessing or remedying a technology or operational failure in which case robust business policies and procedures will serve to protect the confidentiality of institutional information present in the System. Since the System sponsor will serve as counter party on both sides of every trade executed on the System that is execute the retail order as a riskless principal and simultaneously trade as a riskless principal against the institutional indication the anonymity of institutional clients will be preserved throughout the clearance and settlement process.

While trades on the System will be reported to the consolidated tape it will be impossible for any outside observers or downstream execution points to determine the number size or price boundaries of institutional indications present in the System. At best this reporting will sometimes make it possible depending on the specific execution price protocol embodied in the System for a motivated observer utilizing sophisticated techniques to deduce the existence of a buy or sell indication on the System in a particular security. Since information regarding the mere existence of a professional buyer or seller in a given stock is often available today via floor brokers upstairs brokers and electronic indication systems such as AutEx it is extremely unlikely that potential front runners will find this information to be of much proprietary trading value. Moreover the passive nature and slow but steady pace of institutional trading on the System may appeal primarily to market participants who are not trading on a short term time horizon a fact which further erodes the value of available information to potential front runners. It is therefore highly likely that representative embodiments of the present invention will provide the degree of anonymity and invisibility institutional clients require and thus prevent front running of their block size trading interests. Front running occurs when a third party who has learned of a large unexecuted institutional order to buy or sell immediately transacts on the same side of the same security for its own account in an effort to capitalize on the expected price appreciation or depression which will result from execution of the larger institutional order. In the process the front runner s order results in price slippage which is detrimental to the institutional investor.

In another embodiment of the present invention illustrated in the computer hosting the software application that comprises a piece of the COMB may be an Intel Pentium based PC operating at 500 MHz and with 128 to 512 MegaBytes MB of random access memory RAM a mass memory storage unit such as a hard disk drive and sufficient communication capabilities to connect the COMB to each of the individual DOR II and other components.

In the DOR includes one or more DOR Server applications each of which is connected to one or more DOR Client instances . Each DOR Server is externally connected to the COMB by way of the DOR Proxy . The DOR Client is also connected outside of the DOR to at least one Retail Broker System which is in turn connected to a Retail FIX Engine which is connected to the MarketPoint FIX Engine . The DOR Client sees every retail order flowing through a brokerage s internal order handling system part of Retail Broker System and for each order queries the DOR Server regarding the possibility of a potential match. The DOR Server maintains a local institutional indication list the interest list and using the contents of this interest list decides in real time whether a potential match exists for any order for which it receives a query from the DOR Client . If no potential match exists the DOR Server immediately instructs the DOR Client to decline the subject order. Alternatively if no potential match exists the DOR Server can do nothing which also results in the subject order being automatically declined. When the DOR Server receives a query from the DOR Client regarding an order for which a potential match exists it immediately queries the COMB for final instructions concerning the subject order. If the COMB responds with instructions to accept the subject order the DOR Server will transmit this instruction to the DOR Client which originally submitted the query for the subject order. The DOR Client which is integrated into the retail brokerage s order handling system would then flag the subject order by informing the Retail Broker System that the order should be routed to the System for execution. The Retail Broker System represents the internal order handling and order routing system of a retail brokerage firm that participates in the System. When the Retail Broker System is informed by the DOR Client that the subject order should be routed to the System it passes this information to the Retail FIX Engine . The Retail FIX Engine then transmits the order in the FIX language to the COMB . If the COMB responds with instructions to decline the subject order the DOR Server transmits these instructions to the DOR Client or alternatively the DOR Server can do nothing in which case the subject order is also automatically declined. In this case when the subject order is declined the subject order is routed to another market center for execution based on the brokerage firm s primary order routing matrix.

In II is connected to the MarketPoint FIX Engine . Institutional System is connected to the Institutional FIX Engine which is also connected to the MarketPoint FIX Engine . The Institutional GUI Application is software with a graphical interface that allows traders at participating institutions to manually enter view or modify orders entered into the System by their firm. The Institutional System is the internal order routing and management system of an institutional client of the System. In an another embodiment of the present invention as an alternative to the Institutional GUI Application the Institutional FIX Engine can automatically transmits orders directly from the institution to the COMB using existing institutional order routing and management software that is used by traders of the institution.

Although a variety of execution price protocols are possible in one embodiment of the present invention one quarter of the NBBO spread for each retail share executed on the System against an institutional indication will accrue to the end retail investor in the form of guaranteed price improvement that is retail investors whose orders are executed on the System would always buy at a price spread lower than the national best offer and sell at a price spread higher than the national best bid and that another quarter of the NBBO spread will accrue to the originating retail brokerage firm pursuant to a revenue sharing arrangement. The remaining 50 of the NBBO spread will always go to the institutional client in the form of a midpoint execution. The System will generate proprietary revenue which is not expected to be re distributed to brokerage partners as order flow remuneration by charging these institutional clients a per share commission for trades on the System.

This distribution of the NBBO spread in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is illustrated in the following example 

While the distribution of price improvement will be different for orders executed on the System than for orders executed at traditional market centers it is believed that brokerage firms and regulators will view the System favorably if its average price improvement per share the most pertinent indicator of execution quality for retail orders compares favorably with that of other execution points. It is expected that the System will achieve such favorable average price improvement results and that these will persist again relative to other markets when spreads narrow as a result of the move to decimal pricing.

In an embodiment of the present invention a method for the continuous buying and selling of securities includes receiving a plurality of active binding indications to trade securities at non discrete prices from at least one institution where each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade and the non discrete prices are determined using national best bid and offer NBBO data. The method further includes storing the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and executing an institution to institution trade defined by a first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and a second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade the security if the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade the security is on an opposite side of the first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade the security and the first and second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities are from different institutions wherein the institution to institution trade is executed so that each of the first and second active binding indications to trade are anonymous as to a source of the indication and also invisible to all other market participants. The method further includes transmitting information on the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities at non discrete prices to at least one source of binding orders and receiving at least one query from at least one of the at least one source of binding orders to request an instruction regarding one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities. The method further includes transmitting the instruction to the at least one of the at least one source of binding orders the instruction being to transmit a binding order to trade securities if the binding order is an opposite side binding order to trade securities which is on an opposite side of the one of the active binding indications to trade securities or decline the binding order to trade securities. The method further includes receiving the opposite side binding order to trade securities from the at least one source of binding orders if the instruction was to transmit the opposite side binding order to trade securities and executing an institution to retail trade defined by the one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and the opposite side binding order to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the opposite side binding order to trade securities wherein the institution to retail trade is executed so that the one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade and the opposite side binding order to trade are anonymous as to a source of both the indication and the order and also invisible to all other market participants.

In an alternate embodiment of the previous invention instruction to transmit the binding order to trade in the previous embodiment includes instructions to either directly route the binding order to trade or tag the binding order to trade to be subsequently routed by a primary order routing system and forward the tagged binding order to trade to the primary order routing system to be routed.

In another embodiment of the present invention a method for the continuous buying and selling of securities includes receiving a plurality of active binding indications to trade securities at non discrete prices from at least one institution where each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade and the non discrete prices are determined using national best bid and offer NBBO data and storing the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities. The method further includes executing at least one institution to institution trade defined by a first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and a second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities if the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities is on an opposite side of the first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and the first and second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities are from different institutions wherein the at least one institution to institution trade is executed so that each of the first and second active binding indications to trade are anonymous as to a source of the indication and also invisible to all other market participants. The method further includes receiving at least one binding order to trade securities from at least one source of binding orders and executing at least one institution to retail trade defined by one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and one of the at least one binding order to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the one of the at least one binding order to trade securities if the one of the at least one binding order is an opposite side binding order to trade securities which is on an opposite side of the one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities. The method further includes transmitting each unexecuted binding order to trade securities back to the source of the unexecuted binding order to trade securities.

In another embodiment of the present invention a method for the continuous buying and selling of securities includes receiving a plurality of active binding indications to trade securities at non discrete prices from at least one institution where each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade and the non discrete prices are determined using national best bid and offer NBBO data and storing the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities. The method further includes executing at least one institution to institution trade defined by a first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and a second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities if the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities is on an opposite side of the first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and the first and second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities are from different institutions wherein the at least one institution to institution trade is executed so that each of the first and second active binding indications to trade are anonymous as to a source of the indication and also invisible to all other market participants. The method further includes receiving at least one binding order to trade securities from at least one source of binding orders and executing at least one institution to retail trade defined by one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and one of the at least one binding order to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the one of the at least one binding order to trade securities if the one of the at least one binding order is an opposite side binding order to trade securities which is on an opposite side of the one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities. The method further includes transmitting each unexecuted binding order to trade securities to one of an exchange a market maker an electronic communications network ECN an alternative trading system ATS and any other market center.

In another embodiment of the present invention a method for the continuous buying and selling of securities includes receiving a plurality of active binding indications to trade securities at non discrete prices from at least one institution where each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade and the non discrete prices are determined using national best bid and offer NBBO data and storing the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities. The method further includes executing at least one institution to institution trade defined by a first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and a second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities if the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities is on an opposite side of the first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and the first and second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities are from different institutions wherein the at least one institution to institution trade is executed so that each of the first and second active binding indications to trade are anonymous as to a source of the indication and also invisible to all other market participants. The method further includes receiving at least one binding order to trade securities from at least one source of binding orders and executing at least one institution to retail trade defined by one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and one of the at least one binding order to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the one of the at least one binding order to trade securities if the one of the at least one binding order is an opposite side binding order to trade securities which is on an opposite side of the one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities. The method further includes transmitting each unexecuted binding order to trade securities to an order routing service bureau or similar entity for routing to an exchange a market maker an electronic communications network ECN an alternative trading system ATS or any other market center.

In another embodiment of the present invention a method for the continuous buying and selling of securities including receiving a plurality of active binding indications to trade securities at non discrete prices from at least one institution where each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade and the non discrete prices are determined using national best bid and offer NBBO data storing the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and executing at least one institution to institution trade defined by a first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and a second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities if the second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities is on an opposite side of the first of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and the first and second of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities are from different institutions wherein the at least one institution to institution trade is executed so that each of the first and second active binding indications to trade are anonymous as to a source of each indication and also invisible to all other market participants. The method further includes receiving at least one binding order to trade securities from at least one source of binding orders wherein each of the at least one binding order to trade is a retail marketable order executing at least one institution to retail trade defined by one of the plurality of active binding indications to trade securities and an opposite side binding order to trade securities immediately upon receipt of the opposite side binding order to trade securities wherein the at least one institution to retail trade is executed so that the first active binding indication to trade and the one of the at least one binding order to trade are anonymous as to a source of each and also invisible to all other market participants and executing any unexecuted binding orders to trade securities as one of an exchange a market maker an electronic communications network ECN an alternative trading system ATS and an other market center by acting as a principal an agent or a riskless principal.

In another embodiment of the present invention a method for the continuous buying and selling of securities includes receiving an active first entity binding indication to trade a security at non discrete prices where each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade storing the active first entity binding indication to trade the security executing a trade defined by the active first entity binding indication to trade the security and an active second entity binding indication to trade the security immediately upon receipt of the active second entity binding indication to trade the security if the active second entity binding indication to trade is on an opposite side of the active first entity binding indication to trade and executing a trade defined by the active first entity binding indication to trade the security and a third entity binding order to trade the security immediately upon receipt of the third entity binding order to trade the security if the active first entity binding indication to trade the security is on an opposite side of the third entity binding order to trade the security.

In another embodiment of the present invention an article of manufacture comprising a computer readable medium having stored thereon instructions adapted to be executed by a processor the instructions which when executed define a series of steps to perform the continuous buying and selling of securities the steps including receiving an active first entity binding indication to trade a security at non discrete prices where each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade storing the active first entity binding indication to trade the security executing a trade defined by the active first entity binding indication to trade the security and an active second entity binding indication to trade the security immediately upon receipt of the active second entity binding indication to trade the security if the active second entity binding indication to trade is on an opposite side of the active first entity binding indication to trade and executing a trade defined by the active first entity binding indication to trade the security and a third entity binding order to trade the security immediately upon receipt of the third entity binding order to trade the security if the active first entity binding indication to trade the security is on an opposite side of the third entity binding order to trade the security.

In another embodiment of the present invention a method for the continuous buying and selling of securities includes receiving at least one active first entity binding indication to trade securities at non discrete prices each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade storing the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade securities transmitting information on the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade securities at non discrete prices to be used to determine if a third entity binding order to trade a security is on an opposite side of at least one of the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade the security and executing a trade defined by the at least one of the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade the security and the third entity binding order to trade the security immediately upon receipt of the third entity binding order to trade the security if the at least one of the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade the security is on an opposite side of the third entity binding order to trade the security.

In another embodiment of the present invention an article of manufacture comprising a computer readable medium having stored thereon instructions adapted to be executed by a processor the instructions which when executed define a series of steps to perform the continuous buying and selling of securities the steps including receiving at least one active first entity binding indication to trade securities at non discrete prices each of the active binding indications to trade securities is a non retail order to trade storing the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade securities transmitting information on the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade securities at non discrete prices to be used to determine if a third entity binding order to trade a security is on an opposite side of at least one of the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade the security and executing a trade defined by the at least one of the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade the security and the third entity binding order to trade the security immediately upon receipt of the third entity binding order to trade the security if the at least one of the at least one active first entity binding indication to trade the security is on an opposite side of the third entity binding order to trade the security.

In another embodiment of the present invention a system that facilitates the continuous interaction of marketable orders at non discrete prices includes a match box component a financial information exchange FIX middleware component connected to the match box component a marketpoint FIX engine component connected to the FIX middleware converter component and the marketpoint FIX engine component includes at least one external communication port a DOR proxy component connected to the match box component and the DOR proxy includes at least one external communication port a data warehouser component connected to the match box component a clearing and settlement system component connected to the data warehouser component a trade report scanner component connected to the match box component a quote feed parser component connected to the match box component and a monitor graphical user interface GUI connected to the match box component.

In another embodiment of the present invention a system that facilitates the continuous interaction of marketable orders at non discrete prices the apparatus including a match box component a financial information exchange FIX middleware component connected to the match box component a marketpoint FIX engine component connected to the FIX middleware converter component and the marketpoint FIX engine component includes at least one external communication port a DOR proxy component connected to the match box component and the DOR proxy includes at least one external communication port a data warehouser component connected to the match box component a clearing and settlement system component connected to the data warehouser component a trade report scanner component connected to the match box component a quote feed parser component connected to the match box component and a monitor graphical user interface GUI connected to the match box component.

In another embodiment of the present invention a DOR to facilitate the continuous interaction of retail and institutional marketable orders at non discrete prices which includes a DOR client component to receive marketable retail orders for at least one security and a DOR server component connected to the DOR client component. The DOR server component operates to receive a listing of marketable institutional orders for at least one security compare the received listing of marketable institutional orders with incoming marketable retail orders transmit a query requesting at least one instruction if a matching marketable institutional order and marketable retail order are found receive the requested at least one instruction and route the matched marketable retail order according to the received at least one instruction.

In another embodiment of the present invention a crossing network that facilitates the continuous interaction of marketable retail orders with professional trading interest at non discrete prices includes at least one dynamic order router DOR to receive and forward at least one retail order for at least one first instrument representing either a buy order or a sell order for each of the at least one first instrument at least one institutional interface II to transmit at least one institutional order indication for at least one second instrument representing either a buy order or a sell order for each of the at least one second instrument and a central order match box COMB connected to each of the at least one DOR and at least one II over a communications network. The COMB includes a receiving subsystem to communicate with the at least one DOR and at least one II a data subsystem to maintain a listing of the institutional order indications and a matching subsystem to match and execute orders on opposite sides for each of the at least one first instrument.

In another embodiment of the present invention a computer system which facilitates the continuous interaction of institutional and retail marketable orders at non discrete prices includes a processor system a random access memory RAM connected to the processor system a mass memory storage unit connected to the processor system a communication system connected to the processor system and an article of manufacture comprising a computer readable medium having stored thereon instructions adapted to be executed by a processor the instructions which when executed define a series of steps to perform the continuous buying and selling of securities. The steps include receiving at least one binding indication to trade at least one security at non discrete prices from at least one institution storing each of the at least one active binding indications to trade at least one security executing a first trade defined by a first of the at least one active binding indication to trade one of the at least one security and a second of the at least one active binding indication to trade the one of the at least one security immediately upon receipt of the second of the at least one active binding indication to trade if the second of the at least one active binding indication to trade is on an opposite side from the first of the at least one active binding indication to trade the security and the first and second of the at least one active binding indications to trade the one of the at least one security are from different institutions wherein the first trade is executed so that each of the first and second active binding indications to trade are anonymous as to a source of each indication and also invisible to all other market participants transmitting information on the at least one active binding indication to trade at least one security at non discrete prices to at least one source of binding orders and executing a second trade defined by one of the at least one active binding indication to trade the one of the at least one security and a binding order to trade the one of the at least one security immediately upon receipt of the binding order to trade the one of the at least one security if the active binding indication to trade the one of the at least one security is on an opposite side from the binding order to trade the one of the at least one security wherein the second trade is executed so that the one of the at least one active binding indication to trade the one of the at least one security and the binding order to trade the one of the at least one security are anonymous as to the source of the active binding indication to trade and a source of the binding order and also invisible to the other market participants.

The above embodiments are merely illustrative of the numerous possible embodiments and therefore should not be construed so as to limit the scope of the invention. Therefore it should be understood that while the present invention has been described mainly in terms of a centralized COMB system those skilled in the art would recognize that the principles of the invention can be used advantageously with alternative embodiments involving for example distributed systems as well. Accordingly all such implementations which fall within the spirit and the broad scope of the appended claims will be embraced by the principles of the present invention.

