---

title: Wireless subscriber billing and distribution
abstract: Systems and methods for generating and responding to billing requests in a wireless subscriber billing system are disclosed. A billing request can be generated at a trusted service. The billing request including billing information is communicated to a wireless subscriber billing system. A validation response to the billing request is generated in the wireless subscriber billing system and the validation response is communicated to the trusted service.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09350875&OS=09350875&RS=09350875
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 09350875
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050531
---
The present Application for Patent is related to the co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 141 934 entitled WIRELESS SUBSCRIBER APPLICATION AND CONTENT DISTRIBUTION AND DIFFERENTIATED PRICING by Mitchell Oliver Jerry Horel and Brian Minear filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein.

The present invention generally relates to communications between remote computing devices and servers. More particularly the invention relates to the creation and sending of billing events between a server and a remote client device.

Advances in technology have resulted in smaller and more powerful personal computing devices. For example there currently exist a variety of portable personal computing devices including wireless computing devices such as portable wireless telephones personal digital assistants PDAs and paging devices that are each small lightweight and can be easily carried by users. More specifically the portable wireless telephones for example further include cellular telephones that communicate voice and data packets over wireless networks. Further many such cellular telephones are being manufactured with relatively large increases in computing capabilities and as such are becoming tantamount to small personal computers and hand held PDAs. However these smaller and more powerful personal computing devices are typically severely resource constrained. For example the screen size amount of available memory and file system space amount of input and output capabilities and processing capability may each be limited by the small size of the device and in particular the small size of the user input unit e.g. the keyboard. Because of such severe resource constraints it is often typically desirable for example to maintain a limited size and quantity of software applications and other information residing on such remote personal computing devices client devices .

Some of the personal computing devices utilize application programming interfaces APIs sometimes referred to as runtime environments and software platforms that are installed onto their local computer platform and which are used for example to simplify operations of such devices such as by providing generalized calls for device specific resources. Further some such APIs are also known to provide software developers the ability to create software applications that are fully executable on such devices. In addition some of such APIs are known to be operationally located between the computing device system software and the software applications such that the computing device computing functionality is made available to the software applications without requiring the software developer to have the specific computing device system source code. Further some APIs are known to provide mechanisms for secure communications between such personal devices i.e. clients and remote devices i.e. servers using secure cryptographic information.

Examples of such APIs some of which are discussed in more detail below include versions of the Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless software BREW developed by QUALCOMM Inc. of San Diego Calif . BREW can cooperate with a computing device s e.g. a wireless cellular phone operating system and can among other features provide interfaces to hardware features particularly found on personal computing devices. BREW can also provide these interfaces on such personal computing devices at a relatively low cost with respect to demands on device resources and with respect to the price paid by consumers for devices containing BREW . Additional features of BREW include its end to end software distribution platform that provides a variety of benefits for wireless service operators software developers and computing device consumers. At least one such currently available end to end software distribution platform includes logic distributed over a server client architecture where the server performs for example billing security and application distribution functionality and the client performs for example application execution security and user interface functionality.

The foregoing description of the related art is merely intended to provide an overview of some of the known uses of APIs and as an introduction to the BREW platform which can be used in embodiments of the invention. However the invention is not to be construed as being limited to a specific implementation operating platform or environment.

Exemplary embodiments of the present invention are directed to a system and method for generating and processing billing requests in a wireless network.

Accordingly an embodiment of the invention can include a method comprising generating a billing request at a trusted service communicating the billing request including billing information to a wireless subscriber billing system generating a validation response to the billing request in the wireless subscriber billing system and communicating the validation response to the trusted service.

Another embodiment of the invention can include an apparatus comprising a service value billing SVB module in a wireless subscriber billing system configured to receive a billing request from a trusted service and to authenticate the trusted service and validation logic configured to generate a validation response in response to the billing request.

Another embodiment of the invention can include a system comprising means for receiving a billing request including billing information from a trusted service at a wireless subscriber billing system means for generating a validation response to the billing request in the wireless subscriber billing system and means for communicating the validation response to the trusted service.

Another embodiment of the invention can include a computer readable medium on which is stored a computer program for processing billing requests in a wireless subscriber billing system the computer program comprising instructions which upon being executed causes the computing device to perform a process of receiving a billing request from a trusted service wherein the billing request billing information to the wireless subscriber billing system generating a validation response to the billing request in the wireless subscriber billing system and communicating the validation response to the trusted service.

Another embodiment of the invention can include a method of processing multi party billing events in a wireless subscriber billing system the method comprising generating a billing event including a provider fee and payee and at least one source fee and payee associated with a transaction and processing the transaction to distribute payment to the provider payee and the at least one source payee.

Aspects of the invention are disclosed in the following description and related drawings directed to specific embodiments of the invention. Alternate embodiments may be devised without departing from the scope of the invention. Additionally well known elements of the invention will not be described in detail or will be omitted so as not to obscure the relevant details of the invention.

The word exemplary is used herein to mean serving as an example instance or illustration. Any embodiment described herein as exemplary is not necessarily to be construed as preferred or advantageous over other embodiments. Likewise the term embodiments of the invention does not require that all embodiments of the invention include the discussed feature advantage or mode of operation.

Further many embodiments are described in terms of sequences of actions to be performed by for example elements of a computing device. It will be recognized that various actions described herein can be performed by specific circuits e.g. application specific integrated circuits ASICs by program instructions being executed by one or more processors or by a combination of both. Additionally these sequence of actions described herein can be considered to be embodied entirely within any form of computer readable storage medium having stored therein a corresponding set of computer instructions that upon execution would cause an associated processor to perform the functionality described herein. Thus the various aspects of the invention may be embodied in a number of different forms all of which have been contemplated to be within the scope of the claimed subject matter. In addition for each of the embodiments described herein the corresponding form of any such embodiments may be described herein as for example logic configured to perform the described action.

One or more embodiments of the invention can be used in conjunction with a runtime environment e.g. API executing on the computing device. One such runtime environment is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless software BREW previously discussed. However one or more embodiments of the invention can be used with other types of runtime environments or platforms that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless client computing devices.

Additionally it will be recognized to those skilled in the art that an application file type being distributed and executed may be described herein for simplicity of description. However an application may also include files having executable content such as object code scripts java file a bookmark file or PQA file WML scripts byte code and perl scripts. In addition an application referred to herein may also include files that are not executable in nature such as documents that may need to be opened or other data files that need to be accessed.

The application download server ADS is shown here on a network with other computer elements in communication with the wireless network . There can be a stand alone server and each server can provide separate services and processes to the client devices across the wireless network . There is preferably also at least one stored application database that holds the software applications and content that is downloadable by the wireless devices . However those skilled in the art will appreciate that the configuration illustrated in is merely exemplary. Accordingly embodiments of the invention can include one or more servers that can each perform all the described functions and contain all necessary hardware and software or can contain only selected functionality.

In a block diagram is shown that more fully illustrates system including the components of the wireless network and interrelation of the elements of the exemplary embodiments of the invention. System is merely exemplary and can include any system that allows remote client devices such as wireless client computing devices to communicate over the air between and among each other and or between and among components connected via a wireless network including without limitation wireless network carriers and or servers. The application download server and the stored application database along with any other servers such as billing server which are used to provide cellular telecommunication services communicate with a carrier network through a data link such as the Internet a secure LAN WAN or other network. In the embodiment shown a server can include the application download server billing server and the stored application database . However these servers can also be independent devices.

The carrier network controls messages typically sent as data packets sent to a messaging service controller MSC . The carrier network communicates with the MSC by a network the Internet and or a public switched telephone network PSTN . Typically the network or Internet connection between the carrier network and the MSC transfers data and the PSTN transfers voice information. The MSC can be connected to multiple base stations BTS . In a similar manner to the carrier network the MSC is typically connected to the BTS by a network the Internet and or PSTN for data transfer and or voice information. The BTS can broadcast data messages wirelessly to the client devices such as cellular telephone by short messaging service SMS or other over the air OTA methods known in the art.

The client device here a wireless client computing device such as cellular telephone has a computer platform that can receive and execute software applications or content and or commands transmitted from the application download server billing server and or server . The computer platform can include an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other processor microprocessor logic circuit or other data processing device. The ASIC or other processor executes the application programming interface API layer that interfaces with any resident programs in the memory of the wireless device. The memory can be comprised of read only or random access memory RAM and ROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. The API also includes an application based value billing extension AVB containing logic configured to process special billing requests from the client device to the carrier network . The computer platform also includes a local database that can hold applications not actively used in memory . The local database is typically a flash memory cell but can be any secondary storage device as known in the art such as magnetic media EEPROM optical media tape soft or hard disk or the like.

The wireless client computing device such as cellular telephone has installed on it or otherwise downloads one or more software applications such as games news stock monitors and the like. For example the cellular telephone may receive one or more software applications and content downloaded from the download server . The software applications and content may be stored on the local database when not in use. The cellular telephone or other wireless computing device may upload resident applications stored on the local database to memory for execution on the API when so desired by the user or invoked by another API.

As used herein client device wireless device or client computing device includes for example one or more processing circuits executing resident configured logic where such computing devices include for example microprocessors digital signal processors DSPs microcontrollers portable wireless telephones personal digital assistants PDAs and paging devices or any suitable combination of hardware software and or firmware containing processors and logic configured to at least perform the operations described herein directed to billing information communicated between a client device and a server. The client computing device can be serviced by at least one remote server with respect to processing the billing requests generated at the client device. Some examples of client devices which may be used in accordance with embodiments of the present invention include cellular telephones or other wireless communication units PDAs paging devices handheld navigation devices handheld gaming devices music or video content download units and other like wireless communication devices.

The wireless communication between the client device and the BTS can be based on different technologies such as code division multiple access CDMA time division multiple access TDMA frequency division multiple access FDMA the global system for mobile communications GSM or other protocols that may be used in a wireless communications network or a data communications network. The data communication is typically between the client device BTS and MSC . The MSC can be connected to multiple data networks such as the carrier network PSTN the Internet a virtual private network and the like thus allowing the client device access to a broader communication network. As discussed in the foregoing in addition to voice transmission data can be transmitted to the client device via SMS or other OTA methods known in the art.

Referring the a client device is illustrated that includes an application e.g. a BREW application that includes an AVB extension e.g. an API that enables billing requests and processing within the application . The billing request is generated within the application. This allows for the shopping experience to be controlled at the application level and for greater flexibility in the distribution and pricing of applications features in applications and or content. For example a developer may wish to provide an arcade type application with various features each having different price levels. These features may be included with the original application e.g. different levels of difficulty or may be downloaded from a remote server e.g. enhanced background music . The option to purchase each feature can be presented to the user and the user can determine whether or not to purchase additional features at the application level using the AVB extension . Accordingly one application can generate incremental billing for the developer and carrier for differentiated pricing without the need of multiple applications and multiple downloads of the different applications. Also because the additional services are enabled through the application a network based application may dynamically configure the latest set of services available for incremental charges without having to redeploy a new application. An example of this would be a ringtone shopping application. Ringtones may be stored on a server and may be updated as the content server determines appropriate. The AVB application can access a remote directory of ringtones and pricing to display to the consumer in real time. As such the AVB API provides greater flexibility to developers and operators for data service offerings and pricing flexibilities.

In contrast to achieve a similar functionality using conventional systems the application developer would have to generate different applications for each feature and or pricing level and make them available for download. Conventional systems would treat each download as a one time purchase and record the billing information and process the settlements for each application downloaded. This process is controlled by the carrier and to purchase each application the client device would have to connect to the carrier network to browse the application catalog and purchase the desired application with the desired features.

In embodiments of the invention as stated above the shopping experience is conducted at the client device . Accordingly after a purchase option is presented and accepted at the client device a billing request is generated within the client device . The billing request and other information used to process the billing transaction e.g. subscriber identification information SID content provider s retail price and the like can be transmitted to a remote billing system . The billing request is received at the remote billing system and processed. A validation response is generated in response to the billing request at the remote billing system . The validation response is transmitted to the client device .

The validation response can be an approval of the billing request or a denial of the billing request. Once the client device receives the response it can process the validation accordingly. For example the feature e.g. an additional level in an arcade game linked to the billing request can be activated if the validation response is positive. Likewise if the billing request is denied an indication of the denial of the billing request can be displayed on the client device. Optionally additional information can be included in the denial such as the reason why the request was denied e.g. insufficient funds .

In at least one embodiment the billing system can leverage existing billing components to facilitate implementation of the system. For example in the application distribution system ADS can receive the billing request from the client device . The ADS can then access a validation logic that can be determined by the billing entity e.g. a carrier . The validation logic can be as detailed or as limited as desired. For example a carrier may allow all billing events to be processed as long as the SID and a requested billing amount is valid and enough information is provided to generate a billing event e.g. item ID supplier ID supplier pricing e.g. price supplier is paid and the like . This information can be included in the billing request directly or can be generated in combination with stored information in a server in the billing system. For example an item ID can be linked to one or more supplier IDs and related supplier pricing description of the item consumer list price CLP and the like. However typically the pricing information will be transmitted from the AVB as the price displayed to the user during the client based transaction that generates the billing request should be the price used for subscriber billing.

The ADS can generate the additional billing information based on the item ID. Additionally the ADS can perform additional checks once the validation logic approves the billing request. For example if the client pricing plan is a prepay plan the prepay balance can be checked to see if there is sufficient funds to purchase the item. If there are sufficient funds then the approval is transmitted to the client device. However if there are not sufficient funds then the billing request is denied even though the billing request is valid. Once the billing request is ultimately approved by the billing system the approval is transmitted to the client device for processing by the AVB and application that generated the billing request.

In addition to transmitting the approval the ADS communicates transaction data to transaction manager TXN . The TXN is configured to receive the transaction data from the ADS . The TXN can associate any further billing information not included with the transaction data. For example the transaction data can contain the SID the item ID and a price ID. The TXN can associate additional data to complete the billing process e.g. supplier IDs and related supplier pricing description of the item full pricing plan and the like . The TXN then communicates this information as a billing event to a client billing module and a settlement module . The client billing module is configured to receive the billing event from the TXN and to generate a bill to a subscriber associated with the client device . The settlement module is also configured to receive the billing event from the TXN to invoice the billing entity e.g. carrier operator and to pay a supplier e.g. developer publisher and the like .

Typically the billing event is created and processed in a conventional manner after the transaction data has been generated. For example metadata associated with an item can be stored in the TXN and or related database. When the client device receives approval for the billing request transaction data can be sent to and stored in the database. The type of transaction can also be stored so that reports generated to the carrier and or developers can identify the transaction as an AVB generated billing event. The transaction data may also include a subset of the metadata and additional information included by other devices and or systems. Billing events are created in the TXN by correlating the metadata and the raw transaction data. A more detailed description of this process is found in commonly owned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 222 706 entitled Transaction Processing which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The conventional process for purchasing and obtaining applications for a client device includes the client device accessing a catalog of available applications selecting a desired application and downloading the application to the client device. This process generates a billing event related to the application download that ultimately results in the billing of the subscriber and payment of the application developer as discussed in the background. However the marketing and purchasing of applications and utilization of the wireless subscriber billing system has been limited to this client server connection.

An authentication feature can be included in the SVB module that can verify the identity of the trusted service that is accessing the SVB module . For example a digital certificate can be issued to the trusted service. The certificate will be associated with the carrier operator and the trusted service e.g. content payee for validation. The trusted service can digitally sign each transaction to the SVB module using the issued certificate. The digital signature and the digital certificate can be included in each request. The SVB module then authenticates the signature on each billing request. The SVB can be a web based interface and the connection to the SVB can be via the internet using an HTTPS protocol in the trusted service authentication for example. However those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention is not limited to an internet connection and an HTTPS protocol and any combination of wired and or wireless connection and suitable security authentication system can be used to communicate the billing requests from the trusted service.

Accordingly the wireless subscriber billing system can receive a billing request from a trusted service external to the billing system . The billing request can include billing information that is communicated to the billing system and used to validate the request at the billing system . Further the billing system can generate a validation response to the billing request and communicate the validation response to the trusted service . The billing information can include information used to validate the billing request including a subscriber ID provider content payee a content item ID list price billing description and the like. However those skilled in the art will appreciate that other data can be included in the billing request.

For example in the configuration illustrated in a billing request can be generated by trusted service . The SVB can receive the billing request from the trusted service and can authenticate the trusted service as discussed herein. Validation logic can validate the billing request. Using the validation logic the carrier can perform billing integrity checks to determine if the carrier wants to accept the billing request for further processing or reject the request. Since the carrier is not controlling the pricing and transaction but will be billing the subscriber the validation logic can be used as an intervention point to allow the carrier to determine which billing requests are acceptable. If the billing request is validated SVB can generate transaction data based on the billing request and communicate the transaction data to transaction manager . The transaction manager can receive the transaction data from the SVB and generate a billing event which can be communicated to a billing module and a settlement module . The billing module can receive a billing event from the transaction manager and generate a bill to the subscriber. The settlement module can receive the billing event from the transaction manager invoice a carrier and pay a content provider e.g. source of application content service billed for as discussed above. Accordingly the SVB can be used to bill and settle a transaction external to the billing system and the use of the wireless subscriber billing system is not limited to billing and settling application downloads and or carrier related services.

Since the SVB based billing events from the trusted service are not directly generated within the carrier network or from the subscriber s client device an SID map database can be used by SVB to uniquely identify the subscriber. For example a subscriber could use their Mobile Directory dialable Number MDN or other assigned unique number known by the carrier at the trusted service . The MDN or other unique number can be transmitted with the billing request as the SID to the SVB . The SVB can then access the SID map database and replace the MDN or associate the MDN with the unique SID used in the billing system for processing the billing requests and transactions.

Additionally the item purchased billed for item may not be an application or content distributed through the ADS and or carrier network. Accordingly the billing request can include additional information regarding the item description retail price purchase time date and the like. However at least a portion of this additional information may also be pre loaded into a database and accessed based on the item ID and or provider payee ID e.g. trusted source .

The information included in the billing request can include a variety of data used for billing and tracking transactions. For example the information included in the billing request can include Item ID which can be specified by the trusted service to represent a unique identifier for item e.g. application content article and or service purchased at the trusted service. It can be considered a billing part number for the item. However since there is no guarantee that the Item ID is unique across trusted services it can be referenced with the Provider Payee ID which can be the Trusted Service to maintain uniqueness. A Customer ID can be an operator s Subscriber ID SID or other unique ID that can be related to the operator carrier s SID. A Customer ID Type can be included e.g. SID MDN in the billing information. A Signature can be a concatenated string of all of the data digitally signed by the trusted service using the private key of the issued digital certificate. The Digital Certificate from the trusted service key pair can be used for the SVB to authenticate the request. A Payee ID can represent the provider content payee to be paid the content portion of the standard revenue share split e.g. revenue split between carrier settlement entity and content provider and can equate to a publisher developer manufacturer for the item. In many situations the payee ID is the trusted service.

A Greenwich Mean Time GMT stamp for the purchase can be included. A GMT Offset can be included that represents the offset to compute the local time. A Client Trans ID can represent a unique identifier for the billing transaction request. It can be used to check that this transaction has not already been received duplicate check to prevent double billing . Carrier ID represents a sub operator ID in the system e.g. it can equate to a BREW Carrier ID and Primary Carrier . A Pre pay Flag can indicate if the end user is a pre pay customer for the operator. A Retail Price can represent the consumer charge of the content bill event. A Content Fee can represent the value used to determine the content payee payment according to pricing terms. In most cases it is the same as Retail Price. Currency code can represent the currency of the list price content fee and source fee amounts specified in the transaction. A Billing Description can represent a short description of the content item which can be included in the report sent to carriers e.g. a billing XML feed and the report available to developers e.g. a developer XML feed and appear on the consumer billing statement. It equates to the billing part name for this item. A Long Description can represent a longer name of the value bill content which can be used to further describe the transaction e.g. for customer service but is typically not included in the Billing Extract XML or the Developer Extract XML i.e. report to developers . Vendor data can represent additional data to be used by the trusted service as passed with the billing transaction. Vendor data can be included in the billing and developer reports. Information for a start recurring billing interface can include Start Bill Date which can indicate the day e.g. in MM DD YYYY format to trigger subscription billing. If the Start Bill Date is in the future then the first value billing IB event to trigger billing is not created until the start bill date. An End Bill Date can indicate the end date e.g. in MM DD YYYY format of the subscription. No IB events are created after the end bill date.

The foregoing description of optional billing information that can be included in the billing request and or associated with the billing event was provided solely for illustration. Billing requests can be processed without all the information described above and likewise additional information not listed could be added for the purposes of tracking and reporting billing events. Accordingly those skilled in the art will appreciate the billing request and associated information to generate a billing event can be varied as desired by the carriers and providers of the purchased items.

Using the SVB the billing system is essentially functioning as a pass through billing service from the trusted service i.e. an authorized source for billing generation . The trusted service can be responsible for service value billing transaction management which can include creating the transaction e.g. SOAP Simple Object Access Protocol interface providing security setting valid transaction attributes e.g. billing information describe above submitting the transaction to the billing system processing the response from the billing system and re submitting the transaction as required. The trusted service can provide authentication for each transaction e.g. digitally sign each transaction to the SVB using the digital certificate issued by the operator or other secured transaction processing. The SVB can then authenticate the requests from the trusted service validate the requests support value billing operator interfaces and communicate valid requests e.g. transaction data to the TXN . The SVB can return an error code to identify invalid requests. The TXN can support a duplicate event check the conversion processing of the billing transactions the mapping and processing of recurring content value billing and can communicate the value billing events to billing module and settlement module .

The SVB can support multiple operator interfaces. For example a user authorization interface can be used to verify the SID is authorized for the SVB service. A transaction validation interface e.g. validation logic can be used for the operator to implement additional verification of billing information i.e. content fee not to exceed X Customer ID valid etc. . A pre pay interface can used to initiate pre pay authorization e.g. check pre pay balance and debit services for value billing services. These interfaces may be realized as separate modules or may all be included in a common logic module e.g. validation logic .

Application purchasing in conventional wireless systems is controlled by the carrier operator and is typically based on a client device browsing for applications e.g. as presented by the ADS selecting and downloading the application from the carrier network as discussed above. The transaction can be recorded billed and settled as discussed in the background and foregoing disclosure.

However the addition of the SVB service in the billing system allows for alternate buy Alt Buy sources in addition to the direct purchase from the carrier network. Referring to a SID directed or client device directed distribution structure can allow for directed delivery of items e.g. applications content etc. to a remote client device. This SID directed structure allows for applications and or content purchased from a carrier offline to be associated with a SID so that the application content purchased is available for download from the client device and the download event will not generate any additional billing to the subscriber as in the conventional download process.

For example a main catalog can contain a plurality of items e.g. applications content services and the like available for purchase from the carrier operator. A SID directed group that contains only one SID e.g. a My Apps group can be formed that contains items that are specifically directed to that SID client device . Accordingly a shopping catalog can be generated for a client device from a main catalog based on platform ID runtime API and language in a conventional manner e.g. using folders items from main catalog . However the shopping catalog can be augmented by the SID directed group and items e.g. My Apps associated with a SID in the shopping catalog based on the SID associated with the client device . Therefore the shopping catalog can be customizable for each SID and the SID directed group can be used to deliver items purchased via Alt Buy.

In addition to presenting items in separate groups differentiated pricing can be used for the same item. For example item e.g. an application in the main catalog may be offered for a full commercial price of 10.00. However the same item can be contained in a SID directed group e.g. My Apps which may be offered for free. For example item may have been purchased via Alt Buy or be a gift from another subscriber. Accordingly the purchase billing settlement process can be separated from the delivery of the item purchased unlike the conventional download initiated billing event.

An external billing channel e.g. SVB to the wireless subscriber billing system allows for external purchase transactions to be processed via the wireless subscriber billing system. Some purchases can be processed without any associated download or enhancement to the client device such as purchasing tickets to a movie. However other types of external transactions can be processed that include purchasing items from a carrier catalog e.g. downloading or enhancing features of an application application purchase ringtone purchase and the like directed to a client device on the wireless system. In general this type transaction that is directed to a client device but is not generated within the conventional client device to server transaction in the carrier network by the client device is referred to as an alternate buy or Alt Buy in the following description.

An Alt Buy zone can include various channels such as Retail e.g. operator third party retail cards kiosk PC Web based e.g. operator third party web site or directly from within a PC application such as game in which a purchase can be made for a related game for the wireless client Mass media e.g. Advertising Links and the like . The Alt Buy can leverage the SVB for billing and SID based group functions e.g. My Apps for delivery of the content application to the client device associated with the SID.

For example retail cards can be a card sold in either an operator s or third party s retail outlet that provides a subscriber with one or more applications. The purchaser may use the card himself or gift the card to another subscriber. The purchase of multiple applications on a single card can contain a discount in the purchase price of the applications. After purchase or receipt of the gift the subscriber can register the card at which point the applications e.g. BREW applications are loaded into their SID directed group e.g. My Apps directory for download or auto installation. Further the transaction processing is completed to bill subscriber optional if not prepaid and settles with all application and service providers.

Operator third party web offerings can be presented that mimic the catalog offerings and possibly incorporate some discount pricing for purchase of multiple applications or for purchase of certain offerings during limited time offerings. Web site Alt Buys can offer applications and content individually or offer bundles of product and service items. For example the subscriber or gift giver can provide information regarding the destination subscriber s device e.g. MDN and the operator third party i.e. trusted service provides information for subscriber billing and content provider payment via the SVB interface.

Operator or third party kiosks can have application purchasing capability that mimics the main catalog offerings and possibly incorporates some discount pricing for purchase of multiple applications or for purchase of certain applications during limited time offerings. The subscriber provides information on the destination subscriber s device e.g. client device and the operator or third party directs distribution e.g. via My Apps of the purchased applications to that device and provides information for subscriber billing and content and service provider payments.

Advertising Links can offer applications to an operator s subscribers. For example these can be non billable to the subscriber. The subscriber provides information on the destination subscriber s device and the operator or third party directs distribution of the applications to that device e.g. via My Apps for user download.

As discussed in the foregoing the Alt Buy offers a variety of different channels to purchase and deliver applications content to subscribers. In each of these configurations the billing and delivery information is communicated to the SVB and group manager to allow for proper delivery and billing. Accordingly billing and delivery metadata can be transmitted as part of the billing request communicated to the SVB .

For example an application can be purchased outside the carrier network billing system e.g. cash credit card at an operator kiosk . A billing and distribution request is communicated from the trusted service e.g. Alt Buy zone to the SVB . A special price handle can be included with the billing request that indicates the transaction is alternate buy and has a special pricing base e.g. CLP 0 so that the subscriber is not billed . The SID is used to target delivery e.g. My Apps . Generally the Alt Buy service formats and submits billing and distribution requests processes return event information and processes error instances. The billing distribution request can be a SVB transaction and the distribution request can be a group manager directed SID directed application request. The metadata information included with the request includes for example Distribution SID Item ID Price Handle Price Method Price Basis Price Value Vendor Data and Source Type for each application associated with the Alt Buy.

An Alt Buy delivery table can be populated with data from the metadata passed from the Alt Buy source e.g. . For example the table can include SID e.g. the distribution SID Item ID Usage Price Handler CLP fields. In the scenario described above where the application was paid for at the Alt Buy zone and the CLP 0 this information can be associated with the SID and the item ID and associated with the SID directed group e.g. My Apps . When a client device associated with the SID accesses the SID directed My Apps group from shopping catalog generated by the ADS one of the items e.g. an application presented can be an item which was purchased via an Alt Buy.

The ADS can access the Alt Buy table for and determine if there is an Alt Buy price handle associated with the SID and Item ID. The ADS can then replace the provided price handle associated with the Item ID with the local price handle from the Alt Buy table . Assuming the price is zero the presentation of 0.00 or Free or other language specific indication can be displayed at the client device . If there is a local price handle ADS can identify the transaction as an Alt Buy transaction to ensure operator and developer minimums do not apply consumer billing is not applied and developer content provider settlement is not processed or processed at zero value. The ADS can process the download request and generate transaction data at a zero value and pass the transaction data to the transaction processing billing and settlement modules as discussed above. However both the billing and settlement will be zero CLP 0 DAP 0 where the DAP is the payment to the developer content provider as the billing and settlement was performed at the Alt Buy zone via SVB. However the other information related to the transaction can be maintained on this download event in order to populate the operator and or developer reports. For example the information can be useful in tracking of the actual applications downloaded download dates and the like and can be associated with a SID and client device for marketing and customer service.

In another exemplary embodiment an Alt Buy purchase can be made from an operator kiosk for a one time or limited number of downloads for a special price e.g. a low cost or zero cost promotion . As discussed above an Alt Buy delivery table can be initially set to allow the client device associated with the SID to download the application at the special pricing e.g. CLP 0 . The special pricing handle and price level is propagated through the billing system as discussed in the foregoing. However in addition to the pricing item ID and other data in the Alt Buy delivery table a download indicator can be stored. Accordingly once the item is downloaded e.g. via ADS the item ID licensing is delivered to the SID and the status of that license is set to a state of delivered. A record is kept for each downloadable license available for the item ID. When the item ID licensing is delivered to the SID the status of that license is set to a state of delivered. Accordingly the download indicator delivery status indicates that the item has been delivered and can be removed from the Alt Buy delivery table or functionally removed via a logic check to the download indicator field . Likewise the item may not be visible from the SID directed My Apps group . Accordingly in either case if the item is downloaded again it may be offered at the standard price level defined in the main catalog . Therefore standard commercial item pricing can be intermingled with Alt Buy pricing in the wireless billing system to allow for additional flexibility in promoting and marketing applications content and or services.

In the Alt Buy scenario billing and distribution information can be generated in the Alt Buy zone e.g. at an operator kiosk . The billing and distribution information is communicated to the SVB and the group manager . At least a portion of the information metadata can be passed along and stored through the billing and download transactions to allow the system to relate the transactions to a single Alt Buy transaction ID. For example transaction metadata can be generated and carried with the SVB transaction. This metadata can be associated and stored with the item ID added to the SID directed group using for example group manager ADS or other server or logic. The metadata can be passed to the client device on a download request. Further the metadata can be included in a mediated usage record by the transaction manager TXN.

The Alt Buy transaction may generate multiple transaction data at the TXN e.g. first transaction data associated with the SVB billing request and second transaction data associated with the actual delivery e.g. push pull of the content to the client device. Accordingly a tracking ID can be used throughout the transaction processing so that the end to end tracking of the related transactions can be accomplished. Thus the tracking ID can be included with the Alt Buy billing request and first transaction data can be generated based on the billing request. The transaction data can be processed through the billing system e.g. TXN billing and settlement modules to generate a subscriber bill distribute payment to a provider of the item and or transmit reporting data based on the first transaction data. The first transaction data including the tracking ID can be stored in a database for later retrieval adjustments customer service and the like.

As discussed above the delivery of the content in an Alt Buy transaction can occur separately from the billing request or not at all e.g. if no content is delivered . Accordingly if content is to be delivered the content can be added from the main catalog to a SID directed group associated with a client device. The tracking ID can also be associated with the content in the SID directed group. When the content from the SID directed group is downloaded to the client device the tracking ID can also be passed to the client device. Likewise second transaction data can be generated on the download of the content including the tracking ID and processed through the remaining billing settlement and or reporting process as previously discussed. The second transaction data including the tracking ID can also be stored for later retrieval adjustments customer service and the like. Accordingly the Alt Buy transaction can be mapped and managed end to end i.e. from the Alt Buy sale to the application download and transaction billing and settlement . Being able to track these transactions end to end allows for increased business intelligence and application distribution penetration for Alt Buy sales channels. For example with use of the tracking ID the carrier can derive how many Alt Buy downloads were exercised against the applications content purchased. This is accomplished through the TXN mediationlconversion process for Alt Buy related downloads. TXN can use the local price handle to include conversion of the tracking ID in the mediated usage record. The tracking ID is used to correlate download events with SYB billing events. Because the tracking ID is included in the mediated usage record it can also be included in the billing report which can be integrated into carrier billing and data warehousing solutions.

In another embodiment of the invention the transaction may include multiple developers publishers vendors sources as illustrated in . For example in the Alt Buy scenario applications may be bundled and sold in a common transaction e.g. a retail game pack . As can be appreciated from the foregoing disclosure SVB is used for the billing transactions and group distribution is used to distribute the content billed for. Accordingly the SVB can be configured to specify payment settlements based on multiple third party source payees which may be the source content providers with a source description and a source fee associated with each source payee . The source payee s can get paid in addition to the developer and or content payee . In other words the content payee can be paid a content portion of the revenue share split which may be 100 of the content fee . The source payee s payment is processed out of the content fee i.e. typically source fees are not in addition to content fees . Further a source payee can be a developer a publisher or other content provider. For example in the application bundle context the source payees can be the individual developers that have developed the applications included in the bundle. The content fee can be the sum of the fees negotiated with each developer plus additional fees for the content payee e.g. bundler distributor . The multi party settlement e.g. payment distribution can be implemented as source payee extension settlement events. SVB can support payments to the known content payee and any of its authorized multi party source payees .

Accordingly for multi party settlements additional source payee information can be included in the billing request generated in the billing system or by the Alt Buy source. For example at least one source payee ID can be included. The source payee ID can represent a third party payee source payee that supplied at least part of the content. The third party payee is paid some portion of the content payee payment. A source description can be included that represents a short description of the content provided by the source payee . A source fee can be provided for each Source Payee ID that represents the third party payee portion of the content payee payment. This additional information can be included with the billing metadata that is passed with the transaction. Therefore the wireless subscriber billing system can be further leveraged to automatically bill and settled a single transaction including multiple third party content providers sources.

For example in processing multi party billing events in a wireless subscriber billing system a billing event is generated e.g. based on a request from trusted service including a content payee a content fee and at least one source payee and source fee associated with a transaction. The transaction is processed to distribute payment e.g. via settlement module to the content payee and the at least one source payee . The transaction data related to the payment of the content payee and the at least one source payee is stored e.g. at TXN or other database operably coupled to the billing system for later processing e.g. customer service billing adjustments sales marketing data mining and the like . As discussed above the content fee is greater than or equal to the sum of the source fees. Further in addition to storing the transaction data at least a portion of that data can be transmitted e.g. by settlement module as transaction reporting data to the content payee and or each source payee . For example a developer may wish to track application sales related to bundling using the transaction reporting data sent from the billing and distribution system. Also as discussed above the billing event will typically lead to a subscriber bill e.g. via billing module being generated based on a retail price e.g. CLP for the content delivery or scheduled to be delivered. The retail price is typically greater than or equal to the content fee.

Once the transaction data has been stored it can be used for a variety of purposes as discussed above. One such use is in customer relationship management CRM services. As illustrated in an operator receives billing information from billing module and settlement module e.g. invoice for content and source payees portion of content fee . Accordingly the operator will have this information available for the CRM purposes. Assume that a subscriber was not happy with an application bundle purchased through the operator s retail outlet. Since this type of transaction purchase of the application bundle typically has multiple developers of the applications included in the bundle multi party settlement would have been used in the settling of the bundle purchase transaction. Now assume that the CRM call center or manager determines that the price paid should be adjusted by twenty percent for the purchase price. A CRM interface to the billing system can access the stored transaction data and generate an adjustment transaction that contains a negative content fee and at least one negative source fee based on the stored transaction data. For partial adjustments the system will adjust all multi party settlement source payees proportionally.

Accordingly using the SID transaction tracking ID and the like the transaction data associated with the bundle purchase can be accessed. The negative content fee and at least one negative source fee can be based on an adjustment percentage and the stored transaction data related to the payment of the content payee and the at least one source payee . For example the CRM interface can receive an adjustment amount or percentage e.g. 20 from CRM . The CRM interface can access the original transaction data then generate a negative payment e.g. 20 of the content fee and source fee for the content payee and each source payee . The adjustment percentage is not limited but can for example range from one to one hundred percent i.e. a complete refund . Further a subscriber credit can also be generated based on the adjustment percentage and the list price for the content. Accordingly a twenty percent refund to the subscriber can result in each payee in the original purchase e.g. carrier operator content payee source payee s receiving a proportional twenty percent debit. This can be accomplished by CRM interface generating a negative billing event which will then be passed through the billing system and settled in a similar manner to the billing events discussed in the foregoing description. Thus the CRM interface of the multiparty settlement system allows for the automatic adjustment of any multiple third party transactions settled through the wireless subscriber billing system. Once again the adjustment transaction data can be stored and or used to generate reporting data to the operator content payee and or source payee s .

Although the foregoing example and related discusses multiparty settlement and CRM service in relation to an SVB purchase embodiments of the invention are not limited to this configuration. Any transaction e.g. an application download from the client device that included multiple parties that provide the application content and or service can be settled using the foregoing multiparty settlement system described in the foregoing section. Likewise any adjustments made via CRM can apply to any billing event regardless of the origin of the billing event.

In view of the foregoing disclosure those skilled in the art will recognize that embodiments of the invention include methods of performing the sequence of actions operations and or functions previously discussed. For example referring to a method according to an embodiment of the invention is illustrated. A billing request can be generated at a trusted service e.g. a retail store web site and the like block . The billing request including billing information is communicated to a wireless subscriber billing system block . As discussed above the communication can be any means of wire and or wireless communication to the remote trusted service e.g. Internet LAN WAN wireless connection and the like . A validation response to the billing request is generated in the wireless subscriber billing system block and communicated to the to the trusted service block . The trusted service may be authenticated prior to processing the billing request to ensure no fraudulent billing events are processed block . As discussed above the billing request can be digitally signed at the trusted service prior to transmitting the billing request as part of the authenticating the transmission of the billing request from the trusted service.

Additionally as discussed in the foregoing the billing information in the billing request can include a variety of information used for processing and tracking the transaction such as subscriber ID provider ID content payee a content item ID retail price and or billing description. However as will be appreciated by those skilled in the art not all of these fields are required nor is this a complete listing of the possible fields to be used. For example a bill to subscriber ID and a deliver to subscriber ID may be defined in the billing request in a gifting type scenario. Alternatively a subscriber ID may only represent a bill to or a deliver to ID depending on the type of transaction. For example SVB can be used to purchase items services external to the wireless subscriber system but use the wireless subscriber billing system to bill the wireless subscriber and settle the transaction. Alternatively in the Alt Buy examples discussed above an item e.g. application content service and the like available in the wireless subscriber system can be purchased external to the wireless subscriber system and the SID can be used for purposes of identifying the delivery to device subscriber e.g. an application will be available for download at a zero price level . Accordingly the information contained in the billing request or later associated with a billing event can vary based upon many factors such as the type of transaction and the specific preferences of the parties involved in the transaction e.g. operator provider s trusted service and the like .

Referring back to after the validation response is received it can be processed at the trusted service block . The processing of the validation response can also vary depending on the type of transaction. For example in the SVB transaction that is using the wireless subscriber billing system to bill the wireless subscriber for a purchase external to the wireless system the response will typically be an approval or denial and the purchased item e.g. service article etc. will not be provided unless an approval is received. However in the Alt Buy scenario since the item is purchased external to the wireless subscriber system and the item is typically only being delivered via the wireless subscriber system the validation response may just be an acknowledgement that the request is received. In either scenario additional requests may be generated if a validation response is not received and can be distinguished from separate transactions by associating a tracking ID in the billing request so that the duplicate transactions can be easily identified.

Referring to after the billing request is acknowledged in the Alt Buy scenario for example a purchased item e.g. application available from the wireless carrier e.g. in the main commercial catalog can be delivered to the device subscriber associated with the SID in the billing request. For example referring to an item associated with the billing request can be added from a main catalog to a group directed to a subscriber ID SID directed group associated with the billing request block . To track delivery of an item information in a delivery table can be associated with the item in the SID directed group block . The item can then be delivered block . For example the item can be downloaded from or pushed to a client device associated with the SID from the SID directed group. However delivery of the item can take many forms such as the activation of an additional service streaming of media and is not limited to a download to the client device.

Transaction data can be generated upon the download of the item using the information in delivery table block and a billing event can be generated based on the transaction data block . If the item was paid for in the Alt Buy scenario the information in the delivery table can include a zero value retail price for the item and likewise the transaction data and billing event each can include a zero value retail price for the item. Accordingly the item can be delivered and the delivery tracked and reported through the billing system without generating a bill to the subscriber. Alternatively the value could be greater than zero but less than the full retail price in the main catalog and the discounted price can be processed through the billing system and a subscriber billed a discounted amount.

Referring to as mentioned above an alternative embodiment can include a tracking ID with the billing request block . First transaction data including the tracking ID can be generated based on the billing request and the first transaction data can be processed e.g. subscriber billed providers paid and or reports generated block . The tracking ID can be stored with the transaction data block for later retrieval and usage with other transactions. An item that is the subject of the billing request can be added from the main catalog to a subscriber ID directed SID directed group associated with a SID client device and the tracking ID can be associated to the item in the SID directed group block . The item and associated tracking ID can be delivered from the SID directed group block . For example the item and metadata including the tracking ID can be downloaded to a client device. Second transaction data including the tracking ID can be generated and processed upon the delivery of the item block . The second transaction data can be processed through the billing system in a similar manner as the first transaction data and the tracking ID can be used to associate both transactions.

Accordingly a first transaction including a tracking ID based on a SVB generated billing event can cause a billing and settlement of the transaction such as the external purchase of an application in an Alt Buy scenario. The transaction and tracking ID metadata can be stored in the billing system. When the application is actually downloaded to a client device the tracking ID can be passed to the client device and a second transaction can be generated based on the download. The second transaction can include a special pricing handle from the delivery table so the subscriber is not billed on the download as discussed above. However the event can be processed through the billing system so that delivery of the item can be tracked and reported to the carrier and provider s of the item e.g. application . Once again the tracking ID will be included with the second transaction data and can be stored in the billing system for later retrieval reporting and the like. Accordingly purchases billing requests generated external to the wireless subscriber billing system can be tracked end to end from billing request through settlement and delivery of the item.

Another embodiment as illustrated in can include a method of processing multi party billing events in a wireless subscriber billing system. A billing event is generated that includes a provider fee and payee and at least one source fee and payee associated with a transaction block . For example a publisher could provide an item that includes a combination of applications and content e.g. music video and the like for download by a wireless subscriber. The billing event can be generated when the item is downloaded to the client device as discussed above. Metadata associated with the item can include the information to process the transaction through the wireless subscriber billing system. Specifically the information can include provider payee e.g. publisher ID and related information and fee e.g. the amount the publisher is paid for the item. Likewise information on each source payee e.g. developer ID content provider ID and fee for each source e.g. the amount the developer is paid for the application and the content provider is paid for the content can also be associated with the item. Accordingly the multiparty transaction can be billed and settled automatically by the billing system e.g. the transaction is processed to distribute payment to the provider payee and each source payee block .

The transaction data can be stored for further processing data mining and CRM services block . For CRM adjustment purposes the stored transaction data can be accessed block . An adjustment transaction can be generated that contains a negative provider fee and at least one negative source fee based on the stored transaction data block . The adjustment transaction can be processed to debit the provider payee and the at least one source payee based on the negative provider fee and the at least one negative source fee block . The adjustment transaction can be proportional for each of the parties that derived revenue from the initial multi party transaction. Likewise a subscriber credit can be generated based on the adjustment proportion and the retail price for the item block . For example assume an item is purchased at a given retail price. The operator provider and source each may derive revenue off of the retail price at a pre established ratio e.g. as defined by respective fees associated with the item . The wireless subscriber billing system can automatically bill the subscriber and pay the respective parties based upon the fees associated with the item and this information can be stored for later access as previously discussed. Upon a determination by a CRM representative that a subscriber should be credited or refunded a portion of the purchase the adjustment transaction can be processed as a negative billing event. Thus the wireless subscriber billing system can access the stored transaction data and debit each party e.g. operator provider and source in proportion to the respective fees paid from the original transaction. Accordingly the adjustments can automatically propagate through the billing system and be apportioned to all parties which can significantly reduce the manual effort with settling and CRM services.

In further embodiments those skilled in the art will appreciate that the foregoing methods can be implemented by the execution of a program embodied on a computer readable medium such as the memory of a computer platform. The instructions can reside in various types of signal bearing or data storage primary secondary or tertiary media. The media may comprise for example RAM accessible by or residing within the client device and or server. Whether contained in RAM a diskette or other secondary storage media the instructions may be stored on a variety of machine readable data storage media such as DASD storage e.g. a conventional hard drive or a RAID array magnetic tape electronic read only memory e.g. ROM or EEPROM flash memory cards an optical storage device e.g. CD ROM WORM DVD digital optical tape paper punch cards or other suitable data storage media.

While the foregoing disclosure shows illustrative embodiments of the invention it should be noted that various changes and modifications could be made herein without departing from the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. The functions steps and or actions of the method claims in accordance with the embodiments of the invention described herein need not be performed in any particular order. Furthermore although elements of the invention may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated.

