---

title: High temperature flow-through device for rapid solubilization and analysis
abstract: Devices and methods for thermally lysing of biological material, for example vegetative bacterial cells and bacterial spores, are provided. Hot solution methods for solubilizing bacterial spores are described. Systems for direct analysis are disclosed including thermal lysers coupled to sample preparation stations. Integrated systems capable of performing sample lysis, labeling and protein fingerprint analysis of biological material, for example, vegetative bacterial cells, bacterial spores and viruses are provided.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07592139&OS=07592139&RS=07592139
owner: Sandia National Laboratories
number: 07592139
owner_city: Liverpool
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050216
---
This application claims benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 612 969 filed on Sep. 24 2004 the entirety of which is incorporated by reference herein.

This invention was made with Government support under Government Contract No. DE AC04 94AL85000 awarded by the U.S. Department of Energy to Sandia Corporation. The Government has certain rights in the invention including a paid up license and the right in limited circumstances to require the owner of any patent issuing in this invention to license others on reasonable terms.

The present invention is related to methods and devices for lysing cells. The present invention is also related to methods and devices for analyzing lysed cells.

Field portable analysis of biological agents depends on the ability to prepare unknown samples for analysis. A major component of sample preparation is lysing and solubilizing biological agents. Sample preparation is complicated by the wide variability in the stability of biological agents to the effects of lysis and solubilization. A variety of techniques have been developed for lysing viruses and bacterial agents examples of which include chemical and detergent lysis enzyme treatment sonication heating and glass bead milling. Bacterial spores for example are extremely resistant to lysis and solubilization often requiring a combination of the aforementioned techniques. However many of these lysis techniques complicate analysis due to the addition of chemical additives or proteins to the samples which interfere with the amplification labeling or analytical analysis.

Several sample processing techniques have been developed for the use and integration of microfluidic devices. These techniques and microfluidic devices include integrated detergent mediated lysis laser mediated cell lysing and electric field mediated lysis. In addition highly integrated systems have been developed that allow for the lysis concentration purification and analysis of DNA from . Many of these studies perform sample processing on relatively labile eukaryotic cell types and bacteria. Few studies have been directed to rapidly lysing and analyzing bacterial spores for microfluidic analysis. Belgrader et al. A minisonicator to rapidly disrupt bacterial spores for DNA analysis 71 19 1999 4232 6 previously demonstrated that sonication of spores in the presence of silica beads was an effective technique for lysis prior to polymerase chain reaction PCR analysis of spore DNA. Taylor et al. Lysing bacterial spores by sonication through a flexible interface in a microfluidic system 73 3 2001 492 6 followed up these studies by demonstrating real time PCR and protein signature analysis using a similar device.

Sample preparation is complicated by the wide variability in the stability of biological agents to the effects of lysis and solubilization. Numerous techniques have been developed for lysing spores viruses and cells. Common examples include enzyme digestion chemical reducing agents sonication heating and glass bead milling. Bacterial spores are extremely resistant to lysing and require harsh conditions to solubilize. A common protocol is to use a reducing agent such as TCEP tris 2 carboxyethyl phosphine or DTT dithiothreitol . In order to further analyze the solubilized proteins the reducing agent must be removed a time consuming and labor intensive step.

Thus there is a continuing need to develop sample processing techniques useful for a variety of analytical techniques including protein fingerprinting and PCR. There is also a need to develop sample processing techniques useful for immunological based reagent detection and other electrophoretic analysis. In addition there is a need to develop protocols to process extremely robust sample agents such as bacterial spores for direct integrated analysis using microfluidic devices for protein fingerprinting. There is also a need to develop devices that rapidly lyse bacterial spores for use in DNA analysis using such as PCR using microfluidic devices and chips.

The present invention provides processes that rapidly solubilize a wide variety of biological agents. These processes include a thermal solubilization protocol for bacterial spores using ethylene glycol water or any combination thereof as a carrier solvent. The present invention also provides a flow through device hereinafter lyser having the capability of performing flow through high temperature lysis of biological materials such as cells from multicellular organisms as well as unicellular organisms e.g. bacteria bacterial spores and viruses . Lysers can be integrated with a sample preparation station for fluorescent dye labeling and sample buffer mixing with lysates of biological materials. Using these methods and devices various biological agents such as viruses vegetative cells and spores e.g. and spores as well as bacteriophage viruses can be solubilized and labeled to form elutants. This device can be coupled to a hand portable analysis platform for analysis and identification. The elutants generated from this process can be used for a variety of both protein and DNA analysis methods. The methods and devices of the present invention enable among other things rapid preparation of samples of viruses bacteria and bacterial spores for protein fingerprint analysis using a miniaturized capillary electrophoresis CE platform.

The present invention also provides for devices for lysing biological material comprising an inner conduit for transporting the biological material the inner conduit having an entrance and an exit and a heater situated exterior to the inner conduit capable of heating the biological material to at least about 125 C.

The present invention also provides for systems for delivering biological material to an analytical device comprising a biological material source a thermal lyser comprising an entrance and an exit the entrance being in fluid communication with the biological material source a dye source in fluid communication with the exit of the thermal lyser a buffer source in fluid communication with the exit of the thermal lyser and an exit capable of being in fluid communication with the analytical device.

The present invention also provides for micro Total Analysis Systems TAS systems comprising an analytical device and a system for delivering biological material to an analytical device comprising a biological material source a thermal lyser comprising an entrance and an exit the entrance being in fluid communication with the biological material source a dye source in fluid communication with the exit of the thermal lyser a buffer source in fluid communication with the exit of the thermal lyser and an exit capable of being in fluid communication with the analytical device.

The present invention also provides for methods of preparing a biological sample for analysis comprising flowing a biological sample fluid comprising biological material and a solvent through a conduit heating the biological sample fluid as it flows through said conduit to greater than 100 C. at a pressure greater than 1 atmosphere to lyse at least a portion of the biological material and labeling at least a portion of the lysed biological material with a dye.

The present invention also provides for methods of preparing a biological sample for analysis comprising flowing a biological sample fluid comprising biological material and a solvent heating the biological sample fluid as it flows to a temperature greater than about 100 C. and a pressure greater than about 1 atmosphere.

The present invention also provides for methods of analyzing a biological sample comprising flowing a biological sample fluid comprising a biological material and an solvent heating the biological sample fluid to at least 100 C. as it flows lysing at least a portion of the biological material to release biomolecules labeling at least a portion of the biomolecules with a rapid reacting dye and measuring the molecular distribution of the labeled biomolecules.

Other aspects of the present invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art in view of the detailed description and drawings of the invention as provided herein.

As used herein the term to lyse means to break open cells cellular components organelles or any combination thereof to release biological molecules.

As used herein the term lysate refers to the products of lysing biological material for example biological molecules.

As used herein the term microchannel refers to conduits for example channels having a dimension smaller than about 1000 microns.

As used herein the term biological material refers to matter originating in single cell and multicellular organisms.

As used herein the term fluid state refers to the physical state of matter that is capable of freely flowing such as a liquid gas or supercritical fluid.

As used herein the term analysis refers to a process for determining the identity or nature of molecular components or of an organism.

As used herein the term high concentration refers to a composition comprising more 30 weight percent of a specified component based on weight of the composition.

As used herein the term thick film describes a film that is applied by a method of printing which historically has included inter alia screen printing stenciling and direct writing. Modern methods of printing films are also encompassed by this term the methods including inter alia ink jet printing photolithography micro and nano imprint lithography chemical vapor deposition and ion beam lithography. Accordingly the term thick film is not used herein to restrict the dimensions of a film to any particular thickness.

The devices of the present invention for lysing biological material lysing device include an inner conduit for transporting biological material the inner conduit having an entrance and an exit and a heater disposed exterior to the inner conduit for heating the biological material as it is transported through the inner conduit. Suitable inner conduits can have a wide variety of sizes and shapes. For example the conduits can have lengths ranging from as short as 0.1 cm to as long as about 50 cm. Typically the conduits have a length in the range of from about 1 cm to about 20 cm and preferably the conduit lengths are in the range of from about 5 cm to about 15 cm in length. Suitable conduits can also have a variety of cross sectional areas and shapes. For example suitable cross sectional areas of the inner conduits can include circles semicircles squares rectangles triangles as well as regular and irregular polygons. Circles are suitably used such as provided by capillary tubes. Suitable cross sectional areas of the inner conduits can range from as low as 10 microns to as high as 1000 microns typically in the range of from about 50 microns to about 500 microns and preferably in the range of from about 100 microns to about 250 microns. Suitable inner conduits having circular cross sectional areas suitably have diameters from as low as about 100 microns up to about 2000 microns typically in the range of from about 250 microns to about 1000 microns and preferably in the range of from about 500 microns to about 750 microns. Suitable inner conduits can be made of almost any material that is capable of transporting biological material. Conduits are suitably prepared using capillary tubes microfluidic devices and laminated layered materials having a microchannel in an interior layer bounded by one or more additional layers. Examples of suitable inner conduit materials include plastics glasses metals ceramics and combinations thereof. Suitable inner conduit materials are typically capable of transporting aqueous and organic solvents at temperatures up to at least about 70 C. typically at least about 250 C. and preferably up to at least about 400 C. such a glass ceramic and stainless steel. Other suitable materials capable of transporting aqueous and organic solvents at elevated temperatures include engineering plastics for example PEEK.

In certain embodiments a thermal lyser can be formed using one or more glass layers on a microfluidic chip. Multiple microfluidic processes i.e. lysing clean up and analysis can be operated on a single microfluidic chip. In these embodiments regions on the microfluidic chips for lysing are thermally separated e.g. insulated from the other microfluidic processes on the chip.

Examples of biological matter that can be lysed and analyzed using the devices systems and methods of the present invention include organs tissues cells spores organelles molecular aggregates such as hybridized nucleic acids and aggregated proteins single molecules as well as portions thereof and combinations thereof. For example prokaryotic cells eukaryotic cells and any combination thereof can be included in the biological material such as cells from microorganisms animals and plants. In particular the biological matter includes bacterial cells bacterial spores viruses prions eukaryotic cells blood cells tissue white cells bone marrow bone or any combination thereof. Suitable biological materials that can be transported in the inner conduit are provided in a fluid state. Biological materials can be suitably provided in a variety of fluid states such as by dispersing in a suitable solvent. Suitable methods of dispersing biological materials include water ethylene glycol high boiling point solvents i.e. PEG PEO and any combination thereof. In certain preferred embodiments biological materials are suitably dispersed using pressurized water above about 100 C. more suitably above about 125 C. even more suitably above about 150 C. further suitably above about 175 C. and also above about 200 C. Elevated pressures are suitably used to increase the boiling point of the solvent such as water. In certain embodiments the lysing temperatures are suitably below the boiling point of the solution at the operating pressure. In other embodiments the lysing temperatures are slightly above the boiling point of the solution at the operating pressure. Without being bound to a particular theory of operation a slight amount of boiling may assist disruption of biological materials such as tough spore coats. Compositions of water and water soluble high boiling point organic solvents for example water and ethylene glycol are also suitable at elevated temperatures and pressures. Almost any type of solvent can be used for dispersing the biological material. Suitable solvents for dispersing biological material include water and ethylene glycol. In addition detergents such as Triton X 100 sodium lauryl sulfate NP 40 CHAPS CHES buffering reagents such as boric acid sodium phosphate TRIS or any other buffer used to control pH of lysis solutions and any combinations thereof can be added to the solvent. Preferred solvent components for dispersing biological material include water polyethylene oxide PEO polyethylene glycol PEG ethylene glycol propylene glycol or any combination thereof.

Suitable inner conduits will have at least one entrance for receiving the dispersed biological material for delivering lysed biological material. The entrance will typically be constructed to permit fluidic attachment to a suitable conduit capable of providing a source of biological material. For example a suitable conduit can be a capillary tube for delivering the biological material from a sample syringe or vial to the entrance of the lysing device. Conduits can be fluidically coupled to the entrance of the lysing device by using a suitable coupler such as Cap Tite fittings Sandia National Laboratories Upchurch fittings Upchurch Scientific epoxy or any combination thereof.

Lysing of the biological material typically takes place within the inner conduit. Suitable inner conduits will have at least one exit for delivering the lysed biological material for delivering lysed biological material for further processing. Further processing can include delivery directly to a suitable analytical device or into a fluidic junction where subsequent operations are performed on the biological material. Examples of a suitable fluidic junction includes a mixing tee a valve a cross or fitting with a plurality of connections at a single point mixing container injection assembly injection valve injection loop or any combination thereof. Examples of further processing operations include contacting the lysed biological material with a dye a buffer DNA or protein standards fluorescent markers enzymes for analyte protein digestion or enzymes for DNA processing such as Taq polymerase or restriction digestion in addition to reducing agents such as tris 2 carboxyethyl phosphine TCEP or mercaptoethanol BME dithiotheritol DTT tris 2 cyanoethyl phosphine or any combination thereof. The exit of the inner conduit may also be fluidically coupled in parallel or in series with a plurality of subsequent processing steps. Preferably the exit is fluidically coupled to a dye source for dying lysed biological molecules and a buffer source for preparing the sample for analysis or post processing. The exit may also be fluidically coupled to pressure sensors flow sensors pressure regulators flow restriction devices or any combination thereof.

A heater is disposed exterior to the inner conduit for heating the biological material as it is transported through the inner conduit. Suitable heaters include a heating coil such as a metal wire wrapped around the inner conduit for resistively or inductively heating the biological material within the inner conduit. Suitable heaters also include metal heating traces disposed exterior to inner conduits formed using layered substrates. For example a metal heating trace can be formed on a substrate to generate heat when a current is applied. This heating trace can be positioned in a layered system exterior to an inner conduit formed in an adjoining or neighboring substrate. Other suitable types of heaters and methods for heating the biological material within the inner conduit include laser induced heating heated air heated block chemical heating vibration or any combination thereof. In certain embodiments the heater is capable of heating the biological material to a temperature of at least about 195 C. In certain of these embodiments a suitable heater includes an RF induction heater or a resistive heater such as coiled metal wire. In one embodiment a coiled metal wire is wrapped around a glass capillary tube that is used as the inner conduit. In certain embodiments the heater is exterior to the inner conduit and in certain cross sections when compared to the total thickness the heater can be located close to the inner conduit for example a distance of about 0.002 inches about 50 microns when a thin substrate is used. In other embodiments the distance between the inner conduit and heater can even be less than 50 microns for example 40 microns or 20 microns 10 microns 5 microns or even as low as about 1 micron if the heater is printed on the side facing the inner conduit but protected by another thin layer that has a thickness of less than 50 microns for example 40 microns or 20 microns 10 microns 5 microns or even as low as about 1 micron. In other embodiments the heater is adjacent to or inside the lumen of the inner conduit.

In certain embodiments the lysing devices of the present invention further include an optional outer conduit that surrounds the inner conduit. As with the inner conduits the optional outer conduits may include any cross sectional area cross sectional shape or length. The length of the optional outer conduit can be any length but when present it is typically about the same length or slightly shorter as that of the inner conduit. The optional outer conduit can be used for supplying a variety of functions for example providing structural rigidity to the lysing device providing thermal insulation providing electrical insulation conducting the heat to the inner conduit this is done so that the inner conduit can be easily replaced and reduce carry over from sample to sample or any combination thereof. In certain embodiments the optional outer conduit is a coil insulator such as a primary insulator for thermally insulating the heater electrically insulating the heater or both. In certain embodiments in which the optional outer conduit insulates the heater the heater is typically positioned between the optional outer conduit and the inner conduit. In the case of insulation there would be three conduits the inner for transporting the fluidic sample the middle for giving rigidity and conducting heat and the outer for insulation and electrical isolation. In certain embodiments a suitable insulator in an outer conduit may include an open space for example an air gap. Open spaces may be added to the insulators described herein. Open spaces are particularly useful for insulating and cooling the fluid within the inner conduit.

In certain embodiments the lysing device may further include one or more additional secondary insulators. In these embodiments secondary insulators can surround the heater for example by residing exterior to the optional outer conduit or by residing between the optional outer conduit and the heater. Typical secondary insulators provide further thermal insulation of the lysing device. Examples of suitable secondary insulation materials include glass plastic fiberglass low heat conductive ceramic foam and any combination thereof.

The present invention also provides systems for delivering biological material to an analytical device. Suitable systems include a biological material source for providing biological material to a thermal lyser. Suitable biological material sources include sample syringes and vials. Suitable biological material sources typically include a delivery device and a pumping mechanism or source pump for transporting biological material into a thermal lyser. Suitable delivery devices pumping mechanisms and source pumps are typically capable of delivering biological material into the thermal lyser at flow rates as low as 0.01 l min up to flow rates as high as 1 ml min and preferably at flow rates from about 1 min up to about 60 l min. Suitable delivery devices pumping mechanisms and source pumps include a syringe pump a stepper motor gravity feed air pressure water pressure electrokinetic EK pumps peristaltic pumps or any combination thereof.

Suitable thermal lysers for use in the systems of the present invention include any of the thermal lysers described herein as well other thermal lysers that include an entrance for receiving a biological material the entrance being in fluid communication with the biological material source and an exit for delivering lysed biological material to an analytical device of subsequent processing steps. In certain embodiments the systems of the present invention also include a dye source in fluid communication with the exit of the thermal lyser a buffer source in fluid communication with the exit of the thermal lyser and a delivery conduit for delivering dyed lysed biological material to an analytical device. Suitable dyes include a dye capable of binding to at least a portion of the lysed biological material exiting the exit of the lysing device. Examples of suitable dyes include flourescamine naphthalene 2 3 dicarboxaldehyde NDA o phthaldialdehyde OPA 3 4 carboxybenzoyl quinoline 2 carboxaldehyde CBQCA 3 2 furoyl quinoline 2 carboxaldehyde FQ 4 amino 4 benzamidostilbene 2 2 disulfonic acid disodium salt MBDS alexa fluor or any combination thereof. Many dyes are commercially available from Molecular Probes Inc. Eugene Oreg. Suitable dye sources include containers vials syringes flasks and the like for containing a suitable dye. A pumping device e.g. a pump such as a syringe pump is typically provide to actuate flow of one or more of the post processing fluids. In addition to dyes and buffers other examples of post processing fluids include secondary standards pH adjustment addition of detergent SDS chelators other aqueous solvents acids bases photoactive solutions such as scintillation cocktail or any combination thereof. Typically at least one of the biological material source the fluorescent dye source and the buffer source are transported using a pumping device.

In certain embodiments of the system of the present invention the delivery conduit is capable of being in fluid communication with an analytical device. Suitable delivery conduits can include fittings or connections for fluidic coupling to a suitable analytical device. For example delivery conduits are typically connected to an analytical device using commercially available Cap Tite fittings Upchurch fittings or any combination thereof.

Any of a variety of analytical devices can be connected to the systems of the present invention for delivering lysed biological materials. Suitable analytical systems include microchemical analytical systems mass spectrometers chromatographs PCR slab gel 1 D 2 D electrophoresis CE separations electrochemical cells fluorescence detectors photo diode arrays Rad nuc detection and any combinations thereof. Preferably the systems are fluidically coupled to a microchemical analytical device such as any one of the ChemLab microanalytical systems being developed by Sandia National Laboratories. Other suitable microanalytical devices that are commercially available or otherwise available in the art include microbore HPLC HANNA Cepheid and RAPID Idaho technologies .

The present invention also provides micro Total Analysis Systems TAS systems in which lysed biological materials are provide by lysing systems that fluidically couple to microchemical analytical devices. In these embodiments various TAS systems can be coupled directly to the lysing systems of the present invention. Suitable microchemical analytical devices are capable of analyzing biological materials using any of a variety of methods for example mass spectrometry hybridization microarrays UV VIS spectrometry chromatography electrophoresis fluorescence detection electrochemical cell detection rad nuc detection and any combination thereof.

The present invention also provides methods of preparing biological samples for analysis. These methods include the steps of flowing a biological sample fluid comprising biological material and an organic or aqueous solvent heating the biological sample fluid as it flows and labeling at least a portion of the biological material with a dye. Any of the above mentioned biological materials can be analyzed according to these methods. As described further in the examples below these methods are particularly suited for preparing bacterial cells bacterial spores viruses or any combination thereof for analysis.

In certain embodiments the analysis identifies patterns or signatures for identifying a biological or chemical entity. Suitable examples of this analysis are described in U.S. Ser. No. 10 795 549 filed Mar. 8 2004 Viral Identification by Generation and Detection of Protein Signatures the portion of which pertaining to viral signature analysis is incorporated by reference herein. In other embodiments the analysis can use a single entity such as a PCR primer that discriminates between close isoforms of pathogenic bacteria and a biologically nearest neighbor. In these embodiments single or multiple primers can be used to identify a biological agent in question. Alternatively the variety of either specific could be used which are designed to identify specific regions in the agents chromosomal DNA.

Suitable biological sample fluids include a biological material in an organic or aqueous solvent. Almost any composition of biological material and organic solvent can be used to form a suitable biological sample fluid. The amount of biological material in the biological sample fluid can be as low as one spore in a fluid sample having a volume of from about 10 l to 1 ml. The weight percent of biological material in the biological sample fluid can be as high as 50 percent. Typically the weight percent of the biological material is in the range of from about 0.00000001 percent up to about 10 percent and preferably in the range of from about 0.00001 percent up to about 1 percent. Although a variety of additional components may be included in the biological sample fluid for example water salts buffers and contaminants in certain preferred embodiments the biological sample fluid consists essentially of biological material and a suitable organic solvent. In other embodiments the biological sample fluid consists essentially of biological material buffer and water. In certain preferred embodiments the biological sample fluid contains a high concentration of organic solvent. In other embodiments the biological sample contains a high concentration of water.

Organic solvents that are suitably used in certain embodiments of the present invention are typically characterized as being at least partially water soluble. As used herein the term at least partially water soluble means that a composition of a suitable organic solvent and water will exist thermodynamically in a single fluid phase for compositions typically having at least about 1 percent by weight water more typically at least about 2 percent by weight water further typically at least about 5 percent by weight water and even further typically at least about 10 percent water. In certain embodiments the organic solvent is completely water soluble such that a single fluid phase is provide for any combination of organic solvent and water at STP.

In certain embodiments suitable organic solvents include functional groups capable of hydrogen bonding. Examples of functional groups capable of hydrogen bonding include hydroxyl groups ester groups carboxylic acid groups amine groups thiol groups and any combination thereof. Groups capable of hydrogen bonding typically impart at least partial water solubility to an otherwise water immiscible organic solvent. Examples of classes of suitable organic solvents include alcohols alkane diols polyols esters diesters and any combination thereof. Additional functional groups known in the solvent art can also be included. Among the alkane glycols in certain embodiments alkane diols such as ethylene glycol are preferably used. Although a suitable organic solvent composition can include ethylene glycol and any other component the organic solvent in certain preferred embodiments consists essentially of ethylene glycol. Other organic solvents that are suitably used include aniline cyclohexanone decahydronaphthalene decalin dicyclopentadiene cyclopentadiene dimer diethylene glycoldibutyl ether dimethyl sulfoxide glycerol formamide nitrobenzene tetrahydronaphthalene tetralin and any combination thereof. Suitable organic solvents can have a wide range of normal boiling points and typically have a normal boiling point greater than about 25 C. more typically greater than about 100 C. even more typically greater than about 200 C. and further typically greater than about 300 C. In certain preferred embodiments the normal boiling point of the organic solvent is in the range of from about 100 C. up to about 400 C.

In various method embodiments of the present invention the biological sample fluid is heated as it flows. The biological sample fluid can be heated to almost any temperature typically to at least about 50 C. more typically to at least about 75 C. even more typically to at least about 100 C. even more typically to at least about 125 C. further typically to at least about 150 C. to at least about 175 C. and in certain embodiments up to about 200 C. and even higher. These temperatures will depend in part on the boiling point of the particular solvent and the system pressure. The boiling point of the solvent will typically increase with pressure. Superatmospheric pressures i.e. above 1 atm organic solvents or both can be used in various embodiments for achieving operating temperatures above 100 C. In related embodiments a pressure restriction is provided in fluidic communication with the inner conduit to reduce mass fluid movements that can occur at boiling temperatures. Accordingly a suitable solvent and system pressure is selected that facilitates post processing as well as increases the boiling point of the sample fluid.

Various methods can be used for heating the biological sample fluid as it flows. Examples of heating methods include flowing the sample fluid through a suitable fluid flow device such as a conduit or channel while applying energy to the sample fluid. Other suitable methods include flowing the sample fluid over a surface or through on open space while applying energy to the sample fluid. Examples of energy that can be applied to the sample fluid include radiant energy thermal conductive energy thermal convective energy magnetic inductive energy radio frequency energy e.g. microwave energy or laser chemical energy e.g. chemical reactions nuclear energy e.g. fission or fusion processes and any combinations thereof. Suitable conduits include capillaries tubes pipes and enclosed channels and trenches such as provided in microfluidics devices or layered constructions. The sample fluid can also flow over various types of surfaces while heating. In certain preferred embodiments the biological sample fluid is heated using any one of the thermal lysing devices described herein.

In certain preferred embodiments the biological sample fluid is resistively heated by flowing the fluid through a region that is heated using electrical current flowing through a conductive material having a finite resistance. The heat is typically applied to the sample fluid as it flows for example current to resistance heaters that generates heat can be directed to pass through a suitable fluid flow device. A preferred method of heating includes flowing the biological sample fluid through a capillary that is surrounded by a wire coil that has an electric current in the range of from as low as about 0.001 amps up to as high as about 100 amps typically in the range of from about 0.1 amps up to about 10 amps and preferably in the range of from about 0.5 amps up to about 2 amps.

In certain embodiments of the method of the present invention at least a portion of the biological material is lysed to form a lysate. Without being bound by any particular theory of operation the biological material in the biological sample fluid lyses under physico chemical forces created by the combination of the solvent environment cavitation bubble formation heat or any combination thereof. Biological molecules that are released upon lysing include nucleic acids carbohydrates amino acids proteins peptides DNA RNA or any combination thereof. Biological material typically includes water molecules which typically become incorporated in the biological sample fluid. Although most lysates will be readily soluble in the biological sample fluid certain lysate portions such as hydrophobic components may use additional steps to solubilize at least a portion of the lysate. Examples of additional steps for ensuring solubilization of the lysates include a suitable surfactant such as SDS which is typically included in the buffer or any combination thereof. Lysate solubilization may also assisted using vigorous mixing shear heating in surfactant cavitation bead beating boiling degassing or any combination thereof.

In certain embodiments the methods of the present invention also include the step of labeling at least a portion of the biological material with a dye as it flows. Suitable dyes are fluorescent and can be covalently attached to at least one biological molecule in the portion of the biological material. Many suitable dyes are commercially available and include Alexa Fluor bimanes succinimidyl esters maleimides succinimidyl 3 2 pyridyldithio propionate e.g. for thiol derivatization of an amine Cisplatin based DNA dyes Kreatech iodoacetamides methyl nromides hydrazines hydroxylamine dichlorotriazines and any combinations thereof. Preferred dyes include a rapid reacting dye which has the following characteristics fluorogenic uncharged low MW. Preferred dyes include fluorescamine nano orange monobromobimane monochlorobimane naphthalene 2 3 dicarboxaldehyde NDA dialdehydes o phthaldialdehyde and any combinations thereof. Labeling of at least a portion of the biological material with a suitable dye is typically carried out by contacting a biological sample fluid comprising lysed biological material with a dye under conditions to give rise to covalent bonding of the dye to a biological molecule. Suitable labeling conditions include controlled pH 8.5 9.5 for fluorescamine . The dye and the biological molecules can be contacted by a variety of methods. For example dyes and biological molecules residing in separate flow devices can be combined or mixed together into a common flow device.

In the methods of the present invention the biological sample fluid can flow over almost any distance with a combination of any of the above mentioned heating methods to provide lysate. In certain embodiments the biological sample typically flows a distance while it is heated of less than about 100 cm more typically less than about 60 cm even more typically less than about 30 cm further typically less than about 20 cm and even more typically less than about 10 cm. A wide variety of flow geometries flow rates and temperatures can also be used to provide lysing conditions for production of lysate. Accordingly a wide variety of residence times during which the biological sample fluid is subjected to the lysing conditions can be achieved. Residence times can be as low as about 1 second to as high as about 1800 seconds typical residence times range from about 10 seconds to about 600 seconds and preferred residence times range from about 20 seconds to about 90 seconds. In various embodiments the residence time of the biological material during heating is at least about 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 200 250 or even 300 seconds. Likewise in various embodiments the residence time of the biological material during heating is no more than about 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 200 250 or even 300 seconds. In certain preferred embodiments the biological material is quickly heated in ethylene glycol for less than about 90 seconds cooled an then labeled with a rapid reacting dye such as fluorescamine and diluted with an aqueous buffer.

In the methods of preparing biological samples for analysis certain embodiments of the present invention may include one or more additional processing steps. Examples of additional processing steps include polymerase chain reaction PCR solid phase extraction SPE dielectrophoresis filtration restriction digestion of DNA for fragment analysis trypsin digestion of proteins for mass spectrometry and any combination thereof. In embodiments that include PCR the concentration of organic solvent present during the PCR step is typically less than about 3 percent preferably less than about 2.8 percent based on volume. PCR can be carried out by performing degenerate PCR on the lysate generated from the ultra high temperature solubilization process. PCR analysis can be performed using a commercially available PCR kit such as the Ready To Go RAPD analysis kit from Amersham Biosciences. Examples of PCR analysis conditions are as follows each 25 ul reaction includes buffer 50 mM KCl 1.5 mM MgCland 10 mM Tris HCl pH 9.0 200 M of each dNTP dATP dCTP dGTP dTTP and 1 to 1.5 units of Taq DNA Polymerase. A first reaction is carried out using a lysate diluted 1 16 in buffer. PCR is performed on this sample along with a series of further dilutions 1 1.3 1 2 1 4 and 1 20 . Two sets of PCR are carried out one using primer 5 d GTTTCGCTCC 3 SEQ. ID N0.1 and the other using primer 5 d AAGAGCCCGT 3 SEQ. ID NO. 2 . Products are visualized on a 2 agarose E Gel from Invitrogen. A second reaction is carried out on less concentrated dilutions of spores which are prepared prior to the sample lysing process. Low spore concentrated lysates are then prepared for analysis using the using the same post lysis dilution step used in the prior reactions. Spore dilutions include 1 2 1 20 1 200 and 1 2000. Dilutions of each lysate are used in the PCR dilutions include 1 1.3 1 2 1 4 and 1 20 . Primer 2 is chosen for this analysis. Products can also be visualized on a 2 agarose E Gel from Invitrogen.

PCR processes can be incorporated for example by adding target specific primers to a solution that contains a lysate generated from a super heated solubilization protocol e.g. heating to a temperature above the normal boiling point of the solvent and under pressure to prevent boiling . For example a solution is prepared containing water 10 amplification buffer with 15 mM MgClwhich includes 10 mM dNTP 50 M oligonucleotide primer 1 50 M oligonucleotide primer 2 5 unit l Taq Polymerase. A template DNA Lysate 1 g genomic DNA 0.1 1 ng plasmid DNA in 10 l is added to this solution. Reactants can be added in the following order for each reaction on ice in a 0.2 or 0.5 ml tube 10 PCR buffer 10 l Primer 1 1 l Primer 2 1 l dNTP 2 l template DNA and water 85.5 l Taq Polymerase 0.5 l. A control reaction is prepared with no template DNA and an additional 10 l of sterile water. Sample vials or tubes are placed in a thermal cycler preheated to 94 C. and the following repeated program is performed 1 94 C. 1 min 55 C. 1 min 72 C. 1 min for 30 cycles. A final extension at 72 C. for 7 min is performed. The products can be purified using a DNA extraction kit such as QIAquick PCR Purification Kit available from Qiagen Germantown Md. then analyzed for size using an agarose gel.

Real time PCR processes can be incorporated for example by adding target specific fluorescent primers to a solution that contains the lysate generated from the super heated solubilization protocol. Briefly using normalized primer concentrations and mixed gene specific forward and reverse primer pairs each primer forward or reverse should be in solution at an approximate concentration 5 pmol l. The following protocol can be executed on a real time PCR instrument such as an ABI Prism SDS 7000. In optically clear reaction vial add a mixture containing fluorescent dye target DNA primer pairs and water. The following thermocycling protocol can be used to execute the PCR reaction 1 50 C. 2 min 1 cycle 2 95 C. 10 min 1 cycle 3 95 C. 15 s 60 C. 30 s 72 C. 30 s repeated for 40 cycles 4 72 C. 10 min 1 cycle. After thermocycling the products can be checked on an agarose gel 2 3 and or used for dissociation curve analysis.

Microarray processes can be incorporated for example by utilizing a fluorescent dye on to the DNA or RNA that is released from the lysed biological agents. This can be suitably performed for example by directly labeling the nucleic acids using a covalent linking dye or by performing cDNA synthesis step using an appropriate protocol based on the nature of the target material. Once the fluorescent dye is incorporated into target nucleic acids they can be purified using a PCR clean up kit such as the QIAquick PCR Purification Kit. After purification the probes are diluted in a hybridization buffer containing 1 5 SSC depending on protocol 10 50 formamide 0.1 SDS 0.1 1 BSA and or Cot 1 DNA for blocking non specific binding. The solution is then added to pre hybridized prepared microarray slide incubated for 12 14 hours then washed and imaged to determine the presence or absence of the specific gene sequences.

Alternatively as described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 701 097 filed Nov. 4 2003 Microfluidic Integrated Microarrays for Biological Detection labeled nucleic acids can be transported to a microfluidic chip which contains a monolithic trapping polymer. The monolithic trapping polymer specifically isolates the labeled target nucleic acids. The trapped nucleic acids can then be washed and eluted directly onto a high density microfluidic gene array for analysis of the presence or absence of specific nucleotide sequences. The monolithic trapping polymer and microfluidic gene array may be situated on separate microfluidic chips but preferably they are situated on the same microfluidic chip.

The present invention also provides methods of analyzing biological samples. These methods are capable of determining for example the composition of a biological sample in terms of protein amino acids DNA mRNA oligonucleotides polysaccharides or any combination thereof. Such determinations can be correlated to a compositional database for identifying the origin of the sample whether having a natural origin e.g. an organism such as a bacteria or virus an unnatural origin e.g. a synthetic compound or genetically engineering organism or a combination of both.

In certain embodiments methods of analyzing biological samples include the steps of flowing a biological sample fluid comprising a biological material and an organic or aqueous solvent through a conduit heating the biological sample fluid to at least 100 C. as it flows through the conduit lysing at least a portion of the biological material to release biomolecules labeling at least a portion of the biomolecules with a rapid reacting dye and measuring the molecular distribution of the labeled biomolecules. The steps of flowing heating lysing and labeling can be carried out in any of the ways described above. The step of measuring the molecular distribution can be carried out using a macromolecular analytical methodology that gives rise to a measurement of the molecular distribution. Examples of molecular distributions include molecular weight distribution composition distribution nucleic acid distribution amino acid distribution and any combination thereof. Measurement of any of these molecular distributions can be used for identifying the biomolecules the source of the biomolecules whether natural or unnatural or any combination thereof. Suitable methods for determining molecular distribution can be carried using one or more chromatographic methods. Particularly preferred chromatographic methods can be carried out using microfluidics systems such as those provided in U.S. Ser. No. 10 795 549 Viral Identification by Generation and Detection of Protein Signatures filed Mar. 8 2004 which is incorporated by reference herein. One embodiment uses capillary electrophoresis to measure the molecular weight distribution. For example rapid cell lysis can be performed using a flow through lysing apparatus as provided herein to heat a flowing ethylene glycol containing solution to as high as 195 C. The flow through lysing apparatus can be constructed by wrapping a 0.5 mm diameter copper wire around a 10 cm 450 640 ID OD capillary glass Polymicro Technologies Phoenix Ariz. fused silica capillary with approximately 20 windings cm. A second capillary 150 i.d. 360 o.d. can be inserted into the heating capillary to provide sample flow through the heating element which enables the heating of one or more capillaries using a single heating device. The external windings can be insulated using a fiberglass insulation webbing and soldered to a simple two prong connector for operation using a standard 10V power supply. Induction heating can be performed using an applied field of 1.6 volts with 0.6 1.6 Amp A current. Internal temperature of the capillary during induction heating can be measured using a 0.1 mm diameter platinum wire inserted into the inner capillary connected to a thermocouple interface. Thermocouple interfaces are commercially available from Fluka.

Bacteria spores and viral samples can be pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended in a buffer containing 5 mM boric acid 5 mM SDS dissolved in 98 ethylene glycol. Samples are then transferred to a syringe connected to a 150 360 capillary for flowing though the thermal lyser using a syringe pump. Real time imaging of cell lysis for bacteria and spores can be performed using a light microscope to observe both inlet and outlet capillaries. Spore lyses is confirmed by counting spore particles imaged between two glass slides before and after lysing.

Microchannel gel electrophoresis analysis of the lysed agents can be performed using a thermal lyser that is connected to a second sample preparation station that adds dye and buffer to the sample stream. For example 10 mM fluorescamine dye in acetonitrile and an electrophoresis buffer composed of 5 mM boric acid 5 mM SDS dropwise adjusted to pH 8.6 with 1N NaOH can be added to the sample stream. The flow rate is preferably selected to achieve about a 5 lysed sample 10 fluorescamine dye solution 85 electrophoresis buffer. This solution is then pumped directly in a hand portable microchannel electrophoresis instrument to perform microchannel gel electrophoresis of the prepared sample.

Fluorescent dyes 8 hydroxypyrene 1 3 6 trisulfonic acid HPTS ex 405 em 510 nm and fluorescamine ex 395 em 475 nm were obtained from Molecular Probes Eugene Oreg. . Ethylene glycol boric acid sodium dodecyl sulfate SDS lactalbumin 14.4 kDa carbonic anhydrase 32.5 kDa ovalbumin 45 kDa bovine serum albumin 66 kDa were purchased from Sigma St. Louis Mo. . Mouse IgG 147 kDa was obtained from Transduction Laboratories San Jose Calif. . Cholecystikinin flanking peptide CCK is a synthetic peptide 1.1 kDa obtained from Commonwealth Biotechnologies Richmond Va. . Polyethylene glycol polyethylene oxide sieving gel in the 14 200 kDa range part 477 416 was purchased from Beckman Fullerton Calif. . All other chemicals purchased were reagent grade or better.

Bacterial growth and spore production. Preparation of spores was performed as has been previously described Nicholson et al. C. R. Harwood and S. M. Cutting Editors 1990 John Wiley Sons Ltd New York pp. 391 450 . Initial growth for cultures took place in Luria Bertani media 20 g L LB Broth Difco . Small scale cultures incubated overnight at 37 C. were diluted and used to inoculate large scale cultures at an O.D. of 0.05 at 600 nm. When cultures reached an O.D. between 0.4 and 0.6 at 600 nm cells were spun down for 10 minutes in a centrifuge at 5 000 g s and then re suspended in an equal volume of a sporulation media. The sporulation media used herein consisted of 1.0 ml of 0.1 M CaCl2 autoclaved 4.0 ml of 5 L glutamate pH 7.0 with 10 M NaOH filter sterilized 4.0 ml of 1 M MgSO4.7HO autoclaved and 90 ml of sporulation salts 3.3 M FeCl3.6HO 40.1 M MgCl2.6HO 100 M MnCl2.4HO 0.01 M NH4Cl 75 M Na2SO4 50 M KH2PO4 1.21 10 3 M NH4NO3 per 100 ml. Cultures remained incubated at 37 C. for 48 hours. Samples were centrifuged at 10 000 g and the supernatant decanted. Purification included 3 washes with sterile dH2O 1 wash with 1 M KCl 0.5 M NaCl 1 wash with 1 M NaCl 1 wash with 2 M NaCl 1 wash with 0.25 SDS and 3 washes with sterile dHO. All washes occurred in the original culture volume with centrifugation at 10 000 g for 10 minutes. Purified spores were then re suspended in sterile dHO and stored at 4 C.

T even bacteriophage growth and purification. Phages were produced by the multi cycle lysis inhibition technique described by Doermann et al. Genetic control of capsid length in bacteriophage T4. Isolation and preliminary description of four new mutants 12 2 1973 374 85 the entirety of which is incorporated by reference herein . An overnight culture of the appropriate host strain was diluted 1 100 into 1 L medium M103 medium M9 plus 1 casamino acids and incubated at 37 C. with aeration until the cell density reached 4 10colony forming units cfu per milliliter mL . The culture was shifted to 30 C. and cells were infected at a MOI of 0.1 plaque forming units pfu per cfu. Incubation continued at 30 C. for 180 minutes post infection when pregnant bacteria were harvested by centrifugation and re suspended in 50 mL of buffer BUM 13.3 g L NAHPO7HOH 4 g L NaCl 3 g L KHPOand 1 mM MgSO . Cells were lysed by vortexing in the presence of CHCl. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 3000 g for 15 minutes. Phages were pelleted by centrifugation at 18 000 g s for 1 hour. Phage pellets were covered with 25 mL of 2 amino N 3 3 trimethylbutanamide BUM buffer and stored overnight at 4 C. prior to re suspension by gentle mixing. The integrity and purity of these viral preparations were confirmed by transmission electron microscopy.

System for Rapid Cell Lysing and Analysis. Referring to rapid cell lysis was performed using sample preparation module and analysis was carried out using analytical device which was fluidically coupled to thermal lyser . The combination of sample preparation module and analytical device is system . The thermal lyser used in this embodiment is capable of heating a flowing organic or aqueous solution to temperatures as high as 195 C. The thermal lyser has resistive electrical leads that are connected to power supply . The thermal lyser receives sample fluid through a conduit which receives sample fluid from biological material source shown here as a syringe . The biological material source flows upon activation of source pump . Sample fluid is heated within the thermal lyser and the cells are at least partially lysed. Lysed cells exit the thermal lyser and pass through fluidic junctions that are separately connected to a dye source pumped using dye pump and buffer source using buffer pump . Lysed dyed and buffered samples exit the sample preparation module at delivery conduit where it enters the analytical device through one of the sample inlet ports .

Referring to thermal lyser was constructed by providing a heater by wrapping a 0.5 mm diameter copper wire around a center portion 5 cm of a 10 cm long nominal 450 m I.D. 640 m O.D. glass outer capillary hereinafter 450 640 capillary obtained from Polymicro Technologies LLC Phoenix Ariz. with approximately 20 windings cm. An inner conduit a second capillary nominally 150 m I.D. 360 m O.D. hereinafter 150 360 capillary or inner capillary was inserted into the outer conduit a capillary to provide sample flow through the heater . This design enables the use of one or more capillaries with a single heater only one inner conduit is shown inserted in the outer . The heater resistive heating coil wire surrounding outer conduit was enclosed using a primary insulator a layer of fiberglass insulation webbing in this example to control the temperature within the inner capillary . The coil wire ends were soldered to a two prong connector not shown for use with a standard 10V power supply shown in . Resistive heating was performed using an applied current of about 1.5V with 0.6 1.6 A current. Internal temperature of the inner capillary during heating was measured using a small diameter copper indium wire not shown inserted into the capillary containing ethylene glycol and connected to a thermocouple interface e.g. a potentiometer not shown .

Bacterial spores and viral samples were pelleted by centrifugation and re suspended in a buffer containing 5 mM boric acid 5 mM sodium dodecyl sulfate SDS dissolved in 98 ethylene glycol. Samples were then transferred to a syringe connected to a 150 360 capillary used to pumped though the thermal lyser using a syringe pump. Real time imaging of the cell lysis for bacteria and spores was performed using a light microscope to set up to observe both inlet and outlet capillaries. Spore lysing was confirmed by counting spore particles imaged between two glass slides. Inactivation of the viable spores was also determined using standard colony growth procedures.

To perform microchannel gel electrophoresis analysis of the lysed agents the thermal lyser was connected to a second sample preparation station which added fluorescamine dye in acetonitrile and an electrophoresis buffer 5 mM boric acid 5 mM SDS drop wise adjusted to pH 8.6 with 1N NaOH to the sample stream. The flow rate was set up to achieve a 5 lysed sample 10 fluorescamine dye solution 85 electrophoresis buffer. This solution was pumped directly into an analytical device a hand portable microchannel electrophoresis instrument described in U.S. Ser. No. 10 795 549 Viral Identification by Generation and Detection of Protein Signatures filed Mar. 8 2004 the portion of which describing analytical devices is incorporated by reference herein Renzi R. F. et al. Hand portable analytical instrument for re usable chip based electrophoresis Part1 system design and integration 77 2 2005 pp. 435 441 to perform microchannel gel electrophoresis of lysed biological samples.

Separations were performed using 2.0 cm 2.0 cm fused silica microfluidic chips fabricated from Corning 7980 fused silica wafers and obtained from Sensor Prep Services Elbum Ill. using standard wet etch procedures that are described in U.S. Ser. No. 10 795 549. These microfluidic chips contained a 10 cm separation microchannel which was filled with commercially available protein sieving gel for protein analysis. All channels were flushed with filtered deionized water and evacuated to dryness using a syringe connected to a capillary to a flush port on the microfluidic chip. This process was repeated three times. The microfluidic chip was filled with the sieving gel using a gas tight 250 L syringe connected to the flush port. Channels were filled by applying modest pressure 110 cm Hg to the syringe for approximately 1 3 minutes.

In the analytical device buffers were contained in reservoirs connected to a manifold by a capillary septum interface as described previously in U.S. Ser. No. 10 795 549. The sample waste buffer and waste reservoirs were each filled with approximately 0.75 ml of sieving gel. The sample reservoir was filled with approximately 0.2 ml of sample buffer 5 mM boric acid and 5 mM SDS titrated with 1.0 M NaOH to pH 8.8 . The liquid reservoir cartridge was installed on the fluidic manifold and the electrode plate was connected to the top of the fluidic reservoir cartridge. The injection currents voltages were programmed using a user interface.

Sample preparation and electrophoresis. Samples were injected electrophoretically into the separation column as previous described in U.S. Ser. No. 10 795 549 with some alterations. Control of the sample plug on chip was assisted by maintaining the current on the buffer leg between 0.2 0.6 A. This protocol reduced variability in the current flow between the sample and sample waste channels. Separations were carried out using a constant current of 11.0 A 450V cm on the waste leg. Sample and sample waste voltages were chosen to reduce sample carryover and prevent sample leakage into the separation microchannel during a run. Laser induced fluorescence detection was performed using a epifluorescent EX 405 nm EM 475 nm optics module that was previously described. Data related to detected peaks were routed through an A D converter and saved on a memory board for later analysis or viewed directly using a serial port connected to a laptop computer.

Data sets presented herein were uncorrected unless indicated otherwise. Corrected data were analyzed using a data analysis software package that subtracts out background noise and detects peak with a 3 1 ratio to the corrected baseline noise.

Implementation of an embodiment. A thermal lyser was routinely capable of rapidly heating solutions such as ethylene glycol up to temperatures as high as 195 C. The temperature remained generally constant across the length of the heating coil . Moreover heating the capillary demonstrated a linear relation between current and applied voltage and temperature of the flow solution within the capillary . This enabled an accurate determination of the internal temperature with either applied voltage or current. The measurements of the internal temperature of the solution shown in showed that the maximum temperature was achieved in the device within the first 0.5 cm of the 10 cm inner capillary and cooled to room temperature within 0.5 cm of exiting the portion of the capillary surrounded by the heating coil . Quick cooling to room temperature helped integrate the thermal lyser into a complete sample preparation module to perform sample labeling at room temperature about 24 C. .

The thermal lyser when performing at flow rates as a high as 30 L min was also capable of elevating the temperature of the solution up to about 195 C. This flow rate gives rise to the appropriate residence time in the superheated solution which adequately lyses spores. Such flow rates advantageously decrease the overall time for sample processing.

In several examples thermal lysers as short as 5.0 cm were capable of achieving the necessary residence time for nearly complete bacterial spore solubilization. This was supported by the fact that these preparations were completely inactivated as judged by plaque forming analysis. Many colonies submitted to the lysis procedures as described herein resulted in a reduction in the colony forming units cfu s . Flow rates as high 6.0 L min provided adequate residence times 90 sec. for spore solubilization. Imaging these spores demonstrated that the observable spore particles were reduced by greater that 80 percent following lysis . Measured DNA was undetectable prior to spore lysis. In contrast recoverable DNA concentrations as a 1 g ml after purification of spore lysates.

Another embodiment of the thermal lyser is depicted in . Here inner conduit is depicted interior to the lumen of outer conduit . Heating wire is shown wrapped around the outer conduit and connected to power source through electrical leads .

Another embodiment of the sample preparation module is depicted in . Here biological material source and pump is fluidically connected through inlet conduit to thermal lyser . A conduit connects the exit of thermal lyser to a fluidic connector which is connected to a pressure transducer through conduit . A flow restriction device is connected to fluidic connector for increasing the pressure within the thermal lyser. A suitable flow restriction device suitably includes a long narrow capillary for example those having dimensions from about 5 to about 100 micron inner lumen diameter and about 5 to 200 cm in length. In one embodiment a flow restriction device comprising a capillary of a 27 micron inner diameter 29 cm long provides a pressure of about 320 psi in the lyser for a flow rate of about 5 microliters per minute. For example the boiling point of water is about 212 C. at 320 psi. The pressure typically increases proportionally with the flow rate and with the length of the flow restriction device e.g. capillary .

The thermal lyser and the microanalytical device were integrated using a rapid reacting dye fluorescent label e.g. fluorescamine in a solution that contained high concentrations of ethylene glycol. With regard to the thermal lyser the concentration of fluorescamine dye was significantly higher in this configuration. When using the integrated system the dye solution is added prior to the dilution of the sample with electrophoresis buffer. Without being bound by any particular theory of operation it is believed that because the dye was added into a solution that was primarily ethylene glycol based much higher concentration of dye could be used without the dye precipitating out of solution as occurs when using the dye in an aqueous based buffer. In this arrangement the lysed samples exiting the thermal lyser provided proteins that were mixed directly with the 10 mM fluorescein dye in dry acetonitrile and then later diluted with a standard aqueous buffer. A dramatic increase in the area counts of the detected peaks was observed using this protocol . The mechanism behind this increase in signal to noise ratio of the detected peaks was investigated by evaluating the labeling efficiency of fluorescamine when using different buffers.

The use of fluorescamine to rapidly label protein as high as 10 g in a 180 L solution of 5 mM boric acid 5 mM SDS pH 8.5 buffer and later adding 20 L 10 mM fluorescamine dye was reported by Renzi R. F. et al. Hand portable analytical instrument for re usable chip based electrophoresis Part1 system design and integration 2005 77 2 435 441. Using this protocol a maximum fluorescent of 7.2 units was found at a peak wavelength of 475 nm as seen as the EG Buffer fast line in . To determine the efficiency of the reaction in the ethylene glycol buffer 20 L of 10 mM fluorescamine in acetonitrile was added to 20 L of ethylene glycol buffer containing 10 g of bovine serum albumin hereinafter BSA in 10 L of water. Forty five seconds after the addition of fluorescamine standard aqueous buffer was added and the fluorescence spectrum was measured. These results are shown as the HO Buffer std line in . A 45 second delay was used which is similar to the time used for mixing in the thermal lyser apparatus. Using this protocol an 8.0 fold increase 57.9 fluorescent units in the production of fluorescence conjugates was observed over that of the standard aqueous buffer procedure HO Buffer std of . The same reaction was carried out using the 10 g of BSA in a 20 L solution of standard aqueous buffer as a one to one comparison. This reaction generated 12.4 fluorescent units of detectable products and demonstrated a 4.7 fold increase in the conjugate labeling efficiency with the ethylene glycol buffer over that of the modified aqueous procedure HO Buffer fast of .

The kinetics of fluorescent conjugate reaction were then determined by observing the fluorescent product generation as a function of time. Higher volumes of fluorescent product were generated for determining these kinetics. The first reaction was carried out in 280 L of standard aqueous buffer with 10 g of BSA in 10 L of water labeled with 20 L of 10 mM fluorescamine in acetonitrile . An early dramatic increase of fluorescence attributed to dye precipitant was readily observed in the cuvette. The initial fluorescent signal decreased rapidly over 50 seconds to approximately 10 percent of its peak value. Without being bound to a particular theory of operation this rapid decrease in signal was apparently attributed to the dye precipitant dissolving back into solution. A gradual increase in the fluorescent product formation over time was subsequently observed. The spectra of this reaction measured as a function of wavelength resulted in a peak fluorescence of 5 units at a wavelength of 475 nm .

The second reaction was an approximation of the low volume labeling done on the capillary apparatus which is a 1 1 ratio of lysate to labeling dye. To compare labeling rates between a standard aqueous buffer and ethylene glycol buffer the reactions contained 150 L of buffer mixed with 150 L of 10 mM fluorescamine in acetonitrile and 10 g of BSA in 10 L of DI water. These reaction conditions for the aqueous buffer black line revealed a similar pattern as compared to the first reaction carried out light grey line . When dye was added a dramatic increase in fluorescence followed by a rapid decrease in fluorescence which we also attribute to dye precipitation and re solubilization. Similarly this was followed by a gradual increase in the fluorescent product formation over the time course observed. This labeling strategy resulted in roughly three fold increase in labeling efficiency as seen at the end of time course which was then confirmed by comparison of fluorescence spectra taken at completion of reaction . Without being bound by a particular theory of operation the three fold increase in fluorescent product formation is apparently due to a three fold increase in dye concentration in the second reaction.

The third reaction was carried out in the same manner as the second reaction with 150 L of ethylene glycol buffer 150 L of 10 mM fluorescamine in acetonitrile and 10 g of BSA in 10 ul of water. The largest difference to note is the lack of dye precipitation and a much faster increase in the fluorescent product formation which appeared maximal at 300 seconds. The first two reactions did not reach maximal fluorescence until 600 seconds as measured in . At the conclusion of the time course we noted about a two fold increase in fluorescent product formation at 475 nm between the ethylene glycol and water based buffers. Also it should be noted that the ethylene glycol buffer provided a seven fold increase over the conventional labeling strategy.

The dye course buffer source and microanalytical device were integrated as a system with the thermal lyser of . Protein signatures of a variety of agents could be rapidly generated using this system.

PCR reactions of lysate dilutions were performed to determine the amount of lysate needed to obtain products and also to visualize the banding pattern produced by each set of random primers. PCR analysis was performed using the Ready To Go RAPD analysis kit obtained from Amersham Biosciences Piscataway N.J. . A PCR reaction was carried out using a lysate that was initially diluted 1 16. PCR was performed with this sample along with a series of further dilutions 1 1.3 1 2 1 4 and 1 20 . Two sets of PCR were carried out one using primer 2 herein 5 d GTTTCGCTCC 3 SEQ. ID. NO. 1 and the other using primer 4 herein 5 d AAGAGCCCGT 3 SEQ. ID. NO. 2 . Results are shown in .

A second reaction set was carried out using dilutions of the spores that were used during lysis. Spore dilutions included 1 2 1 20 1 200 and 1 2000. Dilutions for each of the lysate included 1 1.3 1 2 1 4 and 1 20. Primer 2 was chosen for this analysis. Results are shown in . A product from all dilutions 2 2000 of the concentrated lysate could be obtained. Apparently in this PCR experiment on the dilutions of spores ethylene glycol inhibited the PCR reaction when present in high concentrations. The ethylene glycol concentrations present in the dilutions were 42 for the 1 1.3 dilution 28 for the 1 2 dilution 14 for the 1 4 dilution and 2.8 for the 1 20 dilution. Not being bound by any theory of operation PCR products were obtained from the 1 20 dilutions because the ethylene glycol concentration was too high in the other dilutions to allow for the PCR to take place. Therefore 1 20 dilutions were used in the remaining experiments.

A third set of reactions were carried out using the same spore dilutions as used in reaction set two in order to be sure that the PCR products were obtained from DNA from lysed spores reactions were run using unlysed spores as well as lysed spores. PCR was run on the lysate after a 1 20 dilution. Results provided in show apparently no products formed from the solutions when unlysed spores negative control were used as a template at any of the dilution factors. These results show that the PCR products are indeed obtained from DNA of the lysed spores. The highest dilution 1 2000 contained template from as low as 295 spores.

Separate solutions comprising pre lysed spores buffer at a 1 20 dilution as well as water were used as controls. These results are shown in . Two sets of PCR were carried out one using primer 2 and the other using primer 4. Without being bound by a particular theory of operation the bands that are visible in the water control are most likely due to small amounts of DNA contamination in the polymerases. The presence of template DNA however out competes this contamination and as a result these bands are not seen when the template is included. Without being bound by a particular theory of operation the differences in banding patterns seen within the spore and lysate dilutions apparently arose from different primer template ratios.

End products generated in each of the four reaction sets were visualized on a 2 agarose E Gel obtained from Invitrogen Corporation Carlsbad Calif. .

Using the thermal lyser apparatus and the in line sample preparation set up protein signatures for viral agents vegetative bacterial cells and bacterial spores were generated. First T2 bacteriophage was processed through the device. After lysis 100 C. dye reaction and buffer dilution the labeled lysate solution was applied directly to a ChemLab microanalytical system using a capillary connection. After sample loading the sample was electrokinetically injected on to the separation column of the ChemLab chip. Further details of the design and operation of the Chemlab microanalytical system and chip are provided in U.S. Ser. No. 10 795 549 the entirety of which is incorporated by reference herein. The separation of the injected analytes revealed a signature of the T2 phage . This signature was in good agreement with previously conventionally processed samples. A similar lysis and sample preparation was conducted for vegetative bacteria and bacterial spores using elevated temperatures to perform lysis of these robust species. Vegetative was lysed at approximately 150 C. spores were lysed at approximately 175 C. Reproducible protein signatures of these agents were subsequently generated.

The foregoing experimental results indicate that rapid cell lysis and sample preparation can be performed using the methods and devices of the present invention which are readily adapted for protein and DNA analysis in a portable system. Vegetative bacterial cells bacterial spores as well as bacteriophage viruses could be robustly lysed and solubilized using the thermal lysers and methods described herein. Direct integrated protein fingerprinting analysis of these agents was possible by microcapillary gel electrophoresis mCGE . Additionally the detection of PCR products of the genomic material from the same samples was possible using random primer amplification.

Certain aspects of the present invention provide an integrated sample preparation module capable of complete solubilization of robust bacterial spores for protein fingerprinting using a microfluidic device. Several additional advantages have been identified using these various systems. One additional advantage is that this protocol as seen in could be used for a variety of agents including vegetative bacteria and viral species. Processing these samples is readily achieved by adjusting the internal temperature of the inner conduit of the thermal lyser to achieve suitable solubilization conditions for an individual agent. Lower temperatures about 95 C. are typically used for lysing and solubilizing viruses. Slightly higher temperatures about 125 C. and the highest temperatures about 175 C. are typically used for spore lysis.

Several unexpected advantages of using a non aqueous based buffer for sample processing were also observed. Although an initial concern was that the covalent labeling reaction kinetics could result in inefficient labeling of the proteins due to dye precipitation in the spore and virus lysates it was surprisingly found that the devices and methods of the present invention could perform the dye labeling reaction in a ten fold less volume that that of the protocol of Renzi R. F. et al. Hand portable analytical instrument for re usable chip based electrophoresis Part1 system design and integration 2005 77 2 pp. 435 441. Without being bound by any particular theory of operation this low volume sequential labeling step was superior when labeling in either standard aqueous buffer or in the ethylene glycol based buffer as it appeared that the increased protein concentration of the sample outweighed the problem of dye precipitation in the reaction. Additionally the fluorescamine labeling of protein in ethylene glycol was superior in terms of kinetics and overall labeling efficiency to the labeling process performed in water based buffers. This improvement in the labeling efficiency apparently results from the absence of competing hydrolysis reactions and dye precipitation in the standard aqueous based buffers. This was surprising given the considerably higher viscosity of the ethylene glycol buffer. This demonstrates that the reaction carried out in ethylene glycol was not detrimental to covalent fluorescamine labeling. The intensity of the fluorescent product generated in ethylene glycol based buffer was statistically higher compared to the water based buffer.

The results also demonstrate that higher molecular weight proteins appear to be more extensively labeled using the ethylene glycol based buffer. Without being bound by any particular theory of operation this may also result from the decrease or absence of competing hydrolysis reactions which allow for the larger sized proteins to be more efficiently labeled in the ethylene glycol buffer.

Many detection platforms for identifying biological agents are based on DNA analysis. The thermal lysers systems and methods of the present invention have the capability to prepare samples not only for protein fingerprinting but also for the direct amplification of DNA from the elutants of lysed agents. As seen in the lysed samples were subsequently analyzed for genomic containing material. Using a random primer with the disclosed methods one is able to specifically amplify DNA from lysed . Initial attempts to purify DNA from these samples resulted in a relatively low efficiency of extraction. In an effort to perform the amplification determining whether the elutant could be used directly in a PCR reaction was tested. It was found that while ethylene glycol inhibited the reaction at high concentration greater that 4 this inhibition could be overcome by diluting the spore lysate in PCR buffer. To determine the limit of detection both dilutions of high concentration spore lysates and dilutions of spores that were lysed in low concentration were performed. A calculated limit of detection using the random primer PCR was about 300 spores.

One of the many goals of the present invention was to develop methods that lyse solubilize and label robust spores for protein analysis. Not only are such methods provided herein but also these methods can be extended to other vegetative bacterial cells and viruses. Additionally using the methods systems and devices of the present invention one can perform PCR amplification of DNA from the same samples. Without being bound by a particular theory of operation ethylene glycol appears to interfere with the purification and subsequent analysis of both proteins and DNA in these samples using conventional techniques. The mechanism of this interference is not certain but it may result from the absence of charged species in the lysing solution. While the increased boiling temperature of ethylene glycol over that of water affords the ability to superheat these solutions and subsequently lyse robust spores it appears that the present methods can be extended further. Such extensions can include using other high boiling point solvents that may have less interaction or interference with the analytes of interest. The current system can also be readily optimized by one of skill in the art with real time PCR assays and immunological reagent based detection assays.

The examples provided herein have demonstrated that efficient lysing and complete solubilization of viruses vegetative bacteria and bacterial spores is possible using the methods devices and systems of the present invention including direct integration with microfluidic devices. The methods of the present invention allow for rapid analysis for example about ninety seconds for spore lysis fluorescamine labeling and buffer dilution and less than about six minutes for analysis. The methods thermal lysers and systems of the present invention enable the universal preparation of biological organisms labile or robust for subsequent analysis by either protein or DNA analysis.

Without being bound to a particular theory of operation several factors that may increase the labeling efficiency include for example 1 mixing steps and 2 the use of a non aqueous based buffer. The labeling reaction can be optimized through the use of low volume high concentration dye solutions. In performing such reactions the solution used for the labeling reaction allows the dye to remain dissolved in the solution i.e. not precipitated to be available to react with the protein or DNA analytes. Ethylene glycol based buffer was found to be a suitable solvent that enabled the performance of the reactions with high dye concentrations which resulted in improved labeling kinetics and fluorescent product generation.

In another embodiment there is provided a thermal lyser formed using layers of material that contain one or more inner conduits and heaters that are laminated together. Referring to there is provided a thermal lyser composed of a bottom layer a lower intermediate layer a middle layer an upper intermediate layer and a top layer . The middle layer has one or more fluidic microchannels formed therein which have a microchannel sealing wall formed by adjacently sealing the lower and upper intermediate films and respectively. Suitable materials for the layers include glass plastic silicon ceramic composites thereof and preferably glass ceramic composite materials for example a combination of ceramic and crystallizing glasses for high temperature lysing of biological agents like cells viruses and spores. This embodiment has an integrated resistive heater for raising the temperature in the fluidic microchannel from room temperature to above 100 C. and preferably above 200 C. The pressure in this device can also be elevated to increase the boiling point of the carrier fluid. For example conditions of 185 C. at 160 psi in the ceramic lyser are typically sufficient to lyse robust agents i.e. bacterial spores with minimal damage or degradation to internal proteins and DNA for further analysis. Although this embodiment uses five layers fewer or more layers are envisioned for example the fewer layers are envisioned when the two or more layers are integrated.

In another embodiment fluidic microchannels can be fabricated in substrates using a sacrificial volume material SVM . Suitable sacrificial materials can be used as a place holder during lamination that burns away cleanly in the firing sequence leaving a void that provides a microchannel. For example referring to stripes of SVM can be applied to middle layer to form microchannels .

Fabrication of a ceramic based layered microfluidic thermal lyser. A ceramic lyser was fabricated using a low temperature cofired ceramic material LTCC or a high temperature cofired ceramic material HTCC . HTCC is commercially available from ESL Electro Science King of Prussia Pennsylvania. LTCC is commercial available from Dupont Corporation and sold under the tradename of Green Tape . Green Tape material system is a co fired glass ceramic dielectric substrate combined with an organic binder. LTCC material is particularly useful in microfluidic applications because of its physical properties of high strength inertness low coefficient of thermal expansion refired stability and environmentally safe binders and solvent system. LTCC substrates were made from discrete laminated sheets and of Green Tape . Referring to microchannels were cut into substrate and stacked between substrates and to form a three dimensional cavity. This was held between upper substrate and lower substrate . Additional features such as via holes metal traces for heating film and electrical pass thrus were incorporated at the time of lamination. Stacked layers were compressed with an isostatic hydraulic press and then placed in a high temperature oven for sintering at 850 C. into a single monolith substrate. shows how five layers of LTCC were used to fabricate a ceramic lyser.

Use of ceramic microfluidic lyser. shows various views of two embodiments of a ceramic lyser one with clamp down o ring sealed fittings A and B and one with epoxy bonded fittings C and D . At room temperature both are capable of withstanding pressures above about 1 000 psi internally. Another device made substantially the same as that shown in was capable of withstanding pressures of even about 5 000 psi. The epoxy bonded fittings are capable of withstanding about 500 psi pressure when heated to about 150 C. Higher operating temperatures are possible at lower operating pressures. The clamp down o ring seal see close up in fitting has been pressure tested up to 800 psi at 220 C. with no failure. In certain preferred embodiments the biological materials are lysed at pressures below 500 psi.

In certain embodiments the method of lysing uses substantially only heat for lysing cells. Particular advantages are apparent in view of the fact that chemical reagents are not needed in this embodiment. Without being bound to a particular theory of operation high thermal energy apparently dissolves and break apart the spore coat to release the spore contents. Various embodiments of the present invention establishes the use of elevated temperatures to demonstrate spore lysing using high thermal energy. Various embodiments use a capillary format and a coiled wire heater wrapped exterior to an inner capillary through which the biological material flows and lyses. Certain of these embodiments use and organic solvent such as ethylene glycol as the carrier fluid to achieve temperature up to 190 C. to avoid boiling of the carrier fluid at ambient or slightly elevated pressures.

In certain embodiments high temperatures without boiling can be achieved using a combination of high pressures and high temperatures. Temperatures above 100 C. and pressures above 1 atm 14.7 psi can be easily achieved using layered constructs containing microchannels especially using ceramic layers. Increasing the internal pressure in the microchannel increases the boiling point of water allowing high temperatures to be reached eliminating the need for ethylene glycol carrier. Standard buffers can be used to have minimal interference with analysis techniques i.e. PCR of DNA . The ceramic microfluidic device also provides a convenient integrated package with imbedded heaters. Simple current or voltage control can regulate the temperature inside the microchannel. As a modular component the ceramic device can be used as an in line component of a flow through system or used in a batch process mode. The inexpensive and easy fabrication of LTCC microfluidic substrates makes such devices suitable for disposable single use applications. In additional embodiments the thermal lyser devices can also include suitable electrical contact pads plug in electrical leads electrical circuitry electronic components optoelectronic components optical components fluidic components or any combination thereof.

