---

title: Personal care compositions containing hydrophobically modified non-platelet particles
abstract: A rinsable personal care composition includes (a) 0 to 75 weight percent of a composition surfactant; (b) 0.01 to 99 weight percent of a skin benefit agent or emollient; (c) 0.01 to 20 weight percent of a hydrophobically modified non-platelet particle; and (d) 0 to 99% water.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08147853&OS=08147853&RS=08147853
owner: The Procter & Gamble Company
number: 08147853
owner_city: Cincinnati
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050215
---
The present invention relates to the field of personal care compositions for improving appearance and feel of keratinous surfaces. More specifically the present invention relates to rinsable personal care compositions that provide excellent skin appearance skin moisturization and conditioning.

Personal care compositions are well known and widely used. These compositions have long been employed to cleanse and moisturize skin deliver actives hide imperfections and to reduce the oiliness shine associated with sebum. Personal care compositions have also been used to alter the color and appearance of skin.

These compositions generally incorporate organic or inorganic particulate material to reduce the shine or redness of skin to also cover over skin imperfections such as wrinkles and even to provide cosmetic effects such as whitening or darkening. For example the use of TiO2 as a skin whitening agent has been known since ancient times and the formulator s chemical library is replete with pigments which can be blended to produce an almost arbitrary range of colors to skin. Other particles such as silicas and silicone resins can produce a mattifying effect on skin reducing the appearance of fine lines and wrinkles.

Recently advances have been disclosed in the art in depositing from rinse off products a specific class of effect particles based on a platelet shape. When particles are present as platelets they produce a higher degree of specular reflectance and tend to lend a shiny appearance to skin. While this may often be desired it is also desirable to provide visual benefits to skin from particles that are non platelet in shape that do not have a shiny appearance on the skin surface.

While the compositions and disclosures of the prior art provide useful advances in the art of personal care compositions there remains the need for improved rinse off compositions that deliver immediate improvements in appearance and skin feel that will effectively deposit on all parts of the body. The compositions also need to be non greasy and easy to apply. Therefore it is desirable to provide a topical rinse off composition comprising a select level and blend of non platelet particles to provide a unique level of skin appearance change across all skin types. It is also desirable to provide personal care compositions that effectively provide skin moisturization. It is further desirable to deliver the above skin conditioning and appearance benefits via an in the shower or in the bath lotion. Unfortunately in the shower bath moisturizers are often readily rinsed from the skin. This is particularly true when surfactant is present. Therefore a need still exists for compositions that can effectively deposit appearance and skin feel particles in a rinse off environment.

The present invention relates to a rinsable personal care composition comprises a 0 to 75 weight percent of a composition surfactant b 0.01 to 99 weight percent of a skin benefit agent or emollient c 0.01 to 20 weight percent of a hydrophobically modified non platelet particle and d 0 to 99 water.

All percentages and ratios used herein are by weight of the total composition and all measurements made are at 25 C. unless otherwise designated.

The term amphoteric surfactant as used herein is also intended to encompass zwitterionic surfactants which are well known to formulators skilled in the art as a subset of amphoteric surfactants.

The term dermatologically acceptable as used herein means that the compositions or components thereof so described are suitable for use in contact with human skin without undue toxicity incompatibility instability allergic response and the like.

The term diameter as used herein means the largest distance across the major axis of the particulate material. Diameter can be determined by any suitable method known in the art such as particle size analyzer Mastersizer 2000 manufactured by Malvern Instruments.

The term gel network as used herein means an emulsifying system comprised of fatty alcohol and a hydrophilic surfactant.

The term hydrophobically modified interference pigment or HMIP as used herein means a portion of the interference pigment surface has been coated with a hydrophobic material.

The term interference pigment as used herein means a pigment with pearl gloss prepared by coating the surface of a particle substrate material generally platelet in shape with a thin film. The thin film is a transparent or semitransparent material having a high refractive index. The higher refractive index material shows a pearl gloss resulting from mutual interfering action between reflection and incident light from the platelet substrate coating layer interface and reflection of incident light from the surface of the coating layer.

As used herein Non platelet particle refers to any shape of a particle in the personal care composition differing from the platelet shape including configurations but not limited to spherical cylindrical configuration rectangular triangular trapezoidal semi circular hourglass or irregular shapes. The non platlet particles may have an aspect ratio define by A B or 0.20 the length A and the width being B more preferably greater than 0.25 even more preferably greater than 0.3

The term personal care composition as used herein refers to unless otherwise specified refers to the compositions of the present invention wherein the compositions are intended to include compositions for topical application to the skin or hair.

The term rinsable composition as used herein means a composition designed to be rinsed off by a liquid such as water. After the composition is rinsed off pigments are deposited on the skin and the skin radiance is realized.

The term safe and effective amount as used herein means an amount of a compound component or composition sufficient to significantly induce a positive benefit preferably a positive skin appearance or feel benefit including independently the benefits disclosed herein but low enough to avoid serious side effects i.e. to provide a reasonable benefit to risk ratio within the scope of sound medical judgment.

A skin compatible oil as defined herein is an oil that is liquid or semi solid at the temperature at which bathing is carried out that is deemed safe for use in cosmetics being either inert to the skin or actually beneficial.

The term topical application as used herein means to apply or spread the compositions of the present invention onto the surface of the skin.

Active and other ingredients useful herein may be categorized or described herein by their cosmetic and or therapeutic benefit or their postulated mode of action. However it is to be understood that the active and other ingredients useful herein can in some instances provide more than one cosmetic and or therapeutic benefit or operate via more than one mode of action. Therefore classifications herein are made for the sake of convenience and are not intended to limit an ingredient to the particularly stated application or applications listed.

The rinsable personal care composition of the present invention comprises 0 to 75 weight percent of a composition surfactant. A wide variety of composition surfactants can be useful herein both for emulsification of the dispersed phase as well as to provide acceptable spreading and in use properties for non lathering systems. For cleansing applications the surfactant phase also serves to clean the skin and provide an acceptable amount of lather for the user. The composition preferably contains no more than about 50 weight percent of a surfactant more preferably no more than about 30 weight percent still more preferably no more than about 15 weight percent and even more preferably no more than about 5 weight percent of a surfactant. The composition preferably contains at least about 5 weight percent of a surfactant more preferably at least about 3 weight percent still more preferably at least about 1 weight percent and even more preferably at least about 0.1 weight percent of a surfactant. For cleansing applications the personal care compositions preferably produces a Total Lather Volume of at least 300 ml more preferably greater than 600 ml as described in the Lathering Volume Test. The personal care compositions preferably produces a Flash Lather Volume of at least 100 ml preferably greater than 200 ml more preferably greater than 300 ml as described in the Lathering Volume Test.

Preferable surfactants include those selected from the group consisting of anionic surfactants nonionic surfactants amphoteric surfactants non lathering surfactants emulsifiers and mixtures thereof. Non limiting examples of surfactants useful in the compositions of the present invention are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 280 757 to McAtee et al. issued Aug. 28 2001.

Non limiting examples of anionic surfactants useful in the compositions of the present invention are disclosed in McCutcheon s Detergents and Emulsifiers North American edition 1986 published by allured Publishing Corporation McCutcheon s Functional Materials North American Edition 1992 and U.S. Pat. No. 3 929 678 to Laughlin et al. issued Dec. 30 1975.

A wide variety of anionic surfactants are useful herein. Non limiting examples of anionic surfactants include those selected from the group consisting of sarcosinates sulfates isethionates taurates phosphates lactylates glutamates and mixtures thereof. Amongst the isethionates the alkoyl isethionates are preferred and amongst the sulfates the alkyl and alkyl ether sulfates are preferred.

Other anionic materials useful herein are fatty acid soaps i.e. alkali metal salts e.g. sodium or potassium salts typically having from a fatty acid having about 8 to about 24 carbon atoms preferably from about 10 to about 20 carbon atoms. These fatty acids used in making the soaps can be obtained from natural sources such as for instance plant or animal derived glycerides e.g. palm oil coconut oil soybean oil castor oil tallow lard etc. The fatty acids can also be synthetically prepared. Soaps and their preparation are described in detail in U.S. Pat. No. 4 557 853.

Other anionic materials include phosphates such as monoalkyl dialkyl and trialkylphosphate salts. Non limiting examples of preferred anionic lathering surfactants useful herein include those selected from the group consisting of sodium lauryl sulfate ammonium lauryl sulfate ammonium laureth sulfate sodium laureth sulfate sodium trideceth sulfate ammonium cetyl sulfate sodium cetyl sulfate ammonium cocoyl isethionate sodium lauroyl isethionate sodium lauroyl lactylate triethanolamine lauroyl lactylate sodium caproyl lactylate sodium lauroyl sarcosinate sodium myristoyl sarcosinate sodium cocoyl sarcosinate sodium lauroyl methyl taurate sodium cocoyl methyl taurate sodium lauroyl glutamate sodium myristoyl glutamate and sodium cocoyl glutamate and mixtures thereof.

Especially preferred for use herein is ammonium lauryl sulfate ammonium laureth sulfate sodium lauroyl sarcosinate sodium cocoyl sarcosinate sodium myristoyl sarcosinate sodium lauroyl lactylate and triethanolamine lauroyl lactylate.

Non limiting examples of nonionic surfactants for use in the compositions of the present invention are disclosed in McCutcheon s Detergents and Emulsifiers North American edition 1986 published by allured Publishing Corporation and McCutcheon s Functional Materials North American Edition 1992 .

Nonionic surfactants useful herein include those selected from the group consisting of alkyl glucosides alkyl polyglucosides polyhydroxy fatty acid amides alkoxylated fatty acid esters sucrose esters amine oxides and mixtures thereof.

Non limiting examples of preferred nonionic surfactants for use herein are those selected form the group consisting of C Cglucose amides C Calkyl polyglucosides sucrose cocoate sucrose laurate lauramine oxide cocoamine oxide and mixtures thereof.

A wide variety of amphoteric lathering surfactants can be used in the compositions of the present invention. Particularly useful are those which are broadly described as derivatives of aliphatic secondary and tertiary amines preferably wherein the nitrogen is in a cationic state in which the aliphatic radicals can be straight or branched chain and wherein one of the radicals contains an ionizable water solubilizing group e.g. carboxy sulfonate sulfate phosphate or phosphonate.

Non limiting examples of amphoteric surfactants useful in the compositions of the present invention are disclosed in McCutcheon s Detergents and Emulsifiers North American edition 1986 published by allured Publishing Corporation and McCutcheon s Functional Materials North American Edition 1992 .

Non limiting examples zwitterionic surfactants are those selected from the group consisting of betaines sultaines hydroxysultaines alkyliminoacetates iminodialkanoates aminoalkanoates and mixtures thereof.

Preferred surfactants for use herein are the following wherein the anionic surfactant is selected from the group consisting of ammonium lauroyl sarcosinate sodium trideceth sulfate sodium lauroyl sarcosinate ammonium laureth sulfate sodium laureth sulfate ammonium lauryl sulfate sodium lauryl sulfate ammonium cocoyl isethionate sodium cocoyl isethionate sodium lauroyl isetlionate sodium cetyl sulfate sodium lauroyl lactylate triethanolamine lauroyl lactylate and mixtures thereof wherein the non ionic surfactant is selected from the group consisting of lauramine oxide cocoamine oxide decyl polyglucose lauryl polyglucose sucrose cocoate Cglucosamides sucrose laurate and mixtures thereof and wherein the amphoteric surfactant is selected from the group consisting of disodium lauroamphodiacetate sodium lauroamphoacetate cetyl dimethyl betaine cocoamidopropyl betaine cocoamidopropyl hydroxy sultaine and mixtures thereof.

A wide variety of non lathering surfactants are useful herein. The composition of the present invention can comprise a sufficient amount of one or more non lathering surfactants to emulsify the dispersed phase to yield an appropriate particle size and good application properties on wet skin.

Nonlimiting examples of these non lathering compositions are polyethylene glycol 20 sorbitan monolaurate Polysorbate 20 polyethylene glycol 5 soya sterol Steareth 20 Ceteareth 20 PPG 2 methyl glucose ether distearate Ceteth 10 Polysorbate 80 cetyl phosphate potassium cetyl phosphate diethanolamine cetyl phosphate Polysorbate 60 glyceryl stearate PEG 100 stearate polyoxyethylene 20 sorbitan trioleate Polysorbate 85 sorbitan monolaurate polyoxyethylene 4 lauryl ether sodium stearate polyglyceryl 4 isostearate hexyl laurate steareth 20 ceteareth 20 PPG 2 methyl glucose ether distearate ceteth 10 diethanolamine cetyl phosphate glyceryl stearate PEG 100 stearate and mixtures thereof.

In addition there are several commercial emulsifier mixtures that are useful in some embodiments. Examples include but are not limited to PROLIPID 141 glyceryl stearate behenyl alcohol palmitic acid stearic acid lecithin lauryl alcohol myristyl alcohol and cetyl alcohol and 151 Glyceryl stearate cetearyl alcohol stearic acid 1 propanamium 3 amino N 2 hydroxyethyl N N Dimethyl N C 16 18 Acyl Derivatives Chlorides from ISP POLAWAX NF Emulsifying wax NF INCROQUAT BEHENYL TMS behentrimonium sulfate and cetearyl alcohol from Croda and EMULLIUM DELTA cetyl alcohol glyceryl stearate peg 75 stearate ceteth 20 and steareth 20 from Gattefosse. The emulsifier systems used in conjunction with the present invention should not be limited to those disclosed in the specification one skilled could use any emulsifier system know in the art keeping in mind the personal care composition of the present invention.

The compositions of the present invention comprise 0.01 to 99 weight percent of a skin benefit agent or emollient. The skin benefit agent or emollient comprises a skin compatible oil gel or wax or mixtures thereof. By definition the skin benefit agent or emollient will have negligible solubility in any aqueous phase and may be present as discrete particles in the composition. The skin benefit agent or emollient preferably comprises no more than about 99 weight percent of the composition more preferably no more than about 70 weight percent still more preferably no more than about 60 weight percent and still more preferably no more than about 50 weight percent of the composition. The skin benefit agent or emollient preferably comprises at least about 0.01 weight percent more preferably at least about 5 weight percent even more preferably at least about 7 weight percent and still more preferably at least 10 of the composition.

The shear index is a measure of how shear thinning the materials are as described in the Lipid Rheology method described herein. It is preferred that the skin compatible oil be shear thinning either by virtue of its composition or the structurants that may be added. Preferably the shear index of the skin benefit agent or emollient will preferably be less than 0.9 more preferably less than 0.75 even more preferably less than 0.6 even more preferably less than 0.5 and still more preferably less than 0.4.

The most useful skin compatible oils for the present invention include ester oils hydrocarbon oils and silicone oils.

Ester oils as the name implies have at least one ester group in the molecule. One type of common ester oil useful in the present invention are the fatty acid mono and polyesters such as cetyl octanoate octyl isonanoanate myristyl lactate cetyl lactate isopropyl myristate myristyl myristate diisopropyl sebacate diisotearyl malate isostearyl neopentanoate isopropyl palmitate isopropyl adipate butyl stearate decyl oleate cholesterol isostearate glycerol monostearate glycerol distearate glycerol tristearate alkyl lactate alkyl citrate and alkyl tartrate sucrose ester and polyesters sorbitol ester and the like.

A second type of useful ester oil is predominantly comprised of triglycerides and modified triglycerides. These include vegetable oils such as jojoba soybean canola sunflower safflower rice bran avocado almond olive sesame persic castor coconut and mink oils. Synthetic triglycerides can also be employed. Modified triglycerides include materials such as ethoxylated and maleated triglyceride derivatives provided they are liquids. Proprietary ester blends such as those sold by Finetex as Finsolv are also suitable as is ethylhexanoic acid glyceride.

A third type of ester oil is liquid polyester formed from the reaction of a dicarboxylic acid and a diol. Examples of polyesters suitable for the present invention are the polyesters marketed by ExxonMobil under the trade name PURESYN ESTER .

A second class of skin compatible oils suitable for the present invention is liquid and semi solid hydrocarbons. These include linear and branched oils such as liquid paraffin squalene squalane mineral oil low viscosity synthetic hydrocarbons such as polyalphaolefin sold by ExxonMobil under the trade name of PURESYN PAO and polybutene under the trade name PANALANE or INDOPOL. Light low viscosity highly branched hydrocarbon oils are also suitable.

Petrolatum is a unique hydrocarbon material and a useful component of the present invention. Its semi solid nature can be controlled both in production and by the formulator through blending with other oils.

A third class of useful skin compatible oils is silicone based. They include linear and cyclic polydimethyl siloxane organo functional silicones alkyl and alkyl aryl and amino silicones.

The personal care compositions of the present invention may optionally further comprise a skin benefit agent suitable for use on the skin and which is otherwise compatible with the other selected ingredients in the composition. The skin benefit agent can be blended with the oils previously described and included as part of the main high internal phase emulsion. In this case the oil functions as a carrier for the skin benefit agent. The skin benefit agent may also be included as part of a separate high internal phase emulsion. The skin benefit agent may also be included as an add on ingredient wherein it is not part of any of the high internal phase emulsion premixes.

Non limiting examples of skin benefit agents suitable for use herein are described in The CTFA Cosmetic Ingredient Handbook Second Edition 1992 which includes a wide variety of cosmetic and pharmaceutical ingredients commonly used in the skin care industry and which are suitable for use in the compositions of the present invention. Non limiting examples of such skin benefit agents include abrasives absorbents aesthetic components such as fragrances pigments colorings colorants essential oils skin sensates astringents etc. e.g. clove oil menthol camphor eucalyptus oil eugenol menthyl lactate witch hazel distillate anti acne agents anti caking agents antimicrobial agents e.g. iodopropyl butylcarbamate antioxidants colorants cosmetic astringents cosmetic biocides drug astringents external analgesics opacifying agents pH adjusters skin bleaching and lightening agents e.g. hydroquinone kojic acid ascorbic acid magnesium ascorbyl phosphate ascorbyl glucosamine skin conditioning and or moisturizing agents i.e. glycerine and other humectants skin soothing and or healing agents e.g. panthenol and derivatives e.g. ethyl panthenol aloe vera pantothenic acid and its derivatives allantoin bisabolol and dipotassium glycyrrhizinate retinoids e.g. retinol palmitate tocopheryl nicotinate skin treating agents vitamins and derivatives thereof. In any embodiment of the present invention however the actives useful herein can be categorized by the benefit they provide or by their postulated mode of action. However it is to be understood that the actives useful herein can in some instances provide more than one benefit or operate via more than one mode of action. Therefore classifications herein are made for the sake of convenience and are not intended to limit the active to that particular application or applications listed. The skin benefit agents are furthered described hereinafter in details.

The skin benefit agent for use herein can include desquamation actives preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.1 to about 10 more preferably from about 0.2 to about 5 even more preferably from about 0.5 to about 4 by weight of the composition for non surfactant containing actives and from about 0.1 to about 3 more preferably from about 0.2 to about 3 even more preferably from about 0.5 to about 3 for surfactant containing actives. Desquamation actives enhance the skin appearance benefits of the present invention. For example the desquamation actives tend to improve the texture of the skin e.g. smoothness . One desquamation system that is suitable for use herein contains sulfhydryl compounds and zwitterionic surfactants and is described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 681 852 to Bissett.

Another desquamation system that is suitable for use herein contains salicylic acid and zwitterionic surfactants and is described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 652 228 to Bissett.

The skin benefit agent for use herein can also include anti acne actives preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.01 to about 50 more preferably from about 1 to about 20 by weight of the composition. Non limiting examples of anti acne actives suitable for use herein include resorcinol sulfur salicylic acid benzoyl peroxide erythromycin zinc and other similar materials.

Other non limiting examples of suitable anti acne actives for use herein are described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 607 980 issued to McAtee et al which description is incorporated herein by reference.

The skin benefit agent for use herein can also include anti wrinkle actives or anti atrophy actives including sulfur containing D and L amino acids and their derivatives and salts particularly the N acetyl derivatives a preferred example of which is N acetyl L cysteine thiols e.g. ethane thiol hydroxy acids e.g. alpha hydroxy acids such as lactic acid and glycolic acid or beta hydroxy acids such as salicylic acid and salicylic acid derivatives such as the octanoyl derivative phytic acid lipoic acid lysophosphatidic acid and skin peel agents e.g. phenol and the like . Also suitable is niacinamide.

Hydroxy acids as skin benefit agents herein include salicylic acid and salicylic acid derivatives preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.01 to about 50 more preferably from about 0.1 to about 10 even more preferably from about 0.5 to about 2 by weight of the composition.

Other non limiting examples of suitable anti wrinkle actives for use herein are described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 217 888 issued to Oblong et al.

The skin benefit agent for use herein can also include anti oxidants or radical scavengers preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.1 to about 10 more preferably from about 1 to about 5 by weight of the composition.

Non limiting examples of anti oxidants or radical scavengers for use herein include ascorbic acid and its salts ascorbyl esters of fatty acids ascorbic acid derivatives e.g. magnesium ascorbyl phosphate sodium ascorbyl phosphate ascorbyl sorbate tocopherol tocopherol acetate other esters of tocopherol butylated hydroxy benzoic acids and their salts 6 hydroxy 2 5 7 8 tetramethylchroman 2 carboxylic acid commercially available under the tradename Trolox gallic acid and its alkyl esters especially propyl gallate uric acid and its salts and alkyl esters sorbic acid and its salts lipoic acid amines e.g. N N diethylhydroxylamine amino guanidine sulfhydryl compounds e.g. glutathione dihydroxy fumaric acid and its salts lycine pidolate arginine pilolate nordihydroguaiaretic acid bioflavonoids curcumin lysine methionine proline superoxide dismutase silymarin tea extracts grape skin seed extracts melanin and rosemary extracts may be used.

The skin benefit agent for use herein can also include chelating agents. As used herein the term chelating agent or chelator refers to those skin benefit agents capable of removing a metal ion from a system by forming a complex so that the metal ion cannot readily participate in or catalyze chemical reactions.

The chelating agents as skin benefit agents for use herein are preferably formulated at concentrations ranging from about 0.1 to about 10 more preferably from about 1 to about 5 by weight of the composition. Non limiting examples of suitable chelating agents are described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 487 884 issued Jan. 30 1996 to Bissett et al. International Publication No. 91 16035 Bush et al. published Oct. 31 1995 and International Publication No. 91 16034 Bush et al. published Oct. 31 1995.

Preferred chelating agents for use in the active phase of the compositions of the present invention include furildioxime furilmonoxime and derivatives thereof.

The skin benefit agent for use herein includes flavonoid compounds suitable for use on the hair or skin preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.01 to about 20 more preferably from about 0.1 to about 10 more preferably from about 0.5 to about 5 by weight of the composition.

Non limiting examples of flavonoids compounds suitable for use as skin benefit agents include flavanones such as unsubstituted flavanones mono substituted flavanones and mixtures thereof chalcones selected from unsubstituted chalcones mono substituted chalcones di substituted chalcones tri substituted chalcones and mixtures thereof flavones selected from unsubstituted flavones mono substituted flavones di substituted flavones and mixtures thereof one or more isoflavones coumarins selected from unsubstituted coumarins mono substituted coumarins di substituted coumarins and mixtures thereof chromones selected from unsubstituted chromones mono substituted chromones di substituted chromones and mixtures thereof one or more dicoumarols one or more chromanones one or more chromanols isomers e.g. cis trans isomers thereof and mixtures thereof. By the term substituted as used herein means flavonoids wherein one or more hydrogen atom of the flavonoid has been independently replaced with hydroxyl C1 C8 alkyl C1 C4 alkoxyl O glycoside and the like or a mixture of these substituents.

Examples of suitable flavonoids include but are not limited to unsubstituted flavanone mono hydroxy flavanones e.g. 2 hydroxy flavanone 6 hydroxy flavanone 7 hydroxy flavanone etc. mono alkoxy flavanones e.g. 5 methoxy flavanone 6 methoxy flavanone 7 methoxy flavanone 4 methoxy flavanone etc. unsubstituted chalcone especially unsubstituted trans chalcone mono hydroxy chalcones e.g. 2 hydroxy chalcone 4 hydroxy chalcone etc. di hydroxy chalcones e.g. 2 4 dihydroxy chalcone 2 4 dihydroxy chalcone 2 2 dihydroxy chalcone 2 3 dihydroxy chalcone 2 5 dihydroxy chalcone etc. and tri hydroxy chalcones e.g. 2 3 4 trihydroxy chalcone 4 2 4 trihydroxy chalcone 2 2 4 trihydroxy chalcone etc. unsubstituted flavone 7 2 dihydroxy flavone 3 4 dihydroxy naphthoflavone 4 hydroxy flavone 5 6 benzoflavone and 7 8 benzoflavone unsubstituted isoflavone daidzein 7 4 dihydroxy isoflavone 5 7 dihydroxy 4 methoxy isoflavone soy isoflavones a mixture extracted from soy unsubstituted coumarin 4 hydroxy coumarin 7 hydroxy coumarin 6 hydroxy 4 methyl coumarin unsubstituted chromone 3 formyl chromone 3 formyl 6 isopropyl chromone unsubstituted dicoumarol unsubstituted chromanone unsubstituted chromanol and mixtures thereof.

Among these flavanoid compounds preferred are unsubstituted flavanone methoxy flavanones unsubstituted chalcone 2 4 dihydroxy chalcone isoflavone flavone and mixtures thereof more preferably soy isoflavones.

Other non limiting examples of flavanoid compounds suitable for use as skin benefit agents herein are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 686 082 and 5 686 367.

The skin benefit agent for use in the present composition can include anti inflammatory agents preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.1 to about 10 more preferably from about 0.5 to about 5 by weight of the composition.

Non limiting examples of steroidal anti inflammatory agents suitable for use herein include corticosteroids such as hydrocortisone hydroxyltriamcinolone alpha methyl dexamethasone dexamethasone phosphate beclomethasone dipropionates clobetasol valerate desonide desoxymethasone desoxycorticosterone acetate dexamethasone dichlorisone diflorasone diacetate diflucortolone valerate fluadrenolone fluclorolone acetonide fludrocortisone flumethasone pivalate fluosinolone acetonide fluocinonide flucortine butylesters fluocortolone fluprednidene fluprednylidene acetate flurandrenolone halcinonide hydrocortisone acetate hydrocortisone butyrate methylprednisolone triamcinolone acetonide cortisone cortodoxone flucetonide fludrocortisone difluorosone diacetate fluradrenolone fludrocortisone diflurosone diacetate fluradrenolone acetonide medrysone amcinafel amcinafide betamethasone and the balance of its esters chloroprednisone chlorprednisone acetate clocortelone clescinolone dichlorisone diflurprednate flucloronide flunisolide fluoromethalone fluperolone fluprednisolone hydrocortisone valerate hydrocortisone cyclopentylpropionate hydrocortamate meprednisone paramethasone prednisolone prednisone beclomethasone dipropionate triamcinolone and mixtures thereof may be used. The preferred steroidal anti inflammatory for use is hydrocortisone.

Nonsteroidal anti inflammatory agents are also suitable for use herein as skin benefit agents in the active phase of the compositions. Non limiting examples of non steroidal anti inflammatory agents suitable for use herein include oxicams e.g. piroxicam isoxicam tenoxicam sudoxicam CP 14 304 salicylates e.g. aspirin disalcid benorylate trilisate safapryn solprin diflunisal fendosal acetic acid derivatives e.g. diclofenac fenclofenac indomethacin sulindac tolmetin isoxepac furofenac tiopinac zidometacin acematacin fentiazac zomepirac clindanac oxepinac felbinac ketorolac fenamates e.g. mefenamic meclofenamic flufenamic niflumic tolfenamic acids propionic acid derivatives e g. ibuprofen naproxen benoxaprofen flurbiprofen ketoprofen fenoprofen fenbufen indopropfen pirprofen carprofen oxaprozin pranoprofen miroprofen tioxaprofen suprofen alminoprofen tiaprofenic pyrazoles e.g. phenylbutazone oxyphenbutazone feprazone azapropazone trimethazone and combinations thereof as well as any dermatologically acceptable salts or esters of thereof.

Other non limiting examples of suitable anti inflammatory or similar other skin benefit agents include candelilla wax bisabolol e.g. alpha bisabolol aloe vera plant sterols e.g. phytosterol Manjistha extracted from plants in the genus particularly and Guggal extracted from plants in the genus particularly kola extract chamomile red clover extract sea whip extract and combinations thereof.

Other non limiting examples of suitable anti inflammatory or similar other skin benefit agents include compounds of the Licorice the plant genus species family including glycyrrhetic acid glycyrrhizic acid and derivatives thereof e.g. salts and esters . Suitable salts of the foregoing compounds include metal and ammonium salts. Suitable esters include C Csaturated or unsaturated esters of the acids preferably C C more preferably C C. Specific non limiting examples of the foregoing include oil soluble licorice extract the glycyrrhizic and glycyrrhetic acids themselves monoammonium glycyrrhizinate monopotassium glycyrrhizinate dipotassium glycyrrhizinate 1 beta glycyrrhetic acid stearyl glycyrrhetinate and 3 stearyloxy glycyrrhetinic acid disodium 3 succinyloxy beta glycyrrhetinate and combinations thereof.

The skin benefit agent for use in the compositions of the present invention anti cellulite agents non limiting examples of which include xanthine compounds such as caffeine theophylline theobromine aminophylline and combinations thereof.

The skin benefit agent for use in the present invention include topical anesthetics non limiting examples of which include benzocaine lidocaine bupivacaine chlorprocaine dibucaine etidocaine mepivacaine tetracaine dyclonine hexylcaine procaine ketamine pramoxine phenol pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof and combinations thereof.

The skin benefit agent for use in the present invention include tanning actives preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.1 to about 20 by weight of the composition. Non limiting examples of such tanning agents include dihydroxyacetone which is also known as DHA or 1 3 dihydroxy 2 propanone.

The skin benefit agent for use in the present invention can include skin lightening agents preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.1 to about 10 more preferably from about 0.2 to about 5 more preferably from about 0.5 to about 2 by weight of the composition. Non limiting examples of skin lightening agents suitable for use herein include kojic acid arbutin ascorbic acid and derivatives thereof e.g. magnesium ascorbyl phosphate or sodium ascorbyl phosphate and extracts e.g. mulberry extract placental extract as well as titanium dioxide and zinc oxide. Non limiting examples of skin lightening agents suitable for use herein also include those described in WO 95 34280 WO 95 07432 and WO 95 23780.

The skin benefit agent for use in the present invention include skin soothing and skin healing actives preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.1 to about 30 more preferably from about 0.5 to about 20 still more preferably from about 0.5 to about 10 by weight of the composition. Non limiting examples of skin soothing or skin healing actives suitable for use herein include panthenoic acid derivatives e.g. panthenol dexpanthenol ethyl panthenol aloe vera allantoin bisabolol and dipotassium glycyrrhizinate.

The skin benefit agent for use in compositions of the present invention may include antimicrobial actives preferred concentrations of which range from about 0.001 to about 10 more preferably from about 0.01 to about 5 and still more preferably from about 0.05 to about 2 by weight of the compositions.

Non limiting examples of antimicrobial actives for use herein includes lactam drugs quinolone drugs ciprofloxacin norfloxacin tetracycline erythromycin amikacin 2 4 4 trichloro 2 hydroxy diphenyl ether 3 4 4 trichlorobanilide phenoxyethanol phenoxy propanol phenoxyisopropanol doxycycline capreomycin chlorhexidine chlortetracycline oxytetracycline clindamycin ethambutol hexamidine isethionate metronidazole pentamidine gentamicin kanamycin lineomycin methacycline methenamine minocycline neomycin netilmicin paromomycin streptomycin tobramycin miconazole tetracycline hydrochloride erythromycin zinc erythromycin erythromycin estolate erythromycin stearate amikacin sulfate doxycycline hydrochloride capreomycin sulfate chlorhexidine gluconate chlorhexidine hydrochloride chlortetracycline hydrochloride oxytetracycline hydrochloride clindamycin hydrochloride ethambutol hydrochloride metronidazole hydrochloride pentamidine hydrochloride gentamicin sulfate kanamycin sulfate lineomycin hydrochloride methacycline hydrochloride methenamine hippurate methenamine mandelate minocycline hydrochloride neomycin sulfate netilmicin sulfate paromomycin sulfate streptomycin sulfate tobramycin sulfate miconazole hydrochloride ketaconazole amanfadine hydrochloride amanfadine sulfate octopirox parachlorometa xylenol nystatin tolnaftate zinc pyrithione clotrimazole and combinations thereof.

The skin benefit agent for use in the present invention may comprise a sunscreen active either organic or inorganic sunscreen actives. Among the inorganic sunscreens useful hererin are metallic oxides such as titanium dioxide having an average primary particle size of from about 15 nm to about 100 nm zinc oxide having an average primary particle size of from about 15 nm to about 150 nm zirconium oxide having an average primary particle size of from about 15 nm to about 150 nm iron oxide having an average primary particle size of from about 15 nm to about 500 nm and mixtures thereof.

The concentration of the sunscreen active for use in the composition preferably ranges from about 0.1 to about 20 more typically from about 0.5 to about 10 by weight of the composition. Exact amounts of such sunscreen actives will vary depending upon the sunscreen or sunscreens chosen and the desired Sun Protection Factor SPF .

A wide variety of conventional organic sunscreen actives are also suitable for use herein non limiting examples of which include p aminobenzoic acid its salts and its derivatives ethyl isobutyl glyceryl esters p dimethylaminobenzoic acid anthranilates i.e. o amino benzoates methyl menthyl phenyl benzyl phenylethyl linalyl terpinyl and cyclohexenyl esters salicylates amyl phenyl octyl benzyl menthyl glyceryl and di pro pyleneglycol esters cinnamic acid derivatives menthyl and benzyl esters a phenyl cinnamonitrile butyl cinnamoyl pyruvate dihydroxycinnamic acid derivatives umbelliferone methylumbelliferone methylaceto umbelliferone trihydroxy cinnamic acid derivatives esculetin methylesculetin daphnetin and the glucosides esculin and daphnin hydrocarbons diphenylbutadiene stilbene dibenzalacetone and benzalacetophenone naphtholsulfonates sodium salts of 2 naphthol 3 6 disulfonic and of 2 naphthol 6 8 disulfonic acids di hydroxynaphthoic acid and its salts o and p hydroxybiphenyldisulfonates coumarin derivatives 7 hydroxy 7 methyl 3 phenyl diazoles 2 acetyl 3 bromoindazole phenyl benzoxazole methyl naphthoxazole various aryl benzothiazoles quinine salts bisulfate sulfate chloride oleate and tannate quinoline derivatives 8 hydroxyquinoline salts 2 phenylquinoline hydroxy or methoxy substituted benzophenones uric and violuric acids tannic acid and its derivatives e.g. hexaethylether butyl carbotol 6 propyl piperonyl ether hydroquinone benzophenones oxybenzene sulisobenzone dioxybenzone benzoresorcinol 2 2 4 4 tetrahydroxybenzophenone 2 2 dihydroxy 4 4 dimethoxybenzophenone octabenzone 4 isopropyldibenzoylmethane butylmethoxydibenzoylmethane etocrylene octocrylene 3 4 methylbenzylidene bornan 2 one terephthalylidene dicamphor sulfonic acid and 4 isopropyl di benzoylmethane. Among these sunscreens preferred are 2 ethylhexyl p methoxycinnamate commercially available as PARSOL MCX 4 4 t butyl methoxydibenzoyl methane commercially available as PARSOL 1789 2 hydroxy 4 methoxybenzophenone octyldimethyl p aminobenzoic acid digalloyltrioleate 2 2 dihydroxy 4 methoxybenzophenone ethyl 4 bis hydroxy propyl aminobenzoate 2 ethylhexyl 2 cyano 3 3 diphenylacrylate 2 ethylhexyl salicylate glyceryl p aminobenzoate 3 3 5 tri methylcyclohexylsalicylate methylanthranilate p dimethyl aminobenzoic acid or aminobenzoate 2 ethylhexyl p dimethyl amino benzoate 2 phenylbenzimidazole 5 sulfonic acid 2 p dimethylaminophenyl 5 sulfonicbenzoxazoic acid octocrylene and combinations thereof.

Non limiting examples of other sunscreen actives suitable for use herein include those described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 937 370 issued to Sabatelli on Jun. 26 1990 and U.S. Pat. No. 4 999 186 issued to Sabatelli Spirnak on Mar. 12 1991. Among those sunscreen actives described preferred are 4 N N 2 ethylhexyl methyl aminobenzoic acid ester of 2 4 dihydroxybenzophenone N N di 2 ethylhexyl 4 aminobenzoic acid ester with 4 hydroxydibenzoylmethane 4 N N 2 ethylhexyl methyl aminobenzoic acid ester with 4 hydroxydibenzoylmethane 4 N N 2 ethylhexyl methyl aminobenzoic acid ester of 2 hydroxy 4 2 hydroxyethoxy benzophenone 4 N N 2 ethylhexyl methylaminobenzoic acid ester of 4 2 hydroxyethoxy dibenzoylmethane N N di 2 ethylhexyl 4 aminobenzoic acid ester of 2 hydroxy 4 2 hydroxyethoxy benzophenone and N N di 2 ethylhexyl 4 aminobenzoic acid ester of 4 2 hydroxyethoxy dibenzoylmethane and mixtures thereof. Especially preferred sunscreen actives include 4 4 t butylmethoxydibenzoylmethane 2 ethylhexyl p methoxycinnamate phenyl benzimidazole sulfonic acid and octocrylene.

The skin benefit agent for use in compositions of the present invention may include visual skin enhancement ingredients. These include ingredients that mask the appearance of any number of skin imperfections such as age spot fine lines wrinkles blemishes etc. including but not limited to titanium dioxide zinc oxide and iron oxides. Also suitable for use herein are organic particulates that diffuse light when deposited on the skin. Preferred concentrations of these ingredients range from about 0.001 to about 10 more preferably from about 0.01 to about 5 and still more preferably from about 0.05 to about 2 by weight of the compositions.

The rinsable personal care composition of the present invention comprises from 0.01 to 20 weight percent of a hydrophobically modified non platelet particle. The non platelet particles of the personal care compositions preferably comprises no more than about 20 weight percent of the composition more preferably no more than about 10 weight percent even more preferably no more than about 7 weight percent and still more preferably no more than about 5 weight percent of the personal care composition. The non platelet particles of the personal care composition preferably comprises at least about 0.01 weight percent of the personal care composition more preferably at least about 0.05 weight percent even more preferably at least about 0.1 weight percent and still more preferably at least about 0.25 by weight of the composition.

Examples of particles which can be used in their hydrophobically modified state include but are not limited to those derived from a wide variety of materials including those derived from inorganic organic natural and synthetic sources provided that they meet the non platelet shape requirement. Non limiting examples of these materials include those selected from the group consisting of almond meal alumina aluminum oxide titanium dioxide sodium stearate stearic acid zinc stearate aluminum silicate apricot seed powder aftapulgite barley flour bismuth oxychloride boron nitride calcium carbonate calcium phosphate calcium pyrophosphate calcium sulfate cellulose chalk chitin clay corn cob meal corn cob powder corn flour corn meal corn starch diatomaceous earth dicalcium phosphate dicalcium phosphate dihydrate fullers earth hydrated silica hydroxyapatite iron oxide jojoba seed powder kaolin loofah magnesium trisilicate mica microcrystalline cellulose montmorillonite oat bran oat flour oatmeal peach pit powder pecan shell powder polybutylene polyethylene polyisobutylene polymethylstyrene polypropylene polystyrene polyurethane nylon teflon i.e. polytetrafluoroethylene polyhalogenated olefins pumice rice bran rye flour sericite silica silk sodium bicarbonate sodium silicoaluminate soy flour synthetic hectorite talc tin oxide titanium dioxide tricalcium phosphate walnut shell powder wheat bran wheat flour wheat starch zirconium silicate and mixtures thereof. Also useful are micronized particles made from mixed polymers e.g. copolymers terpolymers etc. such as polyethylene polypropylene copolymer polyethylene propylene isobutylene copolymer polyethylene styrene copolymer and the like.

The particle size is determined by measuring the diameter thickness of the particulate material through traditional means such as light scattering. The non platelet particle of the personal care compositions preferably have an average diameter not greater than about 200 m more preferably not greater than 100 m even more preferably not greater than about 80 m still more preferably not greater than about 60 m. The non platelet particle of the personal care compositions preferably have a diameter of at least about 0.01 m more preferably at least about 0.05 m even more preferably at least about 0.1 m and still more preferably at least about 0.2 m.

When particles are applied and rinsed as described in the Particle Deposition Tape Strip Method below the deposited particle on the skin is at least 0.5 g cm more preferably at least 1 g cm and most preferably at least 5 g cm.

In an embodiment of the present invention the non platelet particle is either hydrophobic or has been hydrophobically modified. The Particle Contact Angle Test of the present invention is used to determine contact angle of non platelet particles. The greater the contact angle the greater the hydrophobicity of the non platelet particle. The non platelet particle of the present invention possess a contact angle of at least 60 more preferably greater than 80 even more preferably greater than 100 still more preferably greater than 110 even still more preferably greater than 120 even still even more preferably greater than 130 even still even more preferably greater than 135 . The hydrophobically modified non platelet particle or HMNPP allows for the entrapment of the HMNPP within the dispersed phase and greater deposition of the HMNPP. In a preferred embodiment of the present invention the invention contains both HMNPPs and a dispersed oil phase. Preferably the ratio of HMNPP to skin benefit agent or emollient is 1 1 to about 1 100 more preferably 1 2 to about 1 80 still more preferably 1 3 to about 1 70 and most preferably 1 7 to about 1 60.

The HMNPP of the present invention preferably has a hydrophobic coating comprising no more than about 20 weight percent of the total particle weight more preferably no more than about 15 weight percent even more preferably no more than about 10 weight percent even more preferably no more than 5 weight percent and even more preferably no more than 2 weight percent. The HMNPP of the present invention preferably has a hydrophobic coating comprising at least about 0.1 weight percent of the total particle weight more preferably at least about 0.5 weight percent even more preferably at least about 1 weight percent. Nonlimiting examples of the hydrophobic surface treatment useful herein include silicones acrylate silicone copolymers acrylate polymers alkyl silane isopropyl titanium triisostearate sodium stearate magnesium myristate perfluoroalcohol phosphate perfluoropolymethyl isopropyl ether lecithin carnauba wax polyethylene chitosan lauroyl lysine plant lipid extracts and mixtures thereof preferably silicones silanes and stearates.

When formulated into a product the HMNPP s are preferably entrapped within the skin benefit agent or emollient. This necessitates that the oil phase particle size is generally larger than the HMNPP. In a preferred embodiment of the invention the skin benefit agent or emollient contain only a small number of HMNPPs per oil particles. Preferably this is less than 20 more preferably less than 10 most preferably less than 5. These parameters the relative size of the oil droplets to the HMNPP and the approximate number of HMNPP particles per dispersed oil particles can be determined by using visual inspection with light microscopy.

The HMNPP and skin benefit agent or emollient can be mixed into the composition via a premix or separately. For the case of separate addition the hydrophobic pigments partition into the skin benefit agent or emollient oil phase during the processing of the formulation. However preferably the HMNPP may not be supplied dispersed in liquid prior to their incorporation into the personal care composition of the present invention.

The composition will preferably contain an aquouse phase. The aqueous phase will be composed of water and or other hydroxyl containing solvents such as glycerine propylene glycol and other water miscible solvents. The aqueous phase may be continuous or discontinuous depending on the formulation. Preferably the composition will contain at least 10 water more preferably at least 20 even more preferably at least 30 and even more preferably 40 and most preferably at least 50 . Preferably the aqueous phase will comprise no more than 90 of the composition even more preferably no more than 80 of the composition even more preferably less than 75 of the composition and most preferably less than 70 of the composition.

The compositions of the present invention may contain one or more additional skin care components. In a preferred embodiment where the composition is to be in contact with human keratinous tissue the additional components should be suitable for application to keratinous tissue that is when incorporated into the composition they are suitable for use in contact with human keratinous tissue without undue toxicity incompatibility instability allergic response and the like within the scope of sound medical judgment.

The Second Edition 1992 describes a wide variety of nonlimiting cosmetic and pharmaceutical ingredients commonly used in the personal care industry which are suitable for use in the compositions of the present invention.

In any embodiment of the present invention however the additional components useful herein can be categorized by the benefit they provide or by their postulated mode of action. However it is to be understood that the additional components useful herein can in some instances provide more than one benefit or operate via more than one mode of action. Therefore classifications herein are made for the sake of convenience and are not intended to limit the active to that particular application or applications listed.

The present invention may optionally comprise particles having a wide range of shapes surface characteristics and hardness characteristics can be utilized to provide optical effect. These particles of the personal care compositions preferably have an average diameter not greater than about 200 m more preferably not greater than 100 m even more preferably not greater than about 80 m still more preferably not greater than than about 60 m. The particles of the personal care compositions preferably have a diameter of at least about 0.01 m more preferably at least about 0.05 m even more preferably at least about 0.1 m and still more preferably at least about 0.2 m.

These particles may be used as is without being hydrophobically modified although some may in fact be naturally hydrophobic include but are not limited to those derived from a wide variety of materials including those derived from inorganic organic natural and synthetic sources. Non limiting examples of these materials include those selected from the group consisting of almond meal alumina aluminum oxide titanium dioxide mica coated mica sodium stearate stearic acid zinc stearate aluminum silicate apricot seed powder aftapulgite barley flour bismuth oxychloride boron nitride calcium carbonate calcium phosphate calcium pyrophosphate calcium sulfate cellulose chalk chitin clay corn cob meal corn cob powder corn flour corn meal corn starch diatomaceous earth dicalcium phosphate dicalcium phosphate dihydrate fullers earth hydrated silica hydroxyapatite iron oxide jojoba seed powder kaolin loofah magnesium trisilicate mica microcrystalline cellulose montmorillonite oat bran oat flour oatmeal peach pit powder pecan shell powder polybutylene polyethylene polyisobutylene polymethylstyrene polypropylene polystyrene polyurethane nylon teflon i.e. polytetrafluoroethylene polyhalogenated olefins pumice rice bran rye flour sericite silica silk sodium bicarbonate sodium silicoaluminate soy flour synthetic hectorite talc tin oxide titanium dioxide tricalcium phosphate walnut shell powder wheat bran wheat flour wheat starch zirconium silicate and mixtures thereof. Also useful are micronized particles made from mixed polymers e.g. copolymers terpolymers etc. such as polyethylene polypropylene copolymer polyethylene propylene isobutylene copolymer polyethylene styrene copolymer and the like.

The present invention may optionally comprise interference pigments such as those disclosed in co pending and commonly assigned under U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 841 173 filed on May 7 2004 by Clapp et al.

The interference pigments of the present invention are platelet particulates. The platelet particulates of the personal care compositions preferably have a thickness of no more than about 51 m more preferably no more than about 2 m still more preferably no more than about 1 m. The platelet particulates of the personal care composition preferably have a thickness of at least about 0.02 m more preferably at least about 0.05 m even more preferably at least about 0.1 m and still more preferably at least about 0.2 m.

The interference pigment of the personal care compositions preferably have an average diameter not greater than about 200 m more preferably not greater than 100 m even more preferably not greater than about 80 m still more preferably not greater than than about 60 m. The interference pigment of the personal care compositions preferably have a diameter of at least about 0.1 m more preferably at least about 1.0 m even more preferably at least about 2.0 m and still more preferably at least about 5.0 m.

The interference pigment of the personal care compositions comprises a multilayer structure. The centre of the particulates is a flat substrate with a refractive index RI normally below 1.8. A wide variety of particle substrates are useful herein. Nonlimiting examples are natural mica synthetic mica graphite talc kaolin alumina flake bismuth oxychloride silica flake glass flake ceramics titanium dioxide CaSO CaCO BaSO borosilicate and mixtures thereof preferably mica silica and alumina flakes.

A layer of thin film or a multiple layer of thin films are coated on the surface of a substrate described above. The thin films are made of highly refractive materials. The refractive index of these materials is normally above 1.8.

A wide variety of thin films are useful herein. Nonlimiting examples are TiO FeO SnO CrO ZnO ZnS ZnO SnO ZrO CaF AlO BiOCl and mixtures thereof or in the form of separate layers preferably TiO FeO CrOSnO. For the multiple layer structures the thin films can be consisted of all high refractive index materials or alternation of thin films with high and low RI materials with the high RI film as the top layer.

The interference color is a function of the thickness of thin film the thickness for a specific color may be different for different materials. For TiO a layer of 40 nm to 60 nm or a whole number multiple thereof gives silver color 60 nm to 80 nm yellow color 80 nm to 100 nm red color 100 nm to 130 nm blue color 130 nm to 160 nm green color. In addition to the interference color other transparent absorption pigments can be precipitated on top of or simultaneously with the TiOlayer. Common materials are red or black iron oxide ferric ferrocyanide chromium oxide or carmine. It was found that the color of the interference pigment in addition to its brightness had a significant influence on human perception of skin tone. In general preferred colors are silver gold red green and mixtures thereof.

Nonlimiting examples of the interference pigments useful herein include those supplied by Persperse Inc. under the trade name PRESTIGE FLONAC supplied by EMD Chemicals Inc. under the trade name TIMIRON COLORONA DICHRONA and XIRONA and supplied by Kobo Products Inc. under the trade name Kobopearl and supplied by Engelhard Co. under the trade name FLAMENCO TIMICA DUOCHROME .

The present invention may optionally comprise Hydrophobically Modified Interference Pigments such as those disclosed in co pending and commonly assigned under U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 841 173 filed on May 7 2004 by Clapp et al.

In an embodiment of the present invention the interference pigment surface is either hydrophobic or has been hydrophobically modified. The Particle Contact Angle Test of the present invention is used to determine contact angle of interference pigments. The greater the contact angle the greater the hydrophobicity of the interference pigment. The interference pigment of the present invention possess a contact angle of at least 60 more preferably greater than 80 even more preferably greater than 100 still more preferably greater than 110 even still more preferably greater than 120 even still even more preferably greater than 130 even still even more preferably greater than 140 . The hydrophobically modified interference pigment or HMIP allows for the entrapment of the HMIP within the skin benefit agent or emollient and greater deposition of the HMIP.

When formulated into a product the HMIP s are preferably entrapped within the the skin benefit agent or emollient.

The HMIP and the oil can be mixed into the composition via a premix or separately. For the case of separate addition the hydrophobic pigments partition into the oil phase during the processing of the formulation. Nonlimiting examples of the hydrophobic surface treatment useful herein include silicones acrylate silicone copolymers acrylate polymers alkyl silane isopropyl titanium triisostearate sodium stearate magnesium myristate perfluoroalcohol phosphate perfluoropolymethyl isopropyl ether lecithin carnauba wax polyethylene chitosan lauroyl lysine plant lipid extracts and mixtures thereof preferably silicones silanes and stearates. Surface treatment houses include US Cosmetics KOBO Products Inc. and Cardre Inc.

The present invention may optionally comprise a structurant. The structurant can provide the dispersed phase with the correct rheological properties. This can aid in providing effective deposition and retention to the skin the structured oil or oil phase should have a viscosity in the range of 100 to about 200 000 poise measured at 1 Sec 1 preferably 200 to about 100 000 poise and most preferably 200 to about 50 000 poise as determined using the lipid rheology method described below. The amount of structurant required to produce this viscosity will vary depending on the oil and the structurant but in general the structurant will preferably be less than 75 weight percent of the dispersed oil phase more preferably less than 50 weight percent and still more preferably less than 35 weight percent of the dispersed oil phase.

Structurants meeting the above requirements with the selected skin compatible oil can form 3 dimensional network to build up the viscosity of the selected oils. It has been found that such structured oil phases i.e. built with the 3 dimensional network are extremely desirable for use as wet skin treatment compositions used in bathing. These structured oils can deposit and be retained very effectively on wet skin and retained after rinsing and drying to provide long lasting after wash skin benefit without causing a too oily greasy wet and dry feel. It is believed that the highly desirable in use and after use properties of such structured oils are due to their shear thinning rheological properties and the weak structure of the network. Due to its high low shear viscosity the 3 dimensional network structured oil can stick and retain well on the skin during application of the skin conditioner. After being deposited on the skin the network yields easily during rubbing due to the weak structuring of the crystal network and its lower high shear viscosity.

The structurant can be either an organic or inorganic structurant. Examples of organic thickeners suitable for the invention are solid fatty acid esters natural or modified fats fatty acid fatty amine fatty alcohol natural and synthetic waxes and petrolatum and the block copolymers sold under the name KRATON by Shell. Inorganic structuring agents include hydrophobically modified silica or hydrophobically modified clay. Nonlimiting examples of inorganic structurants are BENTONE 27V BENTONE 38V or BENTONE GEL MIO V from Rheox and CAB O SIL TS720 or CAB O SIL M5 from Cabot Corporation.

The structurant may be crystalline may be a natural or synthetic crystalline wax. Mineral animal or plant vegetable waxes are all described as natural waxes. Synthetic waxes are described as those waxes that have been synthetically polymerized from raw materials or chemically modified natural waxes.

Among the natural crystalline waxes which may be used are petroleum based waxes such as paraffins and microcrystalline wax. Molecular weights of paraffin waxes generally range from 360 to 420 26 to 30 carbon atoms although versions with longer chains molecular weights up to 600 are available. Typical melting points are 126 134 F. 52 57 C. the high molecular weight versions have melting points near 170 F. 77 C. . Paraffin waxes are brittle and the addition of oil weakens the structure lowers the tensile strength .

Microcrystalline waxes MC melting points are 145 to 195 F. 63 91 C. . The crystals of MC wax are small and irregular and consist of several types plates malcrystalline and needle. Animal waxes can be obtained from such things as bees insects or whales. These waxes include but are not limited to beeswax Chinese wax shellac wax spermaceti and wool wax. Plant waxes can be derived from beans leaves and berries. Plant or vegetable waxes can include bayberry candelilla carnauba cotton esparto fir Japan ouricury palm rice oil sugar cane ucuhuba and cocoa butter.

Among synthetic crystalline waxes which may be used are crystalline polymers such as polyethylene Fischer Tropsch waxes such as polymethylene chemically modified waxes polymerized alpha olefins and synthetic animal waxes. For example siliconyl beeswax may be used which is beeswax that has been chemically modified.

Another structurant that may be optionally used in the present invention is the microcrystalline wax petrolatum also known as petrolatum or mineral jelly which typically comprises about 90 by wt. of a natural mixture of microcrystalline waxes plus minor amounts of other impurities

In addition structurant may be a natural or synthetic hydrogenated oil or fat. Hydrogenated oils are also commonly referred to as fats. In addition some fatty acids and fatty alcohols can be used as structurant as well as salts of fatty acids hydroxy fatty acids and fatty acid esters.

Hydrogenated oils can be hydrogenated vegetable oils hydrogenated coconut oil hydrogenated palm kernel oil hydrogenated rapeseed oil and many others. Another hydrogenated oil is castorwax.

Along with size and shape a high concentration of particles is required so that the crystals interact in the dispersion. Above a certain critical volume fraction of crystals these interactions will lead to a buildup of a network that extends throughout the whole volume. The crystal network creates a solid like material having viscoelastic properties.

Thus the ability of the fat crystals of the hydrogenated oils to form continuous networks that entrap the oil depends on the solid fat content in the fat oil mixtures and also on crystal morphology. For example when there is a high concentration of beta prime crystals a continuous network of small crystals extends through the sample and the sample is solid and stable. Typically at solid fat contents of 40 50 the consistency is hard and brittle at 20 30 the system is solid like but yielding at lower concentrations the consistency is more fluid often with a grainy texture and at very low concentrations the fat crystals separate from the liquid. However the exact concentrations of crystals required to build desired structures varies depending on the fat and oil used. In practice the crystal formation is also dependent on processing conditions such as temperature crystal formation rate and shearing.

Crystalline long chain fatty acids and long chain fatty alcohols can also be used to structure benefit agents. Examples of fatty acids are myristic acid palmitic acid stearic acid arachidic acid and behenic acid. Examples of fatty alcohols are palmityl alcohol stearyl alcohol arachyl alcohol and behenyl alcohol. Some crystalline fatty acid esters and glyceride esters will also provide structuring benefit.

In addition the crystalline materials can be combined with other structuring materials such as natural and synthetic waxes to form composite networks to structure benefit agents

The compositions of the present invention in some embodiments may further include one or more thickening aqueous phase stability agents. Because different stability agents thicken with different efficiencies it is difficult to provide an accurate compositional range however when present the composition preferably comprises no more than about 10 weight percent more preferably no more than about 8 weight percent and still more preferably no more than about 7 weight percent of the personal care composition. When present the thickening aqueous phase stability agent preferably comprises at least about 0.01 weight percent more preferably at least about 0.05 weight percent and still more preferably at least about 0.1 weight percent of the personal care composition.

Nonlimiting examples of thickening agents useful herein include carboxylic acid polymers such as the carbomers such as those commercially available under the tradename CARBOPOL 900 series from B.F. Goodrich e.g. CARBOPOL 954 . Other suitable carboxylic acid polymeric agents include copolymers of Calkyl acrylates with one or more monomers of acrylic acid methacrylic acid or one of their short chain i.e. Calcohol esters wherein the crosslinking agent is an allyl ether of sucrose or pentaerytritol. These copolymers are known as acrylates Calkyl acrylate crosspolymers and are commercially available as CARBOPOL 1342 CARBOPOL 1382 PEMULEN TR 1 and PEMULEN TR 2 from B.F. Goodrich.

Other nonlimiting examples of thickening agents include crosslinked polyacrylate polymers including both cationic and nonionic polymers.

Still other nonlimiting examples of thickening agents include the polyacrylamide polymers especially nonionic polyacrylamide polymers including substituted branched or unbranched polymers. More preferred among these polyacrylamide polymers is the nonionic polymer given the CTFA designation polyacrylamide and isoparaffin and laureth 7 available under the Tradename SEPIGEL 305 from Seppic Corporation Fairfield N.J. . Other polyacrylamide polymers useful herein include multi block copolymers of acrylamides and substituted acrylamides with acrylic acids and substituted acrylic acids. Commercially available examples of these multi block copolymers include HYPAN SR150H SS500V SS500W SSSA100H from Lipo Chemicals Inc. Patterson N.J. .

Another nonlimiting class of thickening agents useful herein are the polysaccharides. Nonlimiting examples of polysaccharide gelling agents include those selected from cellulose and cellulose derivatives. Preferred among the alkyl hydroxyalkyl cellulose ethers is the material given the CTFA designation cetyl hydroxyethylcellulose which is the ether of cetyl alcohol and hydroxyethylcellulose sold under the tradename NATROSEL CS PLUS from Aqualon Corporation Wilmington Del. . Other useful polysaccharides include scleroglucans which are a linear chain of 1 3 linked glucose units with a 1 6 linked glucose every three units a commercially available example of which is CLEAROGEL CS11 from Michel Mercier Products Inc. Mountainside N.J. .

Another nonlimiting class of thickening agents useful herein are the gums. Nonlimiting examples of gums useful herein include hectorite hydrated silica xantham gum and mixtures thereof.

Yet another nonlimiting class of thickening agents useful herein are the modified starches. Acrylate modified starches such as WATERLOCK from Grain Processing Corporation may be used. Hydroxypropyl starch phosphate tradename STRUCTURE XL from National Starch is another example of a useful modified starch and other useful examples include ARISTOFLEX HMB Ammonium Acrylodimethyltaruate Beheneth 25 Methacrylate Crosspolymer from Clariant and cationic stabylens.

The present invention may also contain organic cationic deposition polymer Concentrations of the cationic deposition polymer preferably range from about 0.025 to about 3 more preferably from about 0.05 to about 2 even more preferably from about 0.1 to about 1 by weight of the personal care composition.

Lipid rheology is measured on a TA Instruments AR2000 stress controlled rheometer with a Peltier temperature controlled sample stage or an equivalent. A parallel plate geometry is used with a 40 mm plate and a 1 mm gap. The lower plate is heated to 85 C. and the melted lipid and structurant if present is added onto the lower plate and allowed to equilibrate. The upper plate is then lowered to the 1 mm gap while ensuring the lipid fills the gap fully spinning the top plate and adding more lipid to promote wicking and the sample is cooled quickly to 25 C. and equilibrated at 25 C. for 5 minutes. Viscosity is then measured using a stress ramp procedure common on these types of machines using a logarithmic stress ramp from 20 to 2000 Pa at a rate of 60 seconds per decade 2 minute ramp test with 20 measurements points per decade. The starting and ending stress is sufficient to induce flow and reach a shear rate of at least 10 sec 1. Viscosity is recorded and the data fitted to a power law model using Equation 1. Only points between 0.001 sec 1 and 40 seconds 1 are to be used in the power law fit. The viscosity at 1.0 sec 1 is calculated from Equation 1. One should carefully watch the sample during the test so that when the material is ejected from under the plate the method is stopped.

The Pigment Deposition Tape Strip Method can be used to semi quantitatively determine deposition of shiny particles onto keratinous surfaces. The method employs the use of a tape strip for removing particles from skin and imaging these particles for a quantitation of deposited particles.

The first step is to weigh 1 g of pigment that is the same as those in the product being tested in a vial. Next 9 g melted petrolatum is added and mixed well with a spatula.

Weigh out 994.17 g purified water Millipore or equivalent . While mixing 600 700 rpm using a Lightning Laboratory Stirrer or Heidolph 2051 mixer and appropriate blade to the water slowly add 3.50 g Pemulen TR 1 BF Goodrich so as to prevent clumping. Follow this with 30 minutes of stirring to ensure complete hydration of Pemulen. To the mixture while still stirring slowly add 2.33 g TEA Triethanolamine 99 Dow Chemical . Follow this by an additional 30 minutes of stirring to ensure homogeneity.

Evaluate product for separation after standing for 1 hour. Separation is not acceptable. Store in glass jars at room temperature. Now mix 1 ml of the pigment petrolatum mixture with 19 ml of 0.35 Pemulen Gel mixture using Cito Unguator on speed 8 2050 rpm for 4 minutes. This combination of the 1 ml of the pigment petrolatum mixture with 19 ml of 0.35 Pemulen Gel mixture will be used to evaluate deposition of pigment on the skin.

Wash inner arms of subject with Olay Sensitive Skin bar and warm water rinsing until all soap has been removed. Dry with clean paper towels. Mark inner arms of subject with three 4 6 cm sites per arm. Apply to site 1 upper left nearest elbow 5 l of the mixture described previously spreading evenly over site and rubbing in with gloved finger for 20 seconds covering entire site. This application equals 1 g pigment per cm. Apply to site 2 middle left 24 l of mixture described previously spreading evenly over site and rubbing in with gloved finger for 20 seconds covering entire site. This application equals 5 g pigment per cm. Apply to site 3 bottom left nearest wrist 48 l of mixture described previously. This equals 10 g per cm. Apply to site 4 top right nearest elbow 96 l of mixture described previously. This equals 20 g per cm. Let sites air dry for a minimum of 10 min. Apply to site 5 middle right 96 l of the product being tested. Apply to site 6 bottom right nearest wrist 96 l of the product being tested. Rinse each site 5 and 6 with warm tap water for 10 seconds each not contaminating one site with the next while rinsing. Then pat each site dry gently with clean paper towels again not contaminating one site with the next.

Take approximately 1 of Scotch Tape and apply to site 1. Rub over the top of the applied tape to pick up product below. Remove the tape and reapply same tape to very same previously stripped area so as to pull product from area twice on the same tape. Then secure this stripping tape to a clean microscope slide product side up marking the slide as 1 g cm . Repeat the application of Scotch Tape method described previously for sites 2 through 6 in that order marking each slide appropriately.

Visually compare the numbers of pigment particles in sites 5 and 6 images with those in the standard sites 1 through 4 images and give a deposition level for example 8 g cm. Take an average of the observations of sites 5 and 6 from at least 3 people.

The Particle Contact Angle Test is used to determine hydrophobicity of shiny particles. The greater the contact angle the greater the hydrophobicity of the particle.

A Spectra Tech Qwik Handi Press Thermo Nicolet Madison Wis. is used to compress the powder into 7 mm diameter discs. After applying firm hand pressure the compression is held for 1 min prior to releasing pressure and removing the disc. The disc is examined for smoothness and rejected unless the surface is smooth. First Ten Angstrom FT 200 First Ten Angstrom Portsmouth Va. contact angle analyzer is employed to determine advancing and receding contact angles. 7 microliters of water Millipore Milli Q deionized distilled is dangled from the needle and slowly placed on the middle of the disc. The needle is left inserted in the drop but not in contact with disc. 0.1 microliters second of water is pumped into the drop. Contact angle images were captured every 0.1 sec. until the maximum contact angle is obtained. The process is reversed to determine the receding contact angle in that the needle is left in the drop and fluid is removed at 0.1 microliters second until the minimum contact angle is obtained. Images were obtained at 0.1 images second then calculate the contact angle. To calculate the contact angle a curve is fitted to the profile of the drop on both sides of the drop. The baseline is drawn across the drop. The intersection of the curves and baseline is determined on both sides of the drop. The tangent slopes of the curve at the intersection is determined on both sides of the drop. The contact angle is the angle between the baseline and the tangent interior to the drop. The average contact angle is determined from the contact angles from both sides of the drop.

Lather volume of a personal care composition can be measured using a graduated cylinder and a tumbling apparatus. A 1 000 ml graduated cylinder is chosen which is marked in 10 ml increments and has a height of 14.5 inches at the 1 000 ml mark from the inside of its base for example Pyrex No. 2982 . Distilled water 100 grams at 23 C. is added to the graduated cylinder. The cylinder is clamped in a rotating device which clamps the cylinder with an axis of rotation that transects the center of the graduated cylinder. One gram of the total personal care composition is added into the graduated cylinder and the cylinder is capped. The cylinder is rotated at a rate of 10 revolutions in about 20 seconds and stopped in a vertical position to complete the first rotation sequence. A timer is set to allow 30 seconds for the lather thus generated to drain. After 30 seconds of such drainage the first lather volume is measured to the nearest 10 ml mark by recording the lather height in ml up from the base including any water that has drained to the bottom on top of which the lather is floating .

If the top surface of the lather is uneven the lowest height at which it is possible to see halfway across the graduated cylinder is the first lather volume ml . If the lather is so coarse that a single or only a few foam cells bubbles reach across the entire cylinder the height at which at least 10 foam cells are required to fill the space is the first lather volume also in ml up from the base. Foam cells larger than one inch in any dimension no matter where they occur are designated as unfilled air instead of lather. Foam that collects on the top of the graduated cylinder but does not drain is also incorporated in the measurement if the foam on the top is in its own continuous layer by adding the ml of foam collected there using a ruler to measure thickness of the layer to the ml of foam measured up from the base. The maximum foam height is 1 000 ml even if the total foam height exceeds the 1 000 ml mark on the graduated cylinder . One minute after the first rotation is completed a second rotation sequence is commenced which is identical in speed and duration to the first rotation sequence. The second lather volume is recorded in the same manner as the first after the same 30 seconds of drainage time. A third sequence is completed and the third lather volume is measured in the same manner with the same pause between each for drainage and taking the measurement.

The lather result after each sequence is added together and the Total Lather Volume determined as the sum of the three measurements in ml. The Flash Lather Volume is the result after the first rotation sequence only in ml i.e. the first lather volume.

The following examples further describe and demonstrate embodiments within the scope of the present invention. The examples are given solely for the purpose of illustration and are not to be construed as limitations of the present invention as many variations thereof are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. All exemplified amounts are concentrations by weight of the total composition i.e. wt wt percentages unless otherwise specified.

Premix the lipid phase and the hydrophobically modified particles and heat to 55 C. If the formula contains a polymer such as Nhance 3196 and PEG 14M from the above examples add it to the water first mix well. Add Polymer phase to the water in a stainless steel vessel using an overhead mixer allow the polymer to fully incorporate. pH adjust if needed. Add Surfactant phase mix and heat to 80 C. Add lipid premix mix well until batch is homogeneous in appearance. Allow batch to cool to 38 C. If the formula contains the following perfume preservatives salicylic acid glycerine and non modified titanium dioxide add it with additional mixing.

In a stainless steel vessel add lipid at 50 C. and hydrophobically modified particle and heat to 80 C. with mixing. Add polymer and allow to mix well. Add surfactant allow to incorporate fully. Separately heat water to 75 C. Add 75 C. water to lipid mixture and mix well until batch is homogeneous in appearance. Allow batch to cool to 38 C. If the formula contains the following perfume preservatives salicylic acid glycerine and non modified titanium dioxide add it with additional mixing.

The compositions described above is prepared by conventional formulation and mixing techniques. The aqueous phase ingredients are mixed in a stainless steel vessel using an overhead mixer and heated to 95 C. Add the trihydroxystearin and allow to fully incorporate into the mixture then add preservatives. Allow the phase to cool with mixing. Premix the lipid phase and the hydrophobically modified particles and heat to 55 C. Once the aqueous phase has cooled to 31 C. the lipid particle premix is added and mixed well until batch is homogeneous in appearance. If the formula contains a non modified particle such as TiPure R101 01 from the above example add it at this point to the mixing batch. Then add perfume. Keep agitation until a homogenous solution forms.

All documents cited in the Detailed Description of the Invention are in relevant part incorporated herein by reference the citation of any document is not to be construed as an admission that it is prior art with respect to the present invention.

While particular embodiments of the present invention have been illustrated and described it would be obvious to those skilled in the art that various other changes and modifications can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. It is therefore intended to cover in the appended claims all such changes and modifications that are within the scope of this invention.

