---

title: Minimally invasive spine implant for restoration of motion
abstract: The present invention provides a vertebral implant comprising a wall forming two short sides () and two elongated sides () to define a generally elongated structure having a passageway () therethrough. At least one of the two elongated sides is resiliently compressible into the passageway, or resiliently expandable away from the passageway, under a force applied to the implant by movement of the spine into which the implant is placed. This resilient opposition to forces in the spine causes the device to want to return to its at-rest position, thereby aiding the spine in its return to a normal position after movement is relaxed, thereby aiding proper spine alignment. Preferably, the device comprises a flexible body having a generally loop-shaped configuration defined by the wall, wherein the wall material and thickness is selected so that the device has appropriate degrees of flexibility and strength.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07963995&OS=07963995&RS=07963995
owner: Aesculap, Inc.
number: 07963995
owner_city: Center Valley
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051005
---
This application is a U.S. National Phase Application of PCT International Application PCT EP2005 010713. This application claims the benefit of Provisional Application No. 60 616 047 filed October5 2004 titled MINIMALLY INVASIVE SPINE IMPLANT FOR RESTORATION OF MOTION which is incorporated herein in its entirety.

The present invention relates generally to intervertebral motion restoring implants and more specifically it relates to a minimally invasive spinal implant for restoration of motion by providing a minimally invasive implant and method for maintaining or restoring disc space height and restoring motion to a degenerated or otherwise damaged spinal disc.

Intervertebral implants for restoration of motion have been in use for years. Typically intervertebral motion implants are comprised of artificial discs. Prosthetic disc nucleus devices have also been used.

The main problems with artificial discs involve the complexity and difficulty of the implantation. Current artificial disc technologies use a polymer core type design or a bearing design such as metal on metal ceramic on ceramic or polyethylene on metal. Most or all of these implants generate wear particulate which may create long term osteolysis or other biological problems. With younger patients being treated for spine related issues wear debris and the potential resultant bone and tissue damage become important issues. In addition revision should be an important criteria as all implants are subject to needing replacement. Unfortunately conventional artificial disc implants are extremely difficult to revise if not impossible.

The present invention provides a vertebral implant comprising a wall forming two short sides and two elongated sides to define a generally elongated structure having a passageway therethrough. At least one of the two elongated sides is resiliently compressible into the passageway and or is resiliently expandable away from the passageway under a force applied to the implant by movement of the spine into which the implant is placed. The side or sides which are compressible is moveable back to an at rest position when the force is removed.

The present invention more specifically includes a vertebral implant comprising a wall forming a two rounded sides and two elongated straight sides to define a generally elongated structure having a passageway therethrough with one rounded short side being larger than the other rounded short side so that the two elongated straight sides are not parallel. In this embodiment at least one of the two elongated sides is resiliently compressible into the passageway or resiliently expandable away from the passageway under a force applied to the implant by movement of the spine into which the implant is placed. In this embodiment as above the side which is compressed or expanded under force returns to an at rest position when the force is removed.

Also included as a part of the present invention is a method of treating a spine comprising the steps of providing a vertebral implant the implant having a wall forming two short sides and two elongated sides to define a generally elongated structure having a passageway therethrough and at least one of the two elongated sides being resiliently compressible into the passageway or resiliently expandable away from the passageway under a force applied to the implant by movement of the spine into which the implant is placed the at least one side returnable to an at rest position when the force is removed. The method includes the steps of compressing the implant by applying a compressive force against at least one of the elongated sides placing the implant between two adjacent vertebrae and releasing the compressive force to thereby allow the implant to expand between the two adjacent vertebrae.

The present invention provides a vertebral implant comprising a wall forming two short sides and two elongated sides to define a generally elongated structure having a passageway therethrough. At least one of the two elongated sides is resiliently compressible into the passageway or resiliently expandable away from the passageway under a force applied to the implant by movement of the spine into which the implant is placed. The exact movement of the side or sides is dependent upon the particular physical movement of the spine. This resilient opposition to forces in the spine causes the device to want to return to its at rest position thereby aiding the spine in its return to a normal position after movement is relaxed thereby aiding proper spine alignment. Preferably the device comprises a flexible body having a generally loop shaped configuration defined by the wall wherein the wall material and thickness is selected so that the device has appropriate degrees of flexibility and strength.

A preferred embodiment which will be discussed in more detail below has an elongated structure with upper and lower surfaces for contact with vertebral end plates and rounded first and second ends. In one embodiment two rounded ends are not the same size but rather are formed so that the implant has a downward slope in the anterior to posterior direction i.e. the anterior end is larger . In a preferred embodiment at least one protrusion extends from one of the contact surfaces.

Also in a preferred embodiment means for releasable connection of the implant to an insertion device are provided. Various such means are contemplated as a part of the invention and they will be discussed in more detail below.

Turning now to the Figures and a specific description thereof exemplary embodiments of the present invention are shown for example in or . As shown in these embodiments a device according to the invention comprises an elongated body defined by a wall shaped to have first end second end upper section and lower section . The wall defines a device having an open passageway disposed therethrough. Preferably the short ends and are curved providing an overall loop shaped or partially oval shaped with flat upper and lower sections configuration. Other embodiments could be envisioned however such as devices having various degrees of curved ends different radii of curvature or even generally square ends to form more of a rectangular shaped device. The importance of the selected configuration of the ends will be addressed below as it relates to the compression resistance of the device as a whole. Generally however first and second ends and respectively provide support to the upper and lower sections and while allowing controlled motion of the upper section relative to the lower section.

Upper and lower sections and each have vertebrae contacting outer surfaces and . illustrates an embodiment where elongated protrusions and extend from upper and lower surfaces and respectively to aide in the securement of the device between adjacent vertebrae. for example illustrates two generally cylindrical protrusions extending from upper surface . Other types and numbers of protrusions could be envisioned by one skilled in the art. shows an end view of the device shown in with instrument receiving hole disposed on second end . As can be seen from this embodiment of the implant has a relatively narrow width indicated as width . is a top view looking down at an embodiment of the invention having protrusion and instrument receiving hole .

The implants of the present invention are preferably formed from a single piece of material allowing for the creation of an implant that allows expansion and collapse of the upper section relative to the lower section in a controlled rate and manner. In effect the elongated shape provides a means of creating an adjustable spring. By altering the wall thickness of the implant the stiffness of the implant is directly affected. This wall thickness can be uniform or vary across different sections of the implant. Thus by so selecting the wall thickness throughout the device a user and adjust the implant to match specific patient requirements. Depending on the design the upper and lower sections could both be compressed equally into the passageway or one could be compressed more as compared to the other such as where the latter is thicker. In any event however the resistance of the device to compressive or expansive forces allows for a spring like or mechanically biased return to its at rest state.

Under physiological loading motion in the spine causes the implant of the invention to expand or collapse according to this load. This allows motion in most directions but not as much rotationally. Therefore this method of treating spine disc degeneration or disease is primarily intended as a means to restore most function via a minimally invasive approach. In addition such an approach allows motion restoring treatment for patients which previously would been treated by fusion. Facet joint degeneration or damage which would heretofore have eliminated non fusion artificial disc treatments can now be treated by the present invention as forces to the facet joints in rotation are controlled. In addition the disc space is restored to the proper height thereby reducing damaging loads to the facet joints.

The implant of the present invention is also highly beneficial for patients undergoing microdiscectomy. Microdiscectomy along with other treatments whereby a portion of a bulging annulus or leaking nucleus is removed can lead to disc space collapse over time. Removal of a portion of the nucleus removes support of the disc space height. However inserting one or more of the implants of the present invention into this disc space provides a simple means of maintaining the desired disc space and motion potentially improving a long term surgical outcome.

In addition to wall thickness and as noted above other design parameters can be taken into account to provide an implant meeting specific needs of a patient. For example by varying the height of the first end relative to the second end the angle of the implant upper section changes relative to the lower section . This allows the implant to be manufactured in various lordotic angles to match specific patient geometric requirements. It also allows the implant to be manufactured in various heights and widths. Depending on the surgical approach either one larger implant such as that shown in or two smaller implants such as shown in can be used for stabilization and restoration of the affected disc space.

In a preferred embodiment two separate implants are inserted from the posterior aspect of the spine. This provides for easier insertion as smaller implants allow access to the disc space without disturbing the lamina or facet joints. Once implanted the two separate implants function in tandem.

The implant and implant system described can have multiple variations. First a large single implant can be used for anterior anterior lateral or lateral insertion. As shown in for example such an implant may have grooves or slots in the surface to reduce implant stiffness. Secondly two implants can be used to form the means of restoring motion and disc height. These implants would be smaller than a single implant for ease in insertion. In addition the surface or surfaces of the implant directly in contact with the end plates of adjacent vertebrae can be textured to allow enhanced bone attachment or bone ingrowth. The implants can be completely smooth or completely textured polished via electropolishing glass beaded or finished in other ways to provide a fatigue resistant implant. Alternatively partial sections of the implant can be textured porous coated or treated in a manner to assist in bone ingrowth for areas in contact with the vertebral end plates. Shot peening may also be used to increase fatigue life with certain materials.

Moving now to the method and system for insertion it is noted that means for attachment to an insertion or removal instrument can be provided on the implant itself. For example there can be an instrument receiving hole in the implant as shown in the embodiment illustrated in . In an alternative embodiment there could be provided an extension such as a threaded post or grooved tab as shown in respectively. show an exemplary implant disposed on the distal end portion of an insertion instrument discussed in more detail below . It is also possible to hold onto the side of the implant and not have such a feature however a feature that allows implantation or removal of the implant with an instrument that does not exceed the width of the implant is typically advantageous.

In one embodiment an internal feature is created as a part of the implant to aid in insertion. As shown in such an implant has extensions disposed into passageway which oppose each other. In a preferred such embodiment upper section extension extends from the inner surface of upper section toward lower section and two lower section extensions extend upward toward upper section from the upper surface of lower section . These protrusions interact such that they can be engaged to lock the implant in a reduced size. This allows for the ability to keep the implant at a reduced profile for insertion in difficult access points such as in the posterior spine. Specifically and as shown in and holes can be aligned and a locking device inserted therethrough such as is shown in . The device for insertion will be addressed in more detail below. Moreover however rod extending distally from an insertion tool the entire tool not being shown in or can engage the holes in the protrusions to thus hold the implant in a reduced profile. shows the rod in place to hole the implant in its reduced profile and shows the implant expanded to its relaxed state after rod has been pulled proximally out of the holes of the anchoring protrusions.

As indicated above the implant of the present invention can be manufactured from various materials having the requisite elasticity and strength requirements. Materials such as titanium alloys including but not limited to Ti 6Al 4V Ti Mo and memory shape alloys such as Nickel Titanium NiTi can be used. In addition biocompatible polymers or reinforced polymers can be used. For healing of the nucleus it may be advantageous to use a bioresorbable material that would allow temporary support and motion and then be resorbed over time. The shape of the implant is preferably angled relative to the upper and lower sections to restore normal spine lordotic angle. However other shapes such as an oval whereby the upper and lower sections are parallel can be constructed to meet anatomic or other requirements.

Manufacturing of the implant requires normal machining or forming techniques known in the industry. One technique is to machine the outer and inner profiles on a milling machine using proper size tooling and fixtures. Another method is to mill the outside profile and cut the inside surfaces using an EDM or Electrical Discharge Machining technique whereby a wire cuts by use of large electrical currents. Still another newer technique is by cutting one or more surfaces by use of a laser. Obviously multiple techniques can be combined to machine the device and surfaces. For example the outside profile can be milled by use of a CNC mill with a ball nose end mill which allows cutting the fins or protrusions while maintaining a blend radius around the features to minimize stress concentrations. The inside profile can be cut using the wire EDM and the flat surfaces textured by use of a laser or chemical milling technique. Other surface enhancements such as polishing sand blasting shot peening glass beading and other treatments are well known in the industry.

As noted above protrusions can extend from one or more outer surfaces of the implant to contact adjacent vertebrae. Such protrusions can have a cutting feature to eliminate bone preparation for receiving said extensions or be smooth. When an extension is smooth a preparation instrument can be used to cut an opening or openings in the bone for receiving the extensions. In addition it is possible to manufacture the device such that the extensions are retractable or collapsible to provide a reduced height for insertion. After insertion these extensions are allowed to return to the desired dimension for engagement of the vertebral end plates.

To accommodate different patients and different parts of a patient different sizes of the implant are possible including implants having different heights and widths along with multiple angles. This allows a surgeon the choice to match patient specific requirements. Matching these features along with the material thickness and properties provides the potential for an infinite number of combinations to fine tune the implant to the needs of the patient.

As noted above the present invention includes a method of treating a spine comprising the steps of providing a vertebral implant the implant having a wall forming two short sides and two elongated sides to define a generally elongated structure having a passageway therethrough and at least one of the two elongated sides being resiliently compressible into the passageway or resiliently expandable away from the passageway under a force applied to the implant by movement of the spine into which the implant is placed the at least one side returnable to an at rest position when the force is removed. The method includes the steps of compressing the implant by applying a compressive force against at least one of the elongated sides placing the implant between two adjacent vertebrae and releasing the compressive force to thereby allow the implant to expand between the two adjacent vertebrae.

An alternative means of attachment would include an extended tab with a groove or undercut as shown in . An instrument having a portion designed to engage the tab and groove undercut or other feature will allow secure locking of the implant to the instrument. Another means of attachment would include the provision of a threaded extension as shown in such that an instrument can be threaded onto the threaded extension to allow secure locking of the implant to the instrument.

A preferred instrument is designed to be compatible with the embodiments discussed above with respect to . Such an instrument is shown in and has a handle portion with a tube section having a distal portion opening to receive the implant beginning with its second end in accordance with the attachment means noted above. Moreover shaft securely locks to the implant. The tube opening is smaller than the expanded at rest dimension of the first end of the implant. By squeezing the handle with respect to trigger the trigger pivots on trigger pin and the implant is drawn into the tube and compressed to a smaller size. As can be seen in slot in tube is provided to receive bone anchor protrusion . In an alternative embodiment the bone contacting protrusions could also be brought within tube .

Slider controller on the instrument allows directional control of the shaft such that after the implant is inserted into the disc space the slider direction can be changed to allow the instrument to force the implant distally out of the tube . As the implant is elastic it will naturally spring back to its original shape as it is deployed as shown in . illustrates deployment of a device of the present invention between two adjacent vertebrae and . Once seated between the upper vertebral body and lower vertebral body the implant is slowly released from the instrument and allowed to return to its original shape or neutral position as shown in .

The device described functions in a manner that allows ease of insertion into a disc space maintenance or restoration of the proper disc space and motion of the affected disc. Under sufficient load the upper implant section will move toward the lower implant section. Upon release of the load the implant will return to its original height. This creates a spring like effect that allows the implant to expand and collapse in varying ways according to the applied load. Resting condition or lack of load sufficient to cause alteration of the dimensions of the implant allows for restoration of the proper disc space and is effectively the neutral position. For example an implant having a first end larger than the second end is implanted such that the first end is placed anteriorly in the spine. The size is chosen based on what the normal healthy disc space should be along with the correct lordotic angle. This restores the proper disc height and removes pressure from the nerve roots and facet joints. It is this initial positioning that creates the neutral position. Under physiological loading this implant can move in complex motions. Pure anterior flexion of the spine transfers load to the front portion of the implant. This load causes the implant shape to change. The upper and lower sections move towards each other causing an alteration to the lordotic angle as well as other dimensional changes. This shape change effectively recreates motion. By maintaining the loads within the elastic range of the material the implant will return to the neutral position upon release of the loading condition.

Other motions such as medial lateral flexion are also allowed. This side to side loading also causes the implant to change shape thereby allowing motion of the vertebral bodies. With the use of two implants such as that which would be preferred for a posterior approach where access to the spine is limited the two implants share loading. It is possible to have one implant relatively unloaded and the other implant loaded depending on the motion of the spine. It should be noted that there is always compressive load on the implant due to weight ligaments and muscles.

The same features that allow motion of the implant also allow collapse of the implant for insertion and expansion of the implant back to the original height after insertion. This provides an advantage as it is easier to insert a smaller implant. Thus the implant can be compressed with an instrument and held in a reduced height configuration until properly seated in the disc space.

For enhancement of adhesion or bone ingrowth to the implant bone contact surfaces the surfaces can treated to allow surface roughness or porosity. This surface roughness can be provided by blasting machining chemical etching laser treating porous coating or other means. In addition coatings can be used to enhance bone growth. Hydroxyapatite calcium sulfate Bone Morphogenetic Proteins BMP and other surface treatments are examples of applied bone enhancing substances.

With respect to the above description then it is to be realized that the optimum dimensional relationships for the parts of the invention to include variations in size materials shape form function and manner of operation assembly and use are deemed readily apparent and obvious to one skilled in the art and all equivalent relationships to those illustrated in the drawings and described in the specification are intended to be encompassed by the present invention.

Although the present invention has been particularly described in conjunction with specific preferred embodiments it is evident that many alternatives modifications and variations will be apparent to those skilled in the art. It is therefore contemplated that the appended claims will embrace any such alternatives modifications and variations as falling within the true scope and spirit of the present invention.

