---

title: Systems, methods, and programs for evaluating audio messages
abstract: Systems, methods, and programs, for evaluating audio messages store a model that may include language patterns, audio patterns, and/or metafeatures that indicate a likelihood that the audio message is a spam message or a non-spam message and compare the content of the input audio message with the model. Based on the comparison, the systems, methods, and programs identify the input audio message as a spam message or a non-spam message.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08051134&OS=08051134&RS=08051134
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property II, L.P.
number: 08051134
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051221
---
The term spam is a coined word for unwanted messages especially in digital communications such as e mails. To detect spam conventional Bayesian type e mail detection systems compare new e mail messages with language models. The language models are developed by evaluating the text of e mail messages that are known to be spam and extracting language patterns from the spam messages. The systems then estimate the probably that new e mail messages are spam based on the frequency with which language patterns from the language models appear in the new e mail message. Such a system is described for example in U.S. Pat. No. 6 161 130.

Voicemail spam for example large scale telephone solicitation from telemarketers has increased in recent years. While Caller ID may be relied on by voicemail systems to screen incoming calls in order to avoid telemarketers the advent of VoIP Voice over Internet Protocol has caused the amount of spam voicemail to increase in spite of these systems because VoIP allows a caller to falsify mask or hide their actual originating telephone number.

Furthermore in order to avoid conventional text based e mail spam filters e mail spammers have resorted to attaching spam audio files to nondescript e mails. Because conventional e mail filters are unable to evaluate the content of such audio messages these e mails are not detected as spam.

Audio message systems methods and programs are disclosed that may evaluate and categorize saved voicemail messages based on the content of the audio messages. The audio message systems methods and programs may evaluate and categorize the language patterns within a message. The audio message systems methods and programs may evaluate and categorize the audio patterns within a message. The audio message systems methods and programs may evaluate and categorize metafeatures associated with a message.

The audio message systems methods and programs may store a model that may include language patterns audio patterns and or metafeatures that indicate a likelihood that the audio message is a spam message or a non spam message and may compare the content of the input audio message with the model. Based on the comparison the systems methods and programs may identify the input audio message as a spam message or a non spam message.

The end user system for example may be a system or device by which a user may access audio messages. The end user system may include one or more of for example a wired telephone wireless telephone a VoIP device a personal computer a notebook computer a client or server of a network a personal digital assistant PDA and or any other now known or later developed device capable of accessing audio messages.

The voicemail system for example may be a system or device that receives and stores voicemail messages. The voicemail system may include one or more of for example an answering machine a personal computer a notebook computer a client or server of a network a large scale dedicated voicemail system run by a service provider and or any other now known or later developed device capable of receiving and storing audio messages.

As shown in the voicemail system may be a separate system from the end user system and may be connected to the end user system by the network such as for example a remote voicemail system located on a server operated by a telephone or audio message provider. However instead of being connected over the network the voicemail system may be a separate system directly connected to the end user system for example wired or wirelessly. Furthermore the voicemail system may be integrated into the end user system as part of a single system or a single device.

According to this example the network functions to transmit voicemail messages between a sender the voicemail system and or the end user system . The network may include for example a wired or wireless network such as for example one or more of a wired telephone network a wireless telephone network an intranet an extranet a local area network a wide area network a storage area network and or the Internet.

As shown in only a portion of the network may be included in the spam detection system . In particular where the network is a telephone network or a large scale computer network such as the Internet only that portion of the network that receives the voicemail message and transmits them to and or between the voicemail system and or the end user system may be part of the system . Alternatively where the voicemail system and end user system are directly connected to one another or included in a single system or device the network need not be part of the system .

In operation a voicemail directed to the end user is sent for example across the network to the voicemail system and on to the end user system. As discussed in detail below the voicemail system or end user system may evaluate the message to determine whether the voicemail message is spam sent from spam generator for example. If the voicemail message is spam it is identified as such and stored in at least one of the voicemail system or end user system for review by the end user. If the voicemail is not spam it is identified as such and stored in at least one of the voicemail system or end user system for review by the end user. Accordingly the end user may identify the spam voicemail messages as such prior to reviewing them.

While shows system using bus architecture any type of hardware architecture including wired and wireless networks may be used based on implementation details. For example memory and network interface may be individually connected to controller . Also these hardware components may be implemented using any available hardware technology such as FPGA PAL application specific integrated circuits ASICs etc.

As shown in the memory may be physically functionally and or conceptually divided into for example a voicemail portion a spam mail portion a good mail portion a language models portion an acoustic models portion and or a metafeatures portion each of which may have for example a generic and personal component and or a spam and non spam component. The voicemail portion may store for example incoming voicemails. The spam mail portion may store for example voicemails that are likely spam. The good mail portion may store for example voicemails that are likely not spam. The language models portion may store for example language patterns that have been determined to frequently occur in spam messages or non spam messages. The acoustic models portion may store for example sound patterns that have been determined to frequently occur in spam messages. The metafeatures portion may store one or more metafeatures that indicate spam messages or non spam messages.

As used herein the term language patterns is intended to encompass for example at least one or more representations of individual or sequences of alpha numeric characters words phrases phonemes syllables and or numbers. Each language pattern may have a score associated with it indicating for example a statistical likelihood that the pattern will be included in a spam message or a statistical likelihood that the pattern will be included in a non spam message. For example the language patterns may collectively form a model that is a stochastic Finite State Automata representing n gram sequences of phonemes or words with probabilities assigned to each transition. These language models are used by an Automatic Speech Recognition engine to guide the conversion of speech to text.

The term audio patterns is intended to encompass for example at least one or more representations of individual or sequences of characteristic and or variations in tone pitch speed rhythm pauses inflection. Each audio pattern may have a score associated with it indicating for example a statistical likelihood that the pattern will be included in a spam message or a statistical likelihood that the pattern will be included in a non spam message.

For example such audio patterns might include the mean and or variance of speech energy characteristics the detection of artificial voices and or the frequency durations mean and or variance of pauses within the message. In addition to or instead of the language patterns of message the audio patterns within a message may help a system or method for evaluating audio messages to distinguish for example the practiced often read or automated voice characteristics of spam callers versus the more spontaneous and varied audio patterns of other callers. The use of audio patterns in addition to or instead of the language patterns of the messages may capture characteristics of speech not reflected by the word itself and may extend the usefulness of the system beyond only language models.

Additionally for example with respect to audio patterns many large scale telemarketing centers automatically call a large amount of targeted telephone numbers at one time and do not connect a human telemarketer to the call unless it has been answered by a person or machine. As a result there is a characteristic pause at the beginning of a message during which the telemarketing center is transferring the call to a human telemarketer. Such an initial pause may be included as part of an audio pattern indicating that a message may be spam.

 Metafeatures are non language non audio characteristics of a message that may help to determine whether or not the message is spam. Each metafeature may have a score associated with it indicating for example a statistical likelihood that the pattern will be included in a spam message or a statistical likelihood that the metafeature will be associated with a non spam message. Metafeatures may include for example whether the caller s number or sender s e mail address matches a particular number or address or is blocked the time of day that the message was received a location from which the message was sent whether the message is long distance local or international and or an IP address of the sender.

It should be appreciated that generic portions of the language models portion acoustic models portion and or metafeatures portion may be developed and used system wide i.e. on multiple users voicemail messages and may be monitored and updated automatically for example by evaluating messages that a plurality of users have tagged as spam or non spam e.g. using Bayesian techniques . Personal portions of the language models portion acoustic models portion and or the metafeatures portion may be developed and used only on a particular user s system and may be monitored and updated automatically by the user identifying voicemail classified as spam or non spam e.g. using Bayesian techniques . As the personal portion of the language models portion acoustic models portion and or metafeatures portion are improved i.e. automatically updated by for example the associated user s voicemail habits and personal definition of spam over a period of time they may replace the generic portions as they become more tailored to the specific user.

As discussed above each of the language models portion acoustic models portion and or metafeatures portion may be divided into for example spam portions and non spam portions. The spam portions would include the respective language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures tending to indicate that a message is spam. Similarly the non spam portions would include the respective language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures tending to indicate that a message is non spam.

The memory shown in can be implemented using any appropriate combination of alterable memory and or non alterable memory. The alterable memory whether volatile or non volatile can be implemented using any one or more of static or dynamic RAM a removable disk and disk drive a writeable or re writeable optical disk and disk drive a hard drive and or flash memory. Similarly the non alterable or fixed memory can be implemented using any one or more of ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM and or an optical ROM disk such as CD ROM or DVD ROM disk.

The speech analyzer may input a voicemail and determine one or more language pattern audio pattern and or metafeatures associated with the voicemail. Then the speech analyzer may access one or more of the language models portion acoustic models portion and or metafeatures portion . Based on the one or more language pattern audio pattern and or metafeatures associated with the voicemail and the language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures stored in the language models portion acoustic models portion and metafeatures portion the speech analyzer may determine the likelihood that the message is spam.

The network interface may allow one or more or the elements of the system to communicate with a network such as for example network .

In operation an incoming voicemail may be input to the audio message classification system for example via the network interface . Under control of the controller the incoming voicemail may be stored in the voicemail portion . Alternatively under control of the controller the incoming voicemail may be input directly into the speech analyzer .

Next under control of the controller the speech analyzer may access the incoming voicemail message and extract features from the voice message using a speech recognizer with the language models. The features may be such things as the overall score of the recognition the recognized string of words or phonemes the N best word and or phoneme scores the number of words or phonemes that have scores that pass some rejection threshold and so on The speech analyzer may then extract features based on the audio patterns and metafeatures of the voicemail. Then the speech analyzer may access one or more of the language models portion acoustic models portion and or metafeatures portion . Based on the respective language patterns audio patterns and or metafeatures stored in the language models portion acoustic models portion and metafeatures portion the speech analyzer may determine the likelihood that the message is spam.

For example each language pattern audio pattern and metafeature stored in the spam and non spam portions of the respective language models portion acoustic models portion and metafeatures portion may have a score e.g. weight or probability associated with it indicating the likelihood that that it occurs in a spam message or the likelihood that it occurs in a non spam message. Thus for each of the spam indicating language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures occurring in or similar to those in the voicemail the scores for those language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures may be combined using a classification technique to obtain a spam probability score. Similarly for each of the non spam indicating language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures occurring in or similar to those in the voicemail the scores for those language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures may be statistically combined using a classification technique to obtain a non spam probability score. By comparing the ratio of the obtained scores for example to a predetermined threshold ratio the speech analyzer may determine whether the incoming voicemail is spam or non spam.

If as a result of the comparison the incoming message is determined to be non spam under control of the controller the incoming message may be stored in the good mail portion . If as a result of the comparison the incoming message is determined to be spam under control of the controller the incoming message may be stored in the spam mail portion . Accordingly an incoming voicemail may be properly stored in either the good mail portion or the spam mail portion based on the content of the message.

Depending on cost or other design constraints one or more of the above described elements of the audio message classification system may be combined into a single element or divided into multiple elements where appropriate. For example although the exemplary audio message classification system has been described as physically functionally and or conceptually divided into a controller and or a speech analyzer it should be appreciated that one or more circuits routines or applications making up the speech analyzer may be provided separately or included in and or executed by the controller .

Although the exemplary audio message classification system has been described as containing a memory the system may contain multiple memories at separate locations. For example the generic portions of the models may be contained in a memory portion within and or assigned to the speech analyzer .

Although the exemplary audio message classification system may evaluate each incoming voicemail message as soon as it is received it may store one or more incoming voicemail messages in the voicemail portion until a predetermined number of messages is reached or until a predetermined evaluation period e.g. every 15 minutes has been reached.

According to the above example the speech analyzer determines whether a message is spam or non spam based on how well portions of the message match or are similar to the language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures.

The audio message classification system may be part of an end user system e.g. end user system or part of a centralized voicemail system e.g. voicemail system . Furthermore portions of the system may be part of an end user system while other portions are part of a centralized voicemail system. For example the speech analyzer the generic model portion and or the voicemail portion may be part of a centralized voicemail system having a controller and network interface while the spam mail portion the good mail portion and the personal portions of the models may be part of an end user system having a controller and network interface. Generally the physical location of the elements of system may be varied as long as the elements are operably connected.

One example of an exemplary process for evaluating audio messages is shown in . The exemplary process may be implemented for example by one or more components of the above described audio message system and or audio message classification system . However even though the exemplary structure of the above described systems may be referenced in the description of the process it should be appreciated that the referenced structure is exemplary and the exemplary process need not be limited by any of the above described exemplary structure.

As shown in in step the process determines if there is an incoming voicemail to be analyzed. If the incoming voicemail is to be analyzed the process continues to step . If there is not an incoming voicemail ready to be analyzed operation returns to step . In step stored language models are accessed. In step the language features of the incoming voicemail are extracted using a speech recognition engine. In step acoustic models are accessed and the acoustic features of the incoming voicemail are extracted. Then in step any metafeature models are accessed and metafeature features associated with the incoming voicemail are extracted.

In step the set of extracted features are classified using know classification techniques as spam and as non spam. As discussed above when classifying a set of extracted features it may be given a score indicating the probability of spam or non spam based on the models. Then based on the scores of each classification the message may be given a total score such as for example a spam non spam ratio . In step it is determined whether the incoming voicemail message is likely spam or non spam based on the classification of the features within the voicemail message for example by comparing the generated score or ratio with a predetermined threshold. If the score or ratio exceeds the threshold the message may be considered spam and operation jumps to step . If the ratio is below the threshold the message may not be considered spam and operation continues to step .

In step the incoming voicemail message is placed with good non spam mail and operation continues to step . In step the incoming voicemail message is placed with spam mail and operation continues to step . Then in step it is determined whether there is more voicemail. If there is more voicemail the process returns to step . If there is no more voicemail the process continues to step and ends.

As a result of the above method an incoming voicemail may be properly stored with either good mail or spam mail based on the content of the message.

According to the above process an incoming message may be determined to be spam or non spam based on how well portions of the message match or are similar to the language patterns audio patterns and metafeatures.

While various features have been described in conjunction with the examples outlined above various alternatives modifications variations and or improvements of those features and or examples may be possible. Accordingly the examples as set forth above are intended to be illustrative. Various changes may be made without departing from the broad spirit and scope of the underlying principles.

