---

title: Interface-directed branched polymer transports and methods for producing same
abstract: Methods and systems for modifying a polymer are disclosed herein. A matrix is generally provided having a surface thereof, wherein the matrix comprises a plurality of hyperbranched polymers. The plurality of hyperbranched polymers can be chemically bound to a plurality of surfactants or order to modify the surface and produce a polymeric material thereof. The surface is tailored with a plurality of functional groups that self-assemble and are deliverable to the surface of the solution, including interfaces thereof, thereby permitting a high-density assembly of functional groups to operate in concert with one another in order to generate a modified surface thereof. The polymeric material produced thereof can be reversibly adaptable to environmental conditions through a blooming of varying surface functional group to the surface of the solution.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07560520&OS=07560520&RS=07560520
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07560520
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051107
---
This application claims priority to U.S. provisional application entitled Interface Directed Branched Polymer Transports having Ser. No. 60 626 501 filed Nov. 8 2004 which is entirely incorporated herein by reference.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the United States Government for Governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties.

The present disclosure relates generally to polymers and polymer modification schemes thereof. The present disclosure also relates to hyperbranched polymers and multiple functional chemical groups and compounds thereof.

The invention is relates to U.S. Pat. No. 6 855 773 issued Feb. 15 2005 to Robert Jensen et al. the teachings of which are fully incorporated herein by reference.

Embodiments of the present invention provide methods and compositions for producing hyperbranched polymers with specialized functional groups. One embodiment of a method for producing the hyperbranched polymer for specialized functional groups includes the following steps modifying a hyperbranched polymer HBP scaffold by addition of a fluorosurfactant to form a HBP compound with the fluorosurfactant substituent modifying the HBP fluorosurfactant compound by addition of an aliphatic compound to form a HBP compound substituted with the fluorosurfactant and the aliphatic substituent and complexing the HBP compound substituted with the fluorosurfactant and the aliphatic substituent with a polyoxometalate POM to form a HBP POM complex.

The present invention also includes modified HBP compositions. An exemplary composition may include a hyperbranched polymer modified with a plurality of first functional groups where the first functional groups are chosen from at least one of perfluorinated chains and aliphatic chains and wherein the hyperbranched polymer is modified with a plurality of second functional groups the second function groups are chosen from at least one of a metal oxide an acid a base a decontaminating agent a biocide and a biological binding site.

The present invention further includes interface directed branched polymer transport systems An exemplary system may include HBPs in a matrix wherein the HBPs are complexed with polyoxometalate POM functional groups wherein upon exposure to a contaminating substance to a surface of the matrix the POM functional groups migrate to the surface of the matrix and decompose or inactivate the contaminating substance.

Other compositions methods systems features and advantages of the present disclosure will be or become apparent to one with skill in the art upon examination of the following drawings and detailed description. It is intended that all such additional compositions methods systems features and advantages be included within this description be within the scope of the present disclosure and be protected by the accompanying claims.

The particular values and configurations discussed in these non limiting examples can be varied and are cited merely to illustrate embodiments of the disclosed compositions and methods and are not intended to limit the scope of the disclosure.

The present disclosure is directed toward a unique class of polymeric materials. These materials have two features of interest for the purposes of the present disclosure. The first feature comprises an efficient architectural design whereby chemical functional groups are assembled at the molecular level and in high local concentrations. The materials utilized to create this chemical architecture can be commercially available hyperbranched polymers which are available with a variety of different functional groups. The properties of the functional groups become amplified relative to materials with the same concentration of functional groups distributed uniformly throughout the material. These domains of dense functional groups bloom to the surface as a result of these strong interactions. By using this approach far less additive has to be used. Note that that the term bloom or blooming is well known in the chemical arts and refers generally to a forced rising of particles or chemical compounds and elements to a surface through thermodynamic interactions thereof.

The second feature of such polymeric materials is that the surfaces of these materials can adapt to the environment by switching the exposed functional groups in order to optimize surface environment interactions. This switching function can be envisioned as a flip flop of functional groups whereby one group buries itself while the preferred group migrates to the surface of the polymer or polymer based solution. An important component is the molecular architecture that simultaneously increases surfactant efficiency and permits delivery of one or more chemical functionalities to the surface and or interface.

Scheme B on the other hand illustrates a hyperbranched chemical architectural approach which can be implemented in accordance with the present invention such that a high local concentration of groups brings many groups to the surface including a plurality of fluorinated groups and and a plurality of hydrophilic groups and which are joined via a chemical bond . Note that surface of scheme B is analogous to surface of scheme A.

Scheme C as shown in and described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 855 773 depicts another feature of the present disclosure which illustrates the switchability of the surface groups without disrupting the bulk of the polymer matrix. Note that in both scheme B and scheme C of like or analogous parts are generally represented by identical reference numerals. Also in schemes A B and C of circular shapes generally represent fluorinated groups while square shapes generally represent hydrophilic groups. Further as utilized herein the term polymer generally refers to compounds with large or very large molecules made up of repeating molecular units. Thus based on the configuration depicted in it can be appreciated that the properties of the functional groups become amplified relative to materials with the same concentration of functional groups distributed uniformly throughout the materials. These domains of dense functional groups bloom to the surface as a result of these strong interactions. By using this approach far less additive has to be utilized. As indicated in scheme C of surfaces such as surface can adapt to the environment by switching the exposed functional groups in order to optimize surface environment interactions.

Preliminary proofs of concept experiments can be carried out which clearly demonstrate the surface activity and switchability potential of fluorinated dendritic polymer additives. Water can be utilized to probe the contact angle hence surface free energies of cured vinyl ester resin as a function of concentration of fluoro additive. To establish a baseline response Du Pont ZONYL fluoro surfactant methacryl functional can be added to Dow DERAKANE 411 C 350 vinyl ester resin in weight percentages ranging from for example approximately 0.0 to 9.6 . The resultant advancing and receding contact angle of water on the surface of the vinyl ester changes very little as the concentration of fluoro surfactant is increased e.g. 62.3 advancing and 42.0 receding .

As described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 855 773 to increase the activity of the fluorinated surfactant the Zonyl can be chemically bonded to a commercial BASF LUPASOL amine functional hyperbranched polymer via an additional reaction between the methacryl groups of the Zonyl and the amine groups of the Lupasol prior to the incorporation into the vinyl ester resin. Note that although the present disclosure is discussed in the context of a vinyl ester resin it can be appreciated by those skilled in the art that the technology described herein can apply to any polymeric oligomeric thermoset and or thermoplastic material. Thus a vinyl ester resin can be replaced with for example any polymeric oligomeric thermoset and or thermoplastic material. The use of a vinyl ester resin is described here for general illustrative purposes only.

An additional reactive product can thus be added to the vinyl ester resin to yield a concentration of for example 1.5 wt. Lupasol i.e. functional group pre reacted with 1.0 wt. Zonyl . The change in the advancing and receding contact angles can be dramatic. The advancing contact angle can increase from 62.3 to 70.3 due to the hydrophobic nature of fluorine and the receding contact angle can decrease from 42.0 to 26.8 presumably due to the surface fluorine groups switching to the more energetically favorable and hydrophilic unreacted amine groups of the Lupasol polymer. It should also be noted that the addition of 1.5 wt. Lupasol to the vinyl ester resin will generally not affect either the advancing or receding contact angle. A summary of preliminary contact angle data is displayed in which depicts a graph illustrating a summary of contact angle results which demonstrate increased surface activity of a fluoro surfactant when bonded to the pendant groups of a polymeric dendrimer. Graph thus represents a plot of contact angle values along a y axis versus fluoro additive values along an x axis .

Based on the foregoing it can be appreciated that methods and systems for modifying a polymer are disclosed herein. According to such methods and systems a solution can be generally provided having a surface thereof in which the solution comprises a plurality of hyperbranched polymers. The plurality of hyperbranched polymers can be chemically bound to a plurality of surfactants in order to modify the surface and produce a polymeric material thereof. The surface can be tailored with a plurality of functional groups that self assemble and are deliverable to the surface of the solution including interfaces thereof thereby permitting a high density assembly of functional groups to operate in concert with one another in order to generate a modified surface thereof. The polymeric material produced thereof can be reversibly adaptable to environmental conditions through a blooming of varying surface functional group to the surface of the solution.

As further described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 855 773 the embodiments described in the present disclosure offer a number of advantages and as indicated previously technology has been developed which allows one to modify a polymer with ammonium salts in order to permit the ammonium salts to migrate to the surface. Prior technologies additionally rely on standard linear polymers and copolymers whereas the present invention is particularly based on branched or hyperbranched polymer architectures. Therefore not only can the materials differ by composition but also by structure. Embodiments of the present invention also possess the ability to change functional groups at the surface wherein such changes are environmentally induced i.e. solvent exposure humidity etc . The polymeric materials can also be adapted for use as self decontaminating materials for textiles and films seeds for catalysts catalytic sites and chemical separation and membranes.

Also as indicated previously some technologies utilize dendritic polymers for coating applications. In one embodiment the polymer is a dendritic or highly branched or hyperbranched polymer scaffold also referred to in the art as a core polymer or component that is fully or partially functionalized with various groups also referred to in the art as a shell polymer or component and or surfactants. Thus the dendritic or hyperbranched polymers disclosed herein can be described as core shell polymers with an interior and a reactive surface with a large number of reactive sites. The dendritic or hyperbranched interior structure generally provides a carrier function with the surface functional groups determining the final chemical and physical properties of the entire unit. The properties of the disclosed dendritic or hyperbranched polymers can also be affected by changing either the core or the hyperbranched structure itself. Hereinafter the term hyperbranched polymer or HBP will be used to describe both highly and imperfectly branched polymers as well as dendrimers.

In the disclosed HBPs all reactive sites can be functionalized with the same moiety or only some of the reactive sites can be functionalized. Additionally some reactive sites can be functionalized for one property while other reactive sites can be functionalized to control one or more other properties e.g. polarity viscosity tensile modulus glass transition temperature etc. The disclosed HBPs can be designed for specific applications in which multiple properties may be desired. Thus the type of group incorporated on the surface will govern the end use with different types of functional groups giving different properties.

One functionality or set of functional groups of the HBP can be used to interact with a polyoxoanion to transport preselected material to the surface of a polymer film or a matrix. By transporting desired material to the surface of the film or matrix the surface can be modified by adding only small amounts of the desired functional group to the hyperbranched polymer.

In general one exemplary method of producing the disclosed compositions includes modifying a HBP scaffold by reacting it with a fluorosurfactant or any low free energy chain to produce a HBP scaffold with the fluorosurfactant or low free energy chain added thereto as depicted in . The modified HBP fluorosurfactant compound can then be further modified by reacting it with an aliphatic compound e.g. an aliphatic epoxy to a produce a HBP fluorosurfactant molecule with the aliphatic epoxy added thereto as illustrated in . By employing a HBP with mixed end groups e.g. perfluorinated aliphatic the solubility of the HBP is enhanced.

The twice modified HBP e.g. HBP fluorosurfactant epoxy compound can then be reacted with one or more polyoxometalates POMs to form an HBP POM complex precipitate as shown in . Adding an acid to the HBP POM complex will solubilize the HBP POM complex. In one embodiment of the method the acid is added in a stoichiometric amount with respect to the amines. The soluble HBP POM complex can then be added to various films. In place of the POM the twice modified HBP can be reacted with other functional groups to provide the HBP with other functionalities such as an acid site a base site a decontamination agent a biocide and or a biological binding site.

The polymer scaffold can be a number of different HBPs such as for example but not limited to branched polyimines including polethyleneimine as indicated here PEI or branched polyesters. Additional polymer types will be apparent to those skilled in the art but include a wide range of chemistries as well as molecular architectures. The HBP scaffolds disclosed here represent any sort of oligomeric or polymeric chain comprised of short chain i.e. non entangling or long chain branching i.e. entangling combined with a plurality of residual functionalities the resulting HBP may therefore include representatives from the following architectural types dendrimer hyperbranched polymer comb polymer dendri graft polymer star polymers A Bsystems or any A Bsystem where n 2 and B 3 linear polymer with pendant functional groups and other polyfunctional materials of or any of which may be referred to herein generally as HBP. Likewise the arena of polymer chemistries may be expanded to include condensation polymers and addition polymers including polyamines polyetherimides polyetheramides polyetherketones polyamides polyimides polyethers polyureas polyurethanes polycarbamates polysaccharides polyvinyl chains e.g. polyethylene polypropylene polyvinyl alcohol polyvinyl amine . It is expected that chains derived from any polymerization technique could be used to prepare these scaffold materials including standard condensation chemistry free radical polymerization stabilized radical polymerization e.g. atom transfer radical polymerization ATRP and self condensing vinyl polymerization SCVP or chain walking polymerization.

The fluorosurfactant can be a number of different fluorosurfactants of the general formula R X. The Rterm relates to a fluorinated segment of indeterminate length generally from about 3 to about 50 atoms long containing minimally carbon and fluorine and potentially other atoms such as oxygen and hydrogen. It is understood by those skilled in the art that for instance perfluorinated polyether segments would function in a similar fashion as a completely perfluorinated alkyl chain. The X component of the general formula given above relates to the chemical functionality by which the Rportion may be attached to the HBP scaffold and includes but is not limited to X Cl Br I OH alcohol NH amine COOH carboxylic acid COOCH ester COY Y Cl Br carboxylic acid halide OCOCZ CH Z H for acrylates CHfor methacrylates unsaturated aliphatic segments including allyl alkenyl and alkynyl groups epoxides sulphonic acid group isocyanate group silane groups or combinations thereof. The preceding list is illustrative and is not exhaustive.

In place of the surfactant any low free energy chain polymer can be used. In some systems surface segregation effects can be observed even in the absence of perfluorinated segments due to the combination of high free energy matrices and low free energy chain ends. Other examples would include aliphatic groups both saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons and polysiloxanes thus meeting the criteria for the Rgroups referred to in the following description.

The aliphatic compound can be a number of different aliphatic compounds such as for example but not limited to an aliphatic epoxy. The solubilizing segment can be composed of a wide range of materials of the general formula R X. The Rterm relates to a solubilizing segment of indeterminate length generally from about 3 to about 50 atoms long containing minimally carbon or silicon and hydrogen and potentially other atoms such as oxygen. It is understood by those skilled in the art that for instance polyethylene glycol segments could function in the same solubility enhancing fashion as an alkyl chain depending upon the polarity of the intended solvent. Likewise short polydimethylsiloxy chains could be used to improve solubility and enhance the thermodynamic driving force for phase segregation. The X component of the general formula given above relates to the chemical functionality by which the Rportion may be attached to the HBP scaffold and includes but is not limited to X Cl Br I OH alcohol NH COOH carboxylic acid COOCH ester COY Y Cl Br carboxylic acid halide OCOCZ CH Z H for acrylates CHfor methacrylates unsaturated aliphatic segments including allyl alkenyl and alkynyl groups epoxides sulphonic acid group isocyanate group or silane groups. The preceding list is illustrative and is not exhaustive. In some embodiments an aliphatic epoxy that can be used has the following formula 

The polyoxometalates POMs that can be used to complex with the modified HBPs include for example but are not limited to HPVMoO HPOM NaPVMoO NaPOM and combinations thereof etc. These techniques are suitable for any polyanionic mixed metal oxide species especially those composed of the mid and early transition metals. It is also understood that metal nanoclusters could similarly be transported including those such as gold or silver nanoparticles. For examples see Gouzerh P. Proust A. 1998 98 77 111 and Coronado E. G mez Garcia C. J. 1998 98 273 296 both of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties. In addition to these POMs simple metal oxides or nano sized metal clusters may be transported through HBP ligand action by functioning as a dendritic box or through simple solvophobic stabilization.

The HBP POM complex can be used in or suspended at the surface of various matrix materials such as for example but not limited to a polymeric material an oligothermoset material and a thermoplastic material. In particular in some embodiments the matrix can be thermoplastic polyurethane TPU but also includes more traditional materials such as polystyrene polymethylmethacrylate nylon 6 6 and polyetherimides e.g. ULTEM commercially available from General Electric Corp. . It is understood that the matrix may also be a coating material preferably liquid dispersed including oligomer based resin systems and colloidal dispersion based systems. The transport of functional groups to a surface is enhanced by the homogenization of the additive and the matrix prior to solidification so solution cast films where both components are soluble can be used as can thermoset resin systems where reactive diluents are used to lower viscosity e.g. styrene s use in vinyl ester resins .

One specific example of an HBP polymer scaffold that was studied is a branched PEI with a ratio of 10 20 30 amines of 1.0 0.91 0.64 and a molecular weight of about 1300 Da n of about 30 . The route employed for the modification of the disclosed PEI is depicted in . As shown in reaction A methacrylated fluorosurfactants were added via Michael addition to the amine termini of the PEI polymer. The shift in carbonyl absorbance of the fluorosurfactant was tracked use Fourier Transform Infrared FT IR analysis changing from 1728 to 1739 cmupon the consumption of the methacrylate group. The reaction took about 3 hours to reach completion at 60 C. neat.

As shown in reaction B of the PEI polymer scaffold was also reacted with an aliphatic epoxy which was added to the reaction mixture after the methacrylate of the fluorosurfactant had fully reacted. After an additional 2.5 hours the reaction mixture was cooled. The modified HBP products were used without further purification. Examination of the polymer by proton H NMR confirmed that the consumption of the epoxy coalescence of well defined resonances confirmed ring opening group. Analysis with FT IR also indicated the disappearance of the characteristic epoxy absorption at 915 cm and the OH peak resulting from the epoxy ring opening intensified and broadened the amine peaks arising from the PEI polymer backbone. The polymer exhibited improved solubility in common organic solvents compared to PEIs lacking the aliphatic chains.

The highly branched PEI polymer was then combined with two POMs with the molecular formulae HPVMoO HPOM and NaPVMoO NaPOM . The HBP formed insoluble precipitates green solids upon treatment with the POMs until the HBP was protonated with HCl aq . Upon addition of the acid stoichiometric with respect to the total amine content of the HBP backbone including 1 2 and 3 amines the precipitate gradually become soluble in THF. After several minutes the green solutions lightened in color to yellow.

The resulting HBP POM complex was examined by FT IR. The chief vibrational resonance influenced by the countercation initially H Na caused about 10 wavenumber difference in a peak near 790 cm. As shown in the resulting complex exhibited a third peak near 800 cm caused by the formation of the ammonium salt POM complex. The shift to the new peak regardless of the original countercation suggests that the proton and sodium are displaced by the ammonium salt providing the basis for the HBP POM complex.

Similar HBPs have shown the ability to segregate and concentrate at the surface of a vinyl ester cross linked film. The disclosed HBPs transport other functional groups by virtue of the fluorosurfactant buoy groups on the periphery of the HBP. Films were prepared using a thermoplastic polyurethane TPU solution and solutions of the HBP POM complex. Appropriate quantities of each solution were combined to yield a net 1 wt POM composition for the blend relative to the quantity of TPU.

Various loading levels were investigated as shown in Table 1 below. The relative quantity of HBP in the HBP POM complex was varied to keep the quantity of POM constant in the solutions. Films of the TPU with HBP POM were cast onto silicon surfaces and the solvent was allowed to evaporate slowly under small enclosures e.g. petri dishes . A sample was also prepared for comparison that contained only the TPU and POM without the HBP. The contact angle analysis that was performed provides an indication of HBP surface migration. The drop in contact angle as a function of HBP loading confirms that the amines of the HBP are near the surface of the film.

The results of the contact angle analysis are also summarized in the chart illustrated in . As illustrated in the perfluorinated chains have limited effect on contact until they are coupled to the HBP. Additionally it can be seen that at the surface amines will dominate the interactions with water.

The films were also examined by X ray photoelectron spectroscopy XPS which provides information about the elemental composition of a surface. The results from the analysis are provided in Table 2 below.

In Table 2 the atomic composition at the film surface is given for each sample with a take off angle TOA of 90 and 30 . The 90 TOA information samples were taken from about 10 nanometers nm into the film surface while the 30 TOA provides information to a depth of about 4 nm.

The results of the XPS analysis for various blends are also summarized in the charts illustrated in . As illustrated in XPS confirms that increased F and nitrogen N are observed for HBP samples. The angle response indicates concentration gradient with depth. The more acute TOA 30 samples a more shallow depth of the surface composition. The observed high concentrations of fluorine relative to the 90 TOA indicate preferential segregation of the perfluorinated segments at the topmost portion of the film surface while the slight decrease in N content comparing 30 to 90 TOA scans indicates the HBP scaffolds are not exposed at the topmost surface in the XPS hard vacuum environment.

Addressing the control sample with TPU and POM first no molybdenum Mo was observed in the XPS scans. The only source of Mo in the sample is from the POM and its absence indicates that the POM does not preferentially segregate to the surface of the film in the control samples.

The second sample is the control sample containing only TPU and HBP. The presence of the HBP is confirmed by both the high quantity of fluorine F found at the surface as well as the decrease in observed oxygen O content. This suggests that the HBP is preferentially segregating to the surface in a sufficient quantity to mask much of the oxygen observed in TPU.

The control sample results can be compared with those observed for the HBP POM containing films. The observation of F at the film surface is a good indication that the HBP has successfully migrated to the film surface and it corroborates the observations from the contact angle analysis. The appearance of Mo near the film surface is a strong indication that the HBP has successfully transported POM to the surface. This assertion is further bolstered when the oxygen content of the HBP POM containing samples is considered. The amount of oxygen observed near the film surface is higher than for the HBP TPU control.

Recall that the POM s studied in the instant Example possess a molecular formula of XPVMoO. For each atom of Mo the POM contributes four atoms of O. The presence of Mo taken with the relative increase in O at the film surface confirms the transportation of the POM to the surface. It also suggests that the quantities of about 2.5 Mo at the surface are reasonable as the O content has increased about 9 10 compared to the HBP TPU control sample. Assuming the level of about 2.5 Mo at the surface is correct this represents an order of magnitude increase in POM concentration at the surface over its bulk concentrations. Having an increased POM concentration at a film surface can be used in for example in decontamination technology. Adapted to the preparation of functional fibers for membrane preparation the technology could be used to prepare flow through membrane reactors either for water decontamination or for some other mild oxidizing reaction e.g. epoxidation . Other applications of POMs are indicated in the reference by Katsoulis D. E. Chem. Rev. 1998 98 359 387 incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The disclosed methods and compositions combine the polyfunctional nature of a HBP to provide a tailored material that can migrate to a surface and transport a metal center to the surface. Thus items can be made of known materials with a small quantity of an additive that provides massive modifications of surface properties. The disclosed dendrimers can be used for example to control phase segregation in fluids. Amphiphilic HBPs can be used to sequester target compounds in the interior of the HBP. This serves as the concept for many dendrimer based drug delivery systems which typically also employ a tethered compound e.g. antibodies to direct the delivery of the therapeutic agent.

An exemplary HBP is depicted in . The HBP includes a polyfunctional core to which linkages attach buoy groups and residual end chains and additional functional groups .

Thus a polyfunctional core is a molecule with multiple reactive sites that may be modified using normal chemical techniques and generally a non entangling species either low molecular weight copolymer or highly branched polymer with a high number of chain ends or pendant reactive groups. The polymers are constructed by most known techniques including condensation uncontrolled radical mechanisms living radical mechanisms anionic polymerization or cationic polymerization.

Linkages are reactive sites from the polyfunctional core that have undergone reaction with a buoy or other functional group or chain and the nature of the linkage is generally determined by the functionality of the core reactive sites end or pendant groups . Potential linkages include amines amides imides urethanes carbamates carbonates ethers esters imines ketones silanes siloxanes as well as new C C bond formation via coupling reactions radical mechanisms or the generic SNor SNmechanisms.

The term buoy group as used herein refers to a moiety attached to the core molecule which has a surface cohesive energy lower than that of the core molecule. Generally any low cohesive energy group may be suitable including perfluorinated species siloxanes and hydrocarbon groups.

Residual chain ends and additional functional groups can also be included in the disclosed HBPs. Polyfunctional core modification is governed by statistics so there will almost always remain unreacted groups. If sub stoichiometric amounts of buoy group are added additional functional groups may be attached to the core to impart greater solubility or specific functionality such as sensing sites binding sites reactive sites acids bases etc. This category encompasses both residual unreacted sites and sites of specific functionality installed in addition to the buoy groups. These sites include a wide range of moieties comprising amines alcohols acidic groups basic groups vinyl groups halides thiols silanes siloxanes aliphatic groups aromatic groups and protected latent or masked sites.

Associated groups are groups bound to the modified core via electrostatic or dipole groups. The groups are generally amenable to direct covalent attachment especially with an electrostatic charge including polyoxometalates conjugate bases conjugate acids anionic species and cationic species.

The disclosed technology can effectively modify the surface of a polymer part during its preparation. The disclosed methods and compositions include surface energy modification combined with surface delivery and responsiveness to environmental changes. The disclosed methods and compositions can be used to make a wide variety of products and devices. For example the disclosed composition can be used in and for adhesives paints coatings signature management products artificial tissues sensors decontamination equipment and devices and wound treatment devices. The disclosed compositions have reversibility capabilities such as disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 855 773.

It should be noted that ratios concentrations amounts and other numerical data may be expressed herein in a range format. It is to be understood that such a range format is used for convenience and brevity and thus should be interpreted in a flexible manner to include not only the numerical values explicitly recited as the limits of the range but also to include all the individual numerical values or sub ranges encompassed within that range as if each numerical value and sub range is explicitly recited. To illustrate a concentration range of about 0.1 to about 5 should be interpreted to include not only the explicitly recited concentration of about 0.1 wt to about 5 wt but also include individual concentrations e.g. 1 2 3 and 4 and the sub ranges e.g. 0.5 1.1 2.2 3.3 and 4.4 within the indicated range.

It should be emphasized that the above described embodiments particularly any preferred embodiments are merely possible examples of implementations and are merely set forth for a clear understanding of the principles set forth herein. Additionally the step of any disclosed method can optionally be performed out of the order disclosed herein and the methods may omit certain steps altogether. Many variations substitutions and modifications may be made to the above described embodiment s without departing substantially from the spirit and principles herein. All such variations substitutions and modifications are intended to be included herein within the scope of this disclosure and the following claims.

