---

title: System and method for improving online search engine results
abstract: System and method for improving online search engine results. In one embodiment, a search system queries one or more servers of a destination site to obtain detailed and relevant information. In one embodiment, this query is in the form of an application programming interface call. Based on the content received in response to the aforementioned queries, a plurality of content pages may then be used to build one or more search databases against which user searches may be made during some future time period.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07599966&OS=07599966&RS=07599966
owner: Yahoo! Inc.
number: 07599966
owner_city: Sunnyvale
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050128
---
This application claims benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 647 859 filed on Jan. 27 2005.

This invention relates generally to online content searching and management and in particular to improving online search engine results for online resources containing dynamic content.

Online content providers are increasingly moving towards building World Wide Web sites which are more reliant on dynamic frequently updated content. Content continues to be made available more and more via online auction sites stock market information sites news and weather sites or any other such site whose information changes on a frequent basis oftentimes daily.

Major search engines however which enable Internet users to search for information on the World Wide Web create search databases of information which rely on pages being static instead of dynamic. To create these databases the search engine does what is known as crawling web sites by retrieving the content of a given Web page and storing it for later use. However if the Web page is removed or changed even once in the several weeks period between successive crawls the search engine will display outdated or irrelevant information to the search engine user.

At a very high level search engines download pages from Web sites and then build databases that index the content of these pages. These databases are then consulted when processing search requests to find the pages relevant to the query. There is a substantial delay from when a page is downloaded to when it is included in a database for processing queries. This delay is usually on the order of several days to several weeks. Many of the Web pages of e.g. an online auction site such as eBay consist of a list of listings frequently auctions combined with navigational links and other information. Some pages of online auction sites display listings that meet some search criteria search pages others show items that are in a given category category pages or that are available for purchase from one auction site user s store store pages . By default those listings ending soon appear at the top of the list.

Many online auction site listings are auctions that last for three to ten days. In addition some listings include an option that ends the listing immediately. It is not uncommon for a listings page to include items that all end in the next 24 hours. This means that online auction site pages included in a search engine usually contain titles from auctions that have already expired.

Because indexed online auction site pages become out of date very quickly search engines cannot accurately match queries against such pages. The text matched against a user s query is likely to be from auctions that are no longer available. Therefore the page is not relevant to the user s query unless new similar listings are available when the user clicks on the search result.

There are several ways search engines have addressed these issues. One option has been to exclude pages containing dynamic content from the search results. Another has been to treat pages containing dynamic content like any other web page. This results in the issues described above. Finally in the case of auction sites another option has been not to include auction titles in the text indexed in the search database.

Matching outdated e.g eBay listings pages to search queries can erode search user trust. The relevance problem that occurs when a query matches the title of an expired listing contributes to this. Returning irrelevant web pages in search results will cause search users to trust our results less and possibly switch to other search providers.

The problem is worse when a search engine displays titles of expired listings in a search result abstract. If this listing title catches a searcher s interest it is likely that he or she will click through i.e. click on the search result to go to a content page referenced by the search result and not find the listing we claimed was available in our search result abstract. Thus there is a need for a system and method which overcomes one or more of the aforementioned drawbacks.

System and method for improving online search engine results. In one embodiment a method includes querying a destination server for updated content where the destination server includes a content database and receiving in response to the querying updated content from the content database. The method further includes building one or more search databases based at least in part on the updated content and responding to a plurality of user queries using the one or more search databases.

Other aspects features and techniques of the invention will be apparent to one skilled in the relevant art in view of the following detailed description of the invention.

One aspect of the invention relates to providing fresh and relevant search results when the content to be searched includes dynamic content. In one embodiment such content may be provided by a site on the World Wide Web whose content changes on a frequent and regular basis e.g. job listing site news site personals or online auction site . In one embodiment a search system e.g. search engine queries one or more servers of a destination site also referred to as a content site to obtain detailed and relevant information immediately from the destination server s itself rather than from the destination site s dynamic Web pages e.g. Web pages which are first generated by the server and then sent to users upon request . In one embodiment this query is in the form of an application programming interface API call of the destination site. In one embodiment the information content received from the destination site is comprised of a plurality of dynamic listings.

Based on the content received in response to the aforementioned queries another aspect of the invention is to create a plurality of content pages which may then be used to build at least in part one or more search databases against which user searches may be made during some future time period. In one embodiment these content pages may be Web pages that resemble the pages to be served by the content site i.e. the destination site itself. These generated pages may then be indexed by the search database.

Another aspect of the invention is to follow a search database update cycle to maximize the relevancy and accuracy of search result listings for content sites containing dynamic content. In one embodiment a 3 stage update cycle is used although more or fewer stages may similarly be used. In another embodiment each stage is equal to approximately one day. However it should similarly be appreciated that each stage may be longer or shorter. In still another embodiment the nature of the content listings may determine the length of the update cycle and or the length of each stage of the update cycle. For example listings from auction sites may require a shorter update cycle to maintain accuracy while content relating to personal ads may be placed on a longer update cycle e.g. 30 days .

Another aspect of the invention is to decouple the fetching of content from the content site from the refreshing of search engine content. The process of obtaining the content to be searched and the process of updating the search engine databases with references to that content can occur independently of one another. In other words the update cycle to be used by the search engine need not be related to the content site s update practices. This enables the search system to use update cycles which are best suited for particular types of content or listings as well as reduce the number of queries required to maintain fresh and relevant content.

As previously mentioned a search engine server may send a query e.g. an API call to the destination site s server. In response the destination site s server may provide content e.g. listings responsive to the query. During the first stage of the exemplary 3 stage update cycle a collection of content or listings which will still available from the particular destination site during the last stage of the update cycle e.g. the third stage may then be identified. In one embodiment this collection of content may then be used to generate a plurality of pages containing dynamic listings which will be available on the destination site during the third stage of the 3 stage update cycle. In another embodiment the plurality of content pages may be shadow Web pages made to resemble a corresponding page that is to be served by the destination site itself.

Once created these content pages may be used to build at least in part a plurality of search databases during the second stage of the exemplary 3 stage update cycle. In one embodiment the plurality of search databases are built using the created content pages as well as content from other sources. In one embodiment each content page may be identified with a key which may be a search string category ID store name or any other identifier. This key may then be used to periodically update its associated content page. For example when the search system determines that a particular content page should be updated a query e.g. API call containing that particular page s key may be sent to the destination site. In this fashion the search system is able to update only pre select content pages. This may be desirable to minimize the number of queries needed to maintain the relevancy and accuracy of the search database s content. For example the search system may prioritize which listings are in the most need of being updated. Using the associated keys for these identified listings the search system may query the destination site for only those particular listings rather than having to update all of the listings for a given destination site.

Thereafter during stage three of the exemplary 3 stage update cycle the search engine may serve user search queries using the plurality of search databases built during stage 2. In one embodiment the user search queries may be submitted to the search database by entering one or more search terms into a search engine s graphical user interface.

Referring now to the drawings shows a system block diagram of one embodiment of an information distribution system in which the system and method of the invention may be used. In the embodiment of system comprises a remote server that may be connected over one or more communications links to one or more user computer systems . The remote server may include computer readable instructions for generating and displaying one or target websites to the user computers . In one embodiment the remote server may further include one or more databases for storing data such as for example user data and or target website data. While for brevity remote server is referred to in the singular it should equally be appreciated that remote server may be comprised of a plurality of individual computers or servers.

Remote server may further be connected to a remote network e.g. the Internet or a remote site e.g. a satellite which is not shown in via communication link . The remote network or remote site may be used to allow the remote server to provide a wider variety of computer software content etc. to the one or more user computers . In addition user computers may be coupled to the remote network via communication link and internet service provider ISP 

Referring to depicted is one embodiment of the type of computer system which may comprise the one or more user computers of . In particular computer system comprises a processor or a central processing unit CPU which may include an arithmetic logic unit ALU for performing computations a collection of registers for temporary storage of data and instructions and a control unit for controlling operation for the system . In one embodiment the CPU includes any one of the x86 Pentium class microprocessors as marketed by Intel Corporation microprocessors as marketed by AMD or the 6 86MX microprocessor as marketed by Cyrix Corp. In addition any of a variety of other processors including those from Sun Microsystems MIPS IBM Motorola NEC Cyrix AMD Nexgen and others may be used for implementing CPU . Moreover the CPU is not limited to microprocessors but may take on other forms such as microcontrollers digital signal processors reduced instruction set computers RISC application specific integrated circuits and the like. Although shown with one CPU it should equally be appreciated that computer system may alternatively include multiple processing units.

The CPU is coupled to a bus controller by way of a CPU bus . The bus controller may include a memory controller integrated therein although the memory controller may be external to the bus controller . In one embodiment the system memory may be coupled to the bus control via a memory bus where the system memory may include synchronous dynamic random access memory SDRAM . System memory may optionally include any additional or alternative high speed memory device or memory circuitry. The bus controller is coupled to a system bus that may be a peripheral component interconnect PCI bus Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus etc. Coupled to the system bus are a graphics controller a graphics engine or a video controller a mass storage device a communication interface device one or more input output I O devices . The video controller may be coupled to a video memory and video BIOS all of which may be integrated onto a single card or device. The video memory may be used to contain display data for displaying information on the display screen and the video BIOS may include code and video services for controlling the video controller . In another embodiment the video controller may be coupled to the CPU through an advanced graphics port AGP bus not shown .

The mass storage device may include but not be limited to a hard disk floppy disk CD ROM DVD ROM tape high density floppy high capacity removable media low capacity removable media solid state memory device etc. and combinations thereof. The mass storage device may further include any other mass storage medium. The communication interface device may include a network card a modem interface etc. for accessing network via communications link . The I O devices include a keyboard mouse audio sound card printer and the like. The I O device may be a disk drive such as a compact disk drive a digital disk drive a tape drive a zip drive a jazz drive a digital video disk DVD drive a solid state memory device a magneto optical disk drive a high density floppy drive a high capacity removable drive a low capacity media device and or any combination thereof.

Computer system may further include system firmware such as system BIOS for controlling among other things hardware devices in the computer system . The system firmware may include ROM and or flash or EEPROM memory.

As is familiar to those skilled in the art the computer system may further includes an operating system OS and at least one application program which in one embodiment are loaded into system memory from mass storage device . The OS may include any type of OS including but not limited or restricted to DOS Windows Unix Linux Xenix etc. The operating system is a set of one or more programs which control the computer system s operation and the allocation of resources. The application program is a set of one or more software programs that performs a task desired by the user.

Process begins at block whereupon the process determines whether the current stage of the update cycle is Stage 1 which in this embodiment is Day 1. If this is so then process continues to . If not then process continues to block whereupon the process determines whether today is Day 2 which is Stage 2 . If this is so then process continues to . If not then process continues to block whereupon the process determines whether today is Day 3. If this is so then process continues to . If not then process repeats to block unless a Cancel signal is given to the process whereupon process interrupts itself and ends. Moreover it should be appreciated that multiple versions of process may be running at the same time such that on any given day one process may be in Stage 1 another process will be in Stage 2 and a third process will be in Stage 3. This will ensure that new search databases are continuously being updated with fresh content.

Referring now to where process continues in the process first moves to block at which point the search engine e.g. search engine creates a collection of listings which will still available from the content site e.g. content site in 3 days from the point at which block runs. In one embodiment this collection of listings may be created using the dynamic listings content received from the content site server e.g. content database in response to one or more content queries e.g. API calls as previously described with reference to . In another embodiment this collection of listings may be in the form of a plurality of content pages which may resemble the pages to be served by the content site itself. These generated pages may then be indexed by the search database.

Process then proceeds to block whereupon the content e.g. content pages created in block may optionally be added to the search database in a piecemeal fashion. In another embodiment the created content may be used to build a plurality of new search databases as will be described below with reference to . Process proceeds to block wherein the process determines whether there is more content available from which to generate listings. If yes process repeats from block otherwise the process ends.

Referring now to where process continues in the process first moves to block wherein the search engine e.g. search engine builds a plurality of search databases from the content retrieved in block of . It should be appreciated that the plurality of search databases may also be built with a combination of the content retrieved in block of and content provided by other sources. Process proceeds to block wherein the process may determine whether the current time is the end of Day 2 which is the end of the second stage . If not process repeats from block otherwise the process proceeds to block whereupon the process sets the plurality of search databases built in block live meaning that the newly built plurality of search databases will be used when users query for a particular listing. Once this is done process ends.

Referring now to where process continues in the process first moves to block wherein the search engine e.g. search engine continues to use the newly built plurality of search databases for user queries of listings as in block of . Process proceeds to block wherein the process determines whether the current time is the end of Day 3. If not process repeats from block otherwise the process proceeds to block whereupon the process updates the plurality of search databases built in block with fresh content created in Day 1 i.e. in block in . Once this is done process ends. The update cycle of may then be repeated.

As previously mentioned the update cycle to be used by the search engine need not be related to the content site s update practices. Thus in one embodiment the search system uses update cycles based on the particular type of content or listings rather than on the update practices of the content site. In addition content updating may be prioritized to have only the oldest or most dynamic content updated first. Thus the search system may process a number of update cycles of varying lengths for different types of content and or destination sites. In one embodiment this may be done using a key or other identifier associated with a particular content page listing. This key which may be a search string category ID store name or any other identifier may be used to periodically update its associated content page. For example when the search system determines that a particular content page should be updated a query e.g. API call containing that particular page s key may be sent to the destination site.

In still other embodiments the presentation of search result listings may be improved by removing or editing listing titles that include for example poor punctuation or other gimmicks commonly used to attract one s attention to the title e.g. such as using L k in the title . In another embodiment static titles and or abstracts may be used to override the boilerplate text currently used. For example static titles and or abstracts for a given destination site may be combined with the dynamic portion of the content received from the site.

While the invention has been described in connection with various embodiments it will be understood that the invention is capable of further modifications. This application is intended to cover any variations uses or adaptation of the invention following in general the principles of the invention and including such departures from the present disclosure as come within the known and customary practice within the art to which the invention pertains.

