---

title: Global visualization process for personal computer platforms (GVP+)
abstract: A system and process that incorporates hardware and software as elements to be combined with procedures and processes to obtain, format, store, combine, control, display, record, and visualize dynamic scenarios by interacting with accurate, realistic models and actual events within, on, and above a three-dimensional surface to be observed or modeled. The present invention software and process is capable of displaying extremely high resolution terrain models and imagery in real time over the entire surface of the planet, as well as a large number of moving entities and their associated graphical models. These features, combined with a network application programming interface (API), make the present invention suitable for flight simulation out-the-window displays, command and control scenarios, and mission review or rehearsal.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07564455&OS=07564455&RS=07564455
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07564455
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051206
---
This application is a continuation in part and claims the benefit of U.S. Nonprovisional application Ser. No. 10 255 413 filed on Sep. 26 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 239 311 which is incorporated herein by reference. Applicants claim the priority date benefits of that application.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

Incorporated by reference is a computer program listing consisting of a listing of program files attached hereto as Appendix A and an electronic copy of this listing of program files and the source files of the present invention which are being submitted concurrently herewith on a compact disc labeled by at least the title and the name of the inventors associated with this Application. On the computer program listing appendix compact disc Appendix A is contained within the file named APPENDIX A PROGRAM LISTING LIS having a size of 61922 bytes and the source code is contained within the folder named GVP having a size of 70798819 bytes .

The parent invention pertains to optimum visualization of complex scenarios in particular a large scale display with user adjustable resolution and viewpoints of these scenarios as events occur in real time over a wide geographic area. The parent i.e. the Global Visualization Process GVP system as described in U.S. Nonprovisional application Ser. No. 10 255 413 filed on Sep. 26 2002 is an integrated software solution for high performance visualization. The GVP software is capable of displaying extremely high resolution terrain models and imagery in real time over the entire surface of the planet as well as a large number of moving entities and their associated graphical models. More specifically the present invention Global Visualization Process and System GVP of this Application similarly pertains to the optimum visualization of complex scenarios preferably in association with local or remote displays having user adjustable resolution and viewpoints and preferably as these scenarios and or information events occur or change in real time over some user determined geographic area s . Furthermore the process and system of the Global Visualization Process and System GVP is comprised of an integrated software solution for high performance visualization for use in or with at least personal computer platforms. Still further the GVP software is capable of displaying extremely high resolution terrain models and imagery in real time over the entire surface of the planet as well as a large number of moving entities and their associated graphical models. Moreover while the present invention employs at least some portion of the original GVP process and system software as described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 255 413 as a starting point and while essentially if not totally achieving the same process functions the present invention incorporates new capabilities functions differently and is also crafted to operate efficiently in other equipment including but not limited to the class of data processing equipment known as Personal Computers.

Flight simulation has proved to be an effective method for crew and mission training. An integral component of flight simulation is the out of the window visual scene. The creation of a GVP visualization or visual database for flight simulation or for mission planning and rehearsal or for other applications such as command and control display systems typically begins with real world source data that has been derived from satellite imagery overhead photography U.S. Geological Survey information or mapping source materials. The conventional approach until very recently now still employed in order to comply with limited computer resources has been to construct a visual environment from representative artificial models and modeled elements to meet specific training objectives.

And while a graphics arts constructed visual database system may be very effective for a particular training application it should also be appreciated that there are many diverse situations where a fully representative visualization system which renders real world data unlimited in resolution scale and represented area would be desirable. GVP offers a general purpose visualization system that does not need to be redesigned for each new project or set of training exercises.

The Global Visualization Process GVP of the invention as described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 255 413 and the GVP described herein accomplish what conventional methods and systems cannot. In the context of an integrated system having complementary components for large scale real time visualization the GVP and GVP can display large scale terrain modeling and simulation depictions in user selectable resolution without the numerous drawbacks of conventional systems. Conventional systems suffer from some or all of the following limitations 

Accordingly there is a need for a system and or process for producing visual databases that utilize s the great improvements in speed area resolution and video display output while preserving the accuracy of the input data. Furthermore as the GVP and GVP were being developed to meet this need their specialized properties were determined to provide solutions to many more applications.

While the following describes the Global Visualization Process system GVP the same description unless specifically noted otherwise may also apply to the Global Visualization Process for Personal Computer Platforms hereinafter referred to as Global Visualization Process and System or GVP as well therefore the use of the terms Global Visualization Process GVP or any other associated term should also be considered to refer to or describe the Global Visualization Process and System GVP where appropriate.

The Global Visualization Process GVP system is an integrated software solution for high performance visualization. GVP software is capable of displaying extremely high resolution terrain models and imagery in real time over the entire surface of the planet as well as a large number of moving entities and their associated graphical models. The system can display imagery at 2 cm pixel and infinitely detailed terrain in real time over the whole surface of the planet earth. All displayed data is referenced to the World Geodetic System 1984 WGS 84 ellipsoid for true round earth effects and can be rendered in correct asymmetric stereo. These features combined with a network application programming interface API make GVP suitable for flight simulation out the window displays command and control scenarios and mission review or rehearsal.

The Global Visualization Process GVP enables accurate and rapid visualization of a wide area that may include ongoing complex military maneuvers comprising extensive spatial and temporal gradients. GVP combines actual imagery geometric relationships and stored map data with location and activity information for both mobile and fixed objects to generate and control display of large scale visual depictions visualizations . GVP integrates data using full external network connectivity for both simulations and actual operations.

Applications include human visualization for command and control of military operations tests training reconnaissance and surveillance simulations mission rehearsal war games and synthetic vision systems. GVP produces high quality displays having dynamic and perceptual properties matched to user needs while providing immediate use of acquired data. GVP can be adapted for use by a single person such as a virtual image display or large group displays such as theaters. GVP may provide standard two dimensional outputs or stereoscopic depictions thus matching a user s perceptual requirements for complex events and spatial interactions such as may occur in war games.

A preferred embodiment of the GVP provides a system and process that incorporates hardware and software as elements to be combined with procedures and processes to obtain format store combine control display record visualize and interact with accurate realistic models and events within on above and below a three dimensional surface to be observed or modeled.

A preferred embodiment of the GVP discloses a process for dynamic human visualization of events occurring within a volume having varying spatial and temporal gradients which provides readily adjustable scale and resolution and initiating activities internal thereto. A preferred embodiment of the process comprises 1 acquiring data that represents imagery geometric and time relationships to be used for generating motion paths stored maps location and activity and the data is acquired from standard sources 2 integrating the data using full external network connectivity the data is acquired from simulations actual events or standard sources and the data includes multi source satellite and aerial imagery available in various wavelengths and formats 3 developing at least one database having a software architecture from which at least one model is generated 4 generating at least one display containing at least one depiction from said at least one model and said data wherein said depiction may be displayed in real time and 5 controlling said at least one display.

A preferred embodiment of the GVP discloses a system having inputs and outputs that enables a process for dynamic human visualization of a volume including events having varying spatial and temporal gradients that are occurring within the volume. The system provides readily adjustable scale and resolution and initiating activities internal thereto. The system comprises 1 at least one data generator as at least one source of data the data represents imagery geometric and time relationships to be used for generating motion paths stored maps location and activity and the data is acquired from standard sources 2 memory for storing and accessing at least a portion of the data 3 at least one interface for communication between the system and external devices 4 at least one visualization device having inputs and outputs for displaying at least one depiction the depiction may be derived at least in part from a model having at least one input and at least one output and is displayed in real time 5 at least one record and playback device for provision of at least some inputs to the visualization device 6 software for manipulating the process the software is used to generate at least one database the software is used at least in part to create at least one model from the database the software is used to control the inputs to and the outputs from at least one model for inputs to at least one display and the software is used to control the outputs from the record and playback device and the interface 7 at least one controller for controlling said inputs and outputs to the system. Moreover in a more preferred embodiment the data generator comprises at least one device such as a real time data collection system a GCCS system a scenario generator a device simulator or a cockpit simulator.

A preferred embodiment of the system and process includes using quad tree architecture for terrain geometry files and clip texture imagery a Master Object Manager to separate objects and a geographical coordinate system such as WGS 84 to convert the imagery into one global model.

Using the quad tree architecture allows management of both position and resolution variations within the clip texture files and the terrain geometry files and facilitates the population of at least one worldwide database. The resolution of the display can be adjusted for varying eyepoints with a first adjustment possibly defining a first level of a plurality of levels within the quad tree architecture. Each succeeding level of the plurality of levels consists of four sub sectors each depicting a quarter of the area of the depiction of an immediately preceding level but containing the same amount of image data as the depiction of the immediately preceding level thus providing higher resolution than any of the preceding levels. Further moving through the plurality of levels in either direction provides a resolution required by a user.

The Master Object Manager module having software architecture interfaces to outside events and collects communication and control processes. The Master Object Manager can interact with standards based processes such as distributed interactive simulation DIS Department of Defense DoD systems under High Level Architecture HLA Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment DII COE formats for the Global Command and Control System GCCS and commercial computer network communications protocols. The software architecture of GVP with the Master Object Manager achieves update rates facilitating real time viewing on the display and permits a user s areas of interest to be embedded at a pre selected resolution. The system accepts data in formats such as DII COE messages in GCCS M Combat Command and Control System HLA DIS military LINK and air traffic control radar or any combination thereof.

Accurate and rapid visualization of an area via orienting position is based on the WGS 84 geophysical standard for world shape to at least one eyepoint. The WGS 84 geophysical standard is fully compatible with standard navigation systems and included within the desired area are events having a range of spatial and temporal gradients. Also systems operating to the WGS 84 permit navigation systems to connect register and synchronize within the process. As a result the accuracy of the data received by the system is preserved.

Initially the GVP and GVP addressed the need to depict complex military flight test operations. For planning controlling and assessment the need for rapid clear communication between all concerned could be met only by some method of advanced visualization. Thus the GVP and GVP address or otherwise meet the following needs 

Advantages of preferred embodiments of the GVP and or GVP as compared to conventional systems preferably include permitting 

Preferably the embodiments of the GVP and or the GVP can be applied to depict any activity requiring a decision maker to undertake one or more of the following actions plan coordinate control communicate command assess reconnoiter negotiate direct collate organize or terminate activities or any action related to any of the above either before or after in time. Sample activities include military flight test operations training simulations tests computer modeling war games maneuvers combat operations flight guidance or vehicle guidance and domestic disturbances. The realistic training available with the system saves capital equipment as well as training and maintenance costs while providing a better trained individual. It will also provide top level decision makers with very realistic hands on experience without the expense of participating in an event that could cost lives and material.

Similarly and preferably the Global Visualization Process and System GVP is an integrated software solution for high performance visualization. Preferably the GVP software is capable of displaying extremely high resolution terrain models and imagery in real time over the entire surface of the planet as well as a large number of moving entities and their associated graphical models. The GVP can display imagery and detailed terrain in real time over the whole surface of the planet earth with a much higher resolution than that possible with the parent GVP. This is preferably accomplished without using clip texture files and preferably the number of levels in the visual database structure is not constrained to 32. All displayed data is referenced to the World Geodetic System 1984 WGS 84 ellipsoid for true round earth effects and can be rendered in correct asymmetric stereo. These features combined with a network application programming interface API make the GVP suitable for flight simulation out the window displays command and control scenarios and mission review or rehearsal. Moreover the GVP enables accurate and rapid visualization of a wide area that may include ongoing complex military maneuvers comprising extensive spatial and temporal gradients. Preferably the GVP combines actual imagery geometric relationships and or stored map data with location and activity information for both mobile and fixed objects to generate and control the display of visual depictions Visualizations including but not limited to large scale visual depictions. And the GVP preferably integrates data using full external network connectivity for both simulations and actual operations. In general the GVP applications include but are not limited to human visualization for command and control of military operations tests training reconnaissance and surveillance simulations mission rehearsal war games and synthetic vision systems. Moreover GVP preferably produces high quality displays having dynamic and perceptual properties matched to a user s needs while providing virtually immediate use of acquired data. Furthermore the GVP preferably can be adapted for use by a single person e.g. such as with portable or hand held virtual image displays or for large groups e.g. such as in theaters and the GVP preferably provides standard two dimensional outputs simulated three dimensional outputs and or stereoscopic depictions thus matching a user s perceptual requirements for complex events and spatial interactions such as those that may occur in or be required for war games.

Preferably the present invention should provide a system and or process that incorporates hardware and software as elements to be combined with procedures and processes to obtain format store combine control display record visualize and interact with accurate realistic models and events within on above and or below a two and or three dimensional surface to be observed and or modeled. More specifically the process preferably comprises the following steps 

Moreover in at least one embodiment of the GVP the data generator preferably comprises at least one device process or means such as a real time data collection system a GCCS system a scenario generator a device simulator a cockpit simulator or some other similar or appropriate device process or means.

Additionally the GVP preferably includes the use of quad tree architecture for terrain geometry files and or imagery files a Master Object Manager to separate objects and a geographical coordinate system such as WGS 84 to convert the imagery into at least one global model. Moreover the use of quad tree architecture preferably allows for the management of both position and resolution variations within the imagery files and or the terrain geometry files and preferably facilitates the population of at least one worldwide database. Furthermore and preferably the resolution of a display can be adjusted for varying eyepoints with a first adjustment preferably defining a first level of a plurality of levels within the quad tree architecture. Moreover the present invention is preferably capable of providing higher resolution in each succeeding level of display since each succeeding level of the plurality of levels consists of four sub sectors that each depict a quarter of the area of the depiction of an immediately preceding level but contain the same amount of image data as the depiction of the immediately preceding level. Still further moving through the plurality of levels in either direction preferably provides the resolution required by a user.

Similarly as with the GVP the GVP and or the Master Object module of the GVP has at least one software architecture interface to outside events and collects communication and control processes. Preferably the GVP and or the Master Object Manager can interact with standards based processes such as distributed interactive simulation DIS Department of Defense DoD systems under High Level Architecture HLA Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment DII COE formats for the Global Command and Control System GCCS and or commercial computer network communications protocols. However the GVP and or the Master Object Manager of the present invention are not limited to such systems processes formats protocols and or platforms. In other words the GVP is preferably capable of accepting data in formats such as DII COE messages in GCCS M Combat Command and Control System HLA DIS military LINK and or air traffic control radar or any combination thereof however the GVP is not limited to these systems processes formats protocols and or platforms. Moreover the software architecture of the GVP and or the Master Object Manager preferably achieves update rates facilitating real time viewing on at least one display and permits a user s area s of interest to be embedded at a preferably pre selected resolution. Still further the accurate and rapid visualization of an area via orienting position is preferably based on the WGS 84 geophysical standard for world shape to at least one eyepoint. The WGS 84 geophysical standard is fully compatible with standard navigation systems and preferably included within the user s desired area of interest are relevant events which may have a range of spatial and temporal gradients . Also it is known that systems operating to the WGS 84 standard permit navigation systems to connect register and synchronize within the process. As a result the accuracy of the data received by the system is virtually if not fully preserved.

As with the GVP and preferably the embodiments of the present invention GVP can be or should be capable of being applied to depict any activity requiring a decision maker to undertake one or more of the following actions plan coordinate control communicate command assess reconnoiter negotiate direct collate organize and or terminate activities and or undertake any action related to any of the above either before or after in time. Sample activities include but are not limited to military flight test operations training simulations tests computer modeling war games maneuvers combat operations flight guidance or vehicle guidance and or the command and or control of or over domestic disturbances. Importantly the realistic training available with the system saves capital equipment as well as training and maintenance costs while providing a better trained individual. It is also capable of providing top level decision makers with very realistic hands on experience s without the expense of participating in an event that could incur significant costs lives and or materials.

Preferred embodiments are fully disclosed below albeit without placing limitations thereon and other features and their advantages will be apparent to those skilled in the art from a careful reading of the Detailed Description of the Invention accompanied by the drawings.

As background and while referring to an example of an embodiment of the underlying GVP invention which is used at least in part in the present invention GVP is shown. A preferred embodiment of the GVP the system as shown in incorporates hardware and software as elements to be combined with procedures and processes to obtain format store combine control display record visualize and interact with accurate realistic terrain models and events or activities in on above and below the terrain. Elements of the developmental system include several commercial computer and display products of advanced but conventional design. The GVP software runs on standard computers including both graphics processing computers and personal computers. Some of the software employs commercially available programs and interfaces with commercially available programs.

Again referring to User Interfaces permit software manipulation of databases storage interface to internal sources and an external interface module Master Object Manager replay and a display through CTL World software interface to sources external to the process and internal functions via a software module Master Object Manager and user input and control through a variety of electromechanical control devices such as a keyboard mouse or joystick.

A database generation process functions off line to make visual database file structures which populate a visual database that may be manipulated by CTL World software to provide displays in multiple windows in either two or three dimensions and which may also be input directly to displays in cockpit simulations . The Master Object Manager provides interface to external sources either simulations using DIS or a HLA or actual scenarios using GCCS B for example. Simulation scenarios may be provided by a scenario generator that may include inputs from conventional modeling and simulation programs such as FORCES A Force Operational Readiness Combat Effectiveness Simulation ModSaF B Modern Semi automated Forces or EADSIM C Extended Air Defense Simulation or actual or simulated events using a GCCS system including its Repeat data record and replay mode A. A history of object positioning eyepoint and events is maintained as a Track History in turn provided to a replay system GVP Playback Controller for manipulation by CTL World software in developing depictions for display on a multi window display or for use by the Master Object Manager including for use as input to cockpit simulations .

GVP incorporates specialized processes to develop terrain models termed database generation . Standard commercial database generation support software including TERREX ERDAS IMAGINE MULTIGEN and SGI elements are employed in specialized or customized ways along with customized or original CTL software and procedures to turn terrain imagery and elevation data files into GVP terrain model database products i.e. a visual database . The specialized file and world geometry of GVP requires specific and unconventional operations to organize standard source data in terrain imagery and elevation data to create terrain databases . Major parts of the database development processes run on small single processor or multiprocessor PCs and can apply to data from all conventional sources including multilayer map material. For example satellite and aerial imagery from numerous sources in different wavebands and formats have been processed successfully. Visual databases for GVP are populated by generating imagery files called clip texture files and storing these separately from terrain geometry files. Terrain geometry as processed for database use generates triangulated irregular network TIN files. These are polygons assembled to approximate the surface shape of the terrain. Coordinating the image files the geometry files relative information content and sequencing for precision and speed in both the file generation processes and in the image generation process is a key strong point of the GVP invention. Both types of files have an associated resolution provided as data density indicating the degree of precision in representing the actual source terrain. An advantage of GVP is that clip texture files and terrain geometry files are retained and processed separately not being combined until late in the display generation process thus saving interim computation steps. ASIDE Preferably the GVP does not use clip texture files and the files used are not retained and or processed separately. In other words the files used in the GVP are preferably combined and may be kept this way until they are needed later in the display generation process. 

As illustrated in GVP applies dual quad tree architecture for the clip texture and terrain geometry files. In actuality the terrain imagery files comply with the SGI display software PERFORMER which employs clip textures in a hierarchical format of SGI design. However other display control programs capable of generating video views of 3 D modeled objects could be incorporated. For the purposes of this application it is a quad tree forming one half of the dual quad tree architecture. In a preferred embodiment of the present invention a base terrain skin is generated according to an approach referred to as the quad tree approach. Under the quad tree approach a region of terrain represented by a tile at a coarser level of detail may be represented at the finer and next level of detail by four tiles. Furthermore the scene graph is generated such that when the terrain skin is played back a tile is never displayed at a level of detail that is more than one level different from the level of detail of any adjacent tile. Finally the polygons in each tile are generated so that the shared edges between the tiles appear well matched. Techniques for generating a terrain grid according to the quad tree approach and for generating grids formed of matched shared edges are well known to those skilled in the art. Using a dual quad tree approach that is one for terrain shape and one for imagery enables management of both position and resolution variations for development of world wide databases . GVP achieves its high performance in area resolution precision and speed by effective innovations architecture and balanced design in the dual quad tree approach. At the lowest resolution data density and detail an entire hemisphere can be depicted in one working file level. The resolution of the display can be matched or exceeded for distant eyepoints not separately shown e.g. a view that includes an entire hemisphere by a visualization database with relatively low resolution i.e. on the order of 1 or 2 kilometers smallest detail element. This zoom out version comprises the first quad tree level for the GVP architecture for both clip texture and TIN files. Each level is further divided into four sub sectors depicting one quarter of the area but with similar file size and amount of detail data or polygons thus making much higher resolution as first zoom in version. This structure is repeated as necessary to provide the resolution required by a user i.e. additional zoom in and zoom out versions as illustrated in . Imagery is also processed in stages with increasing resolution and conforming to the TIN Quad Tree file structure. This forms the basic information storage and data manipulation architecture of the GVP system.

A preferred embodiment of the GVP incorporates an architecture with 32 levels that can hold and operate anywhere on the earth s surface with a maximum resolution of about two centimeters. Further the architecture is expandable as necessary for higher resolutions or other purposes such as celestial bodies operations in space or even for mapping manmade objects.

Input devices include for example multiple controls for video signal outputs for display device type and location matching adjustments control over the stereoscopic rendering parameters and input selection options for motion position control devices such as two axis joystick controls and three axis six degree of freedom helmet motion trackers.

Completing the basic GVP architecture is a separate software module termed the Master Object Manager . The Master Object Manager interfaces the system to outside events of all types and determines the objects and activities displayed with the terrain model. It permits two way communication with simulation modeling and operational events external to GVP. Network operations currently implemented via Master Object Manager interact with standards based processes for distributed interactive simulation DIS and with the DoD systems operating with High Level Architecture HLA A. For interaction with operational forces the interface employs Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment DII COE formats not separately shown for the Global Command and Control System GCCS B. In these formats and generally compatible with computer network communication protocols the Master Object Manager assembles and tracks locations orientation types activities and depiction relevant factors for fixed and mobile objects of all types. Within the Master Object Manager various sorting filtering and aggregation algorithms refine an object list not separately shown for the display system . Some aspects of selection for visibility and display level of detail LOD required are conducted inside Master Object Manager to reduce computational demands in the CTL World display generator . This reserves computer resources for the graphics processes CTL World display generator and orders the data traffic between the CTL World display generator and processes or systems outside GVP including simulations scenario generators and operational events . In addition Master Object Manager can command or feed multiple copies of CTL World to match a variety of extended visualization generation demands and to synchronize multiple remote or nearby visualization processes to a common consolidated data set.

Finally the GVP architecture is completed by two supplementary elements a track file recorder to store motion paths as track history of various events for data purposes and an all purpose event replay control utility shown as GVP Playback Controller . Processes external to GVP but to which it is designed to be connected e.g. simulators models and operational data or operational data recorders normally have their own data recording and replay capability. These two elements of GVP function to replace those separate operations combining sources for the display and for activities initiated internal to GVP. For example the local computer interface to GCCS inputs is itself a computer and has record playback capability i.e. Repeat A . The Repeat capability might suffice to reconstitute and replay or manipulate visualizations accomplished with the GVP system alone but if the visualization involves other data sources as well as GCCS events this would not be practical. Thus GVP uses its track history and GVP Replay Controller to reconstruct and manipulate visualizations.

In sum in an embodiment for use by government users GVP incorporates a suite of government owned products and software processes that are suitable for use in a variety of applications e.g. military scenario depiction and visualization. The specialized architecture of GVP allows creation of operating models that are geo specific geo referenced and universally scalable. The results are accurate depictions of a round world. The GVP products support immediate direct application in a variety of possible roles all emphasizing enhanced situational awareness precision and accuracy in the use of positional information as well as support for a higher tempo of operations with increased confidence and reduced risk. Further imagery based terrain models with terrain elevation data can be generated from all data sources and in selectable degrees of resolution. Combined for display products can include terrain models fixed and mobile object models weather or visibility effects and map materials with multiple layers of information.

GVP operating models are geo specific geo referenced and universally scalable. In a preferred embodiment of the present invention a geographical coordinate system enables accurate and rapid visualization of an area via orienting position based on a geographical coordinate system to at least one eyepoint. The geographical coordinate system is fully compatible with standard navigation systems and permits navigation systems to connect register and synchronize with the system. In a more preferred embodiment of the present invention an internationally valid coordinate system is incorporated as the geographical coordinate system. An applicable geographical coordinate system is the round world WGS 84 standard that permits inputs from all modern navigation systems to connect register and synchronize correctly. The WGS 84 is an approximation of the earth s surface defining a coordinate system which provides a reference surface for GVP and the geoid is the difference between the WGS 84 model and the true surface of the earth. Terrain model resolution is dependent primarily on source imagery characteristics but there are important considerations with respect to demands for memory i.e. dynamic computer texture memory dynamic graphics memory and application specific demands for display update rate. GVP software architecture has been optimized to achieve very high update rates. The GVP software can achieve update rate of between 50 and 60 frames per second including in stereoscopic mode. Additionally specific high interest areas as identified by a user may be embedded in GVP models at a required high resolution.

The GVP software handles large complex models while maintaining a high update speed i.e. above 50 frames per second. A typical set of cultural features such as buildings can be added to GVP terrain models without adverse impact on frame rate. Large numbers and many types of mobile objects can be added with appearance location and dynamics established by external sources and . The GVP architecture and model handling processes enable relatively large numbers of such scenarios to be modeled or displayed while maintaining high update rates.

Terrain and any depicted features or modeled objects display at appropriate and controllable resolution levels or level of detail based on primary object resolution eyepoint distance and display surface capability. The eyepoint s for viewing are entirely controllable along with all other relevant display parameters.

Communication to the system is established and functional in several modes. Military elements and operational entities can be connected via DII COE messages in GCCS M or other variants of the Combat Command and Control System standards. All types of simulation can be connected via HLA standards compliant means and by DIS formatted data A. Other standard means such as the military LINK and air traffic control radar data not separately shown are also accommodated.

By using a separate but integrated Master Object Manager module for collecting communication and control processes the architecture 

The GVP CTL World display software architecture is written for and adapts itself to multi processor CPUs multi channel video outputs not separately shown and multi pipe computer systems not separately shown using all system resources.

The GVP CTL World software that controls video output and creates the visualization is government owned software and includes interfaces to all software drivers not separately shown for input and output devices. Complete process and programming control affords freedom to optimize the system for specific applications and to capitalize on any available innovations. Interactive devices including mouse controls joysticks helmet mounted head and eye trackers voice control gesture recognition etc. can be used without limitations imposed by inaccessible software source code.

All depictions in the basic GVP displays can be formatted as video products to be operated and displayed as perspective 2 D views of 3 D models scalable to various ranges and viewpoints. The GVP CTL World software also supports binocular stereopsis for true 3 D displays in several modes. CTL World outputs active stereo viewable with shutter glasses for left and right eye view control. Dual optics virtual displays without shutters i.e. virtual display devices are directly supported including those for head directed helmet mounted or head mounted displays. CTL World software also supports custom 3 D visualization products such as FAKESPACE VERSABENCH and other passive stereo displays which are generally viewed with polarized lenses for left and right view control.

For all viewing modes and devices CTL World software has the necessary control over video output to provide corrections and adjustments to match or trim for display device and viewing geometry requirements. Explicit control of all stereo viewing parameters is incorporated in CTL World software for full control of the stereoscopic viewing experience. Dynamic response to scaling changes in eyepoint is provided to maintain the intended stereoscopic effects.

In one embodiment GVP supports investigation of human engineering issues in advanced technology displays and information visualization. It provides effective and efficient software having an architecture tailored to interactive military systems. In another role GVP can help speed development while reducing costs of new systems by covering in simulation and testing various aspects of DoD missions.

Additionally GVP may be implemented to reduce required memory to hold large area database files by incorporating fast file compression and decompression. Further GVP may be implemented to accept streaming information i.e. continuous real time imagery or other data from sensors to update or replace database material thus providing timely updates for real time visualization.

Models suitable for flight simulator operation as out the window displays. Because GVP is fully compliant with round world geometry standards interfaces are facilitated in interactions between simulation models such as DIS that incorporate operational position data in the simulation. The GVP model type and construction and the GVP CTL World display software comprise a standard or uniform product type suitable for high end military flight training simulators. Unmanned Airborne Vehicle UAV and UCAV systems. GVP is suitable for training multi platform command and control reconnaissance and surveillance processes planning and rehearsal and rapid prototyping applications. Interactive visualization during tactical flight operations. Applications range from mission rehearsal including while deployed or airborne to operational exploitation of near real time tactical intelligence. GVP based displays by providing a full visualization context for mission depiction may also provide a natural means for ground and aircrew to interact with and control advanced interactive aircraft design features for pilot aiding devices and system automation features.

The above descriptions should not be construed as limiting the scope of the invention but as mere illustrations of embodiments. For example although examples discussed at length focus on military applications the method and apparatus is applicable to any that a user may need to visualize in real time relatively wide areas within which dynamic relatively large scale events occur. Therefore the scope shall be determined by appended claims as interpreted in light of the above specification.

To practice an embodiment of the present invention as described herein at least portions of the source code for an embodiment of the present invention have been submitted on a computer program listing appendix compact disc and the information and or data contained therein is incorporated by reference in its entirety. Moreover while the discussion herein illustrates preferred embodiments of the present invention it does not limit the present invention from being implemented and or configured in a myriad of other manners within the spirit and scope of this Application. Moreover while the devices a portion of the software and or processes circuits and or other components used in the present invention preferably come from the group of devices software processes circuits and or other components that are well known and or are commonly or readily made available other means of implementing the present invention may also be used as well. As background it should be noted that the preferable use of network ready functionality that enables the coordinated operation of multiple GVP processes and or systems with a single preferably dynamically organized database of events and or objects is now incorporated in the primary GVP and or GVP software as an integral part of the invention. Previously this capability was a separate process see e.g. the above described Master Object Manager discussion needing additional computer equipment to be accessible to the main image control and generation process. Because of this addition the invention can now operate in commodity class PC computers and depending on speed and or coverage demands can also be installed in more limited performance computers including but not limited to laptops and tablet devices and may be possibly installed for operation in miniaturized computing devices as well. Moreover as a non limiting definition and where appropriate the term model as used herein may refer to at least some of the following at least one terrain model including but not limited to those that may be comprised of texture or shape or both shape and or appearance records or renderings of a real object including but not limited to one or more buildings one or more vehicles and or one or more other real objects and constructive processes which may be used to record or predict the actions of selected entities in interaction over time including but not limited to the simulation of aircraft actions the interactive events of action elements as in a war game a theory based mathematical description of processes and events and or other systematic time referenced descriptions of complex events and or processes.

Referring now to a general block diagram of the GVP for Personal Computer Platforms A is shown in and the elements that may be associated with these blocks as well as an embodiment of the present invention GVP for Personal Computer Platforms GVP or the System are shown in . Preferably and as shown the System incorporates hardware and software that is used with and or combined with procedures and processes in order to at least accomplish the purposes and or applications of the original GVP but the GVP does so in different ways with novel and unique features and desirable new capabilities for effective application to a new class of user s needs. Preferably the System is constructed to operate using the LINUX operating system in conventional computers and with the associated hardware called desktop personal computers laptop computers and or other relatively small and relatively inexpensive data processing hardware however the GVP could be configured for use with other processing platforms and or for other purposes and or applications as well. Furthermore C is the preferable high level computer language used but other languages could be used as well. The System s software architecture is preferably tailored to operate efficiently in the main processors and the video processor components of today s personal computers and in other small data processing hardware. Moreover the GVP does not require the use of non U.S. Government proprietary software or limited license or limited availability software components for its implementation and or operation. On the other hand the GVP invention does employ or incorporate to some degree software products that are conventional open source materials developed by others. These elements may include some if not all of but are not limited to the following The Adaptive Communication Environment ACE the ACE ORB TAO preferably implementing the common object request broker architecture CORBA the Open Scene Graph OSG the Developer s Image Library DevIL the GNU Scientific Library GSL the GNU Libtool and the GNU Portability Library PLIB which is also referred to as Steve s Portable Game Library.

More specifically but without limitation the GVP and or its processes may comprise at least some of the following elements as shown in 

Preferably the GVP employs an off line set of procedures and processes to produce a multiplicity of data files in a specially formatted hierarchical memory structure as represented in by the Visual Database Generator element and to hold visualization models of global sized terrain areas as represented by the Visual Database . Specifically the basic model information is preferably stored in appearance files called texture files and in shape files constructed as triangulated irregular mesh networks called elevation files . Preferably the GVP employs client server design architecture and the processes which function as Server Elements in this architecture are represented by the Server Elements box in and the SERVER S block as shown in . They include but are not limited to one or more Render Server structures the first 4 of n of these are represented by RenderServer with API OSG RenderServer with API OSG RenderServer with API OSG and RenderServer with API OSG . The system also employs one or more Global Entity Manager elements the first two of these are represented by Global Entity Manager with API and Global Entity Manager with API . Preferably each of these elements shares several software architecture and code structures in common and they preferably have a common Application Programmer s Interface API which is fully identical in program structure which is based on common software content and which interacts in a similar manner with other processes inside and outside the GVP .

Preferably the Render Servers include and or produce outcomes appropriate for Open Scene Graph OSG pictorial renderings of the final visualization models. More specifically each one preferably connects to Open Scene Graph video generation software and to a personal computer s video processor hardware to generate its associated video rendering for the output visualization. Preferably the Render Servers and Entity Managers employ common entity structure and data structure forms so that all entity classes are named and defined in a common terminology across the Render Servers and Entity Managers. As a generality a single Render Server controls output to a single display channel which depending on the external display device and characteristics may be complex in form and preferably multi channel display requirements are generally met with multiple Render Servers. As a non limiting example a straightforward large scale video display or screen for use by a group may include several video display projectors organized in a large screen array and preferably one Render Server would generate the imagery for each such individual screen or display. On the other hand under some conditions and as another non limiting example one Render Server could fill the display requirements of two adjacent displays depending on the display surface resolution and the hardware capabilities of the personal computer video processor and or other hardware elements. Specifically characteristics and features of the basic Render Server architecture preferably allow multiple Render Server units to be synchronized e.g. at least in timing in order to provide for the production of a smooth video display for composite multi channel visualizations. Consequently this retains or allows for fast update rates and eliminates or nearly eliminates visible disruptions and irregularities in scene update and movement. Moreover because of the commonality of API structures and entity class construction Render Servers and Entity Managers can preferably connect with one another and with external processes in multiple and flexible ways in order to meet a user s application needs. And as a non limiting example shows that four Render Servers and two Entity Managers are connected and operating. Furthermore by using the GVP process the client and or control elements and or other processes inside and or outside the GVP can preferably generate and connect to each appropriate Render Server and or Entity Manager element in a uniform orderly way i.e. by preferably using a common language common procedure s and common software structures.

Preferably the GVP also utilizes an API Interactions Database to which all communications to and from the APIs of the render servers and and the entity managers and are reported for recording. Preferably the detailed record accumulated in the API Interactions Database can be employed by a Playback Controller as represented by the Playback Client to preferably regenerate the full system output of the GVP at any time subsequent to an initial operation for at least the purpose of providing for the full and complete reproduction of an original earlier operation.

Other preferable processes may include but are not limited to components specifically for control of the GVP and also those for communication with outside processes. As a non limiting example a Distributed Interactive Simulation DIS interface as represented by the DIS Client Process is incorporated in the GVP to enable direct connection with a major class of computerized simulations using the DIS Protocol and communication means. More specifically but without limitation Simulation and Modeling interactions with other systems employing the DIS or HLA technical approaches can connect to the DIS Client Process as shown in by the possibly external to GVP HLA Gateway and the DIS Network Traffic component represented by the DIS Network Traffic from M S Modeling Simulation Processes such as FORCES EADSIM ModSAF etc. block . Preferably operations involving this interface pathway may include but are not limited to constructive model and simulation operations and applications such as war gaming scenario generator systems. Similarly and preferably a Global Command and Control System GCCS Client as represented by the GCCS Client Process element may be an element of the GVP . Preferably its purpose is to effectively interface with external GCCS Maritime Servers in order to enable interactions with operational forces in this non limiting case it is primarily the U.S. Navy. Moreover other control process needs of the GVP e.g. for direct operator input for display eyepoint control and or for other control functions are preferably met by the Joystick Client as represented by the Joystick Client and or other control Process es element .

Preferably when operated for an application the GVP is prepared in advance with global terrain information to permit it to generate visualizations this information and or data can be from all types of sources it is preferably processed off line and it is used to at least generate the information for the Visual Database Generator and or the Visual Database . Furthermore imagery can be from different sources in various wavelength wavebands and may include satellite and aerial photography. Moreover the GVP possibly allows for the terrain elevation data to include different sources and types of input the use of mixed levels of resolution and the mapping information to be applied to the Visual Database Generator and or the Visual Database and or otherwise used to create the visual database and or the visualization database. And because of the use of the unique data structure i.e. employing a hierarchy that can be generally described as being a quad tree or in other possible embodiments as a dual quad tree structure see with a multiplicity of file structure layers the visual database can contain information at many different levels of resolution which can be selected according to the video display surface resolution for a given visualization condition and selected individual portions of the visualization database can be independently updated or revised or extended in detail without revising other areas.

Visualizations setups can be applied to the GVP establishing each Render Server and or Entity Manager needed to match the user s display communication and or information requirements. Moreover since the external entities to be depicted have associated reporting means and protocols one or more of the Global Entity Managers are preferably set to track this incoming data and to maintain a global in scope updated listing of all such events and the Render Servers are set to produce a video output as needed by the application s display conditions and or the user s information requirements. Operationally the user s viewing eyepoint is indicated to the system to initiate display generation and as the eyepoint is controlled the GVP responds with the commanded repositioning of the eyepoint preferably causing the appropriate adjustment of the display. This is preferably mediated by a client process such as a joystick a simulator s motion computation or some other selected control input operating through the controller client interface as represented by the Joystick Client and or other control Process es element . For facilitation of this process the Global Entity Manager s and or retain information on all classes of events and entities of visualization interest and depending on rendering instructions of the user including aggregation and de aggregation instructions the Entity Manager s and or note when any traffic item of interest is in the eyepoint s viewing frustrum and cause it to be included in the video generation cycle so that it shows appropriately in the visualization. And preferably but without limitation alphanumerics symbols icons and or 2D or 3D models which may all be possibly taken from stored libraries of such objects may be used to depict entities these libraries are not shown in or B .

Because of the commonality of the software and its architecture the Render Server s and the Entity Manager s can connect with one another and with client control and other process elements as needed in flexible and convenient ways. A non limiting example is the generation of a historical interaction file in the Application Programmer s Interface Interaction File as represented by the API Interactions Database block . In other words all process interactions with all of the APIs in the Render Server s and or and the Entity Manager s and or are reported for recording in the API Interactions Database preferably as a continuous process while the GVP is running. This allows the Playback Client to use these records to reconstruct a rerun of some previous operation at a later time and the rerun can be used for analysis instruction or for whatever other purpose that may suit a user s needs.

In a non limiting example of a typical application an operational user may employ the GVP as a mission rehearsal tool. In this regard the military area of operation or other area of interest may have recent tactical or other terrain data which can be loaded at the appropriate places in the visual database to make the most recently available data part of the visualization. Furthermore mission planning information can be generated in a client process and connected to the visualization via the DIS and or other protocol inputs and or and presented to at least one Entity Manager and or for at least tracking. Moreover the eyepoint control and timing representing mission routing or other planned actions can be input via one or more of the control clients . With this established the view from the resulting eyepoint and its path in time and space can be reviewed inspected evaluated and or studied as an element of mission planning and rehearsal activity and at some later time the final selected action visualization can be run and or rerun for practice or analysis.

Functionally as the eyepoint view is generated and or determined for any specific moment in time and or space the terrain and texture files are accessed by one or more of the Render Server and or to extract the region of files containing the view defined by the viewing frustum. Then as required by the user setup the very basic WGS 84 model seen at that location is re rendered with the combined local terrain depiction files preferably including the appropriate lighting weather and or other available depictions . Terrain visualizations are then generated at resolutions that match or challenge the video display surface in use e.g. personal displays group displays helmet displays aviation cockpit displays and or other local or remote equipment and all can preferably be accommodated as required. Furthermore as the view is defined for the visualization the at least one Entity Manager and or inserts relevant entity and event information into the video generation process via and or so that the final depiction is as true as intended and preferably holds the most recent information on events and entities in the area of interest. Furthermore the process for file construction and file structure developed for and used by the GVP includes precise geo referencing of all data. And preferably the position data for all terrain elevation and texture file materials is specific for all displayed information i.e. every pixel at every level is preferably referenced to a geographic location with exactness . Still further to increase the efficaciousness of the GVP technical means preferably based on WGS 84 shape referencing for terrain are employed in the GVP to retain the precision of the initial geo referenced input data and to prevent any introduction of positional error based on the processes of the GVP itself. Still further and preferably the visualizations generated by GVP can be interrogated for geo specific location data at any point in the display volume through the use of suitable user application processes thereby producing directly usable location information.

As previously noted the above may be a typical application but it is not limiting. Many other actions and applications can be accommodated by the GVP . As other non limiting examples constructive simulations involving military or civil events can be depicted preferably by at least using the communication process interfaces. Moreover use of the GVP with local or remote manned simulations or in concert with constructive simulations can be supported and as a non limiting example military plans or scenario generators or war games as well as other constructive simulations may be connected for depiction via the DIS HLA and or other network interface clients and or through one or more of the global Entity Managers and or . One property of the Global Entity Manager architecture is that it permits a single entity manager to consolidate complex data from multiple sources and to synchronize that data with the information held by other inside or outside processes. Importantly by using networked operations and easily arranged API interactions at least one Entity Manager and or can preferably coordinate information and keep numerous visualizations generated by one or more other GVP any of which may be in different locations all in order and up to date through the use of a common database. ASIDE Preferably broadband video is normally generated near to where it is being used for display. Moreover and preferably manned simulations with individual platforms in operation can conduct activities within a visualization generated by a GVP can report actions and movements via the DIS and or other protocol pathways and or can receive information on other manned platforms possibly acting in concert with visualizations that are being generated by other GVP and or other systems applications and or processes and both or all such activities can be configured to report and or respond to scenario events generated in or by constructive simulations such as ModSAF or by other models and or simulations for complex events . With this in mind it is easy to envision that very complex structures can be generated using the interface convenience power and flexibility of the GVP . Moreover the architecture of the GVP may enable several now planned functional extensions. These include the capacity to receive streaming data input from real time sources on terrain elevation and appearance and to promptly incorporate this material into visualizations with only minor processing delays i.e. delays on the order of seconds or less so that the effect is a near real time visualization data update . This capability could address tactical sensor information such as appearance information for areas of high military interest and this capability could include adapted registration of geographical precision and geo referencing in the source material to meet a user s needs generally within the known or refined accuracy of the input data. Preferably the GVP could potentially operate without destroying original visualization file structure data on the region of coverage and possibly interact on a separate activity basis with GVP and or GVP visualization database construction processes so that inputs may eventually become part of the permanent database preferably if that matches the application requirement s of the user. Also contemplated and possibly enabled by the present GVP architecture is fast time database generation through the incorporation of some or all of the necessary data processing functions for visual database generation at or with the sensor system that collects the initial data. Whereas the current processing of terrain elevation and appearance data for populating the visual database is off line occupies relatively small and potentially slow processing capability is relatively time intensive and involves substantial human attention the actual procedures and processing could be more highly streamlined and possibly relocated near to or at the data source s . This realignment of process operations within the scope of the current invention could render the GVP capable of producing visualizations employing data of high and immediate currency with respect to visualized area appearance and have an impact that may be the strongest for applications responding to or having major wide scale regional changes.

Referring now to A B and C. Preferably the GVP employs a specialized hierarchical data structure to retain the terrain shape and appearance information for use in generating its visualizations. And regarding this one of the several new characteristics of the GVP concerns the use of a data structure that does not contain clip textures i.e. clip textures are a specific type of imagery files matched to the operating system and file structure previously employed by an earlier GVP embodiment . Another important difference is that the GVP employs effective data compression in order to effectively reduce stored data file size in the Visual Database as shown in by about 8 1 when compared to the initial file size . In other words the stored compressed data resulting from the visual database generation processes as represented by the Visual Database Generator element in is approximately one eighth the expected size of the actual data file. Preferably file size compression is provided by incorporating S3TC compression for imagery a well known standard for image compression that is widely employed in video card products for Personal Computers or by using some other appropriate compression method process and or device and then the files are preferably decompressed by utilizing hardware and or software based decompression of the imagery information upon the event of video signal generation. Whereby said S3TC compression and decompression reduce memory requirements which may efficiently allow the user to develop database files representing large geographic areas. Moreover to accomplish this the mode of compression employed preferably matches the hardware data processing of the hardware video processor components being used. Importantly all operations within the GVP are preferably conducted upon the compressed files without expansion so that the benefits of compression are realized at every stage of processing and preferably only when delivered to the final view generation hardware e.g. as a non limiting example a computer component video processor card are the compressed files reconstituted to uncompressed structures for display.

Moreover other non limiting examples of specific features of the GVP file structure are indicated in B and C. For example since a multiplicity of levels of shape and appearance data are stored with compression as indicated above a variety of appearance files and shape files can be generated. These are or can be structured and addressed in such a way that they can be relocated and edited revised replaced and or supplemented with higher or different resolutions as may be needed for the user and when combined the shape and appearance information preferably along with adjacent tiles preferably occupies a tile for display at some resolution level in the hierarchy as represented by the shape and or other appearance information represented by the tiles and or shown in B and or C . Another unique feature of the GVP in addition to the capability of specific tiles to be independently updated is that adjacent tiles can employ data materials at different levels of resolution there are a variety of reasons why this may occur and may be desirable. Concerning this one important issue is that adjacent tiles constructed at differing resolutions may have imperfect edge matching e.g. in shape and appearance . This may lead to visually distracting discontinuities in local areas defining the boundaries of such tiles. Moreover the boundary between regions of differing resolutions generally shows vertical gaps in the terrain model. Still further seen obliquely as in a view from flight levels for example the small vertical gaps are visually distracting openings in the terrain which may destroy the realistic nature of the visualization. To overcome this problem the GVP applies curtain edges to each display tile structure as shown in and to each wireform tile as shown by the wireform tile curtain edges in . ASIDE Note only two of the curtain edges are shown on the display tile in and only two wireform tile curtain edges are shown on the wireform tile in as well. These curtain edges and wireform tile curtain edges are preferably formed by vertically matching the edges of each tile and e.g. to the color and brightness of the appropriate and or associated edge pixel s . In other words the last edge pixel s appearance is repeated along the vertical edge. And with the curtain edge itself blocking any see through effect the presence of the vertical discontinuities becomes almost undetectable and as a result this new vertical tile edge treatment virtually masks any discontinuity at resolution transition boundaries in the final visualizations as shown by the curtain edge treatment on the Display tile in .

Finally it will be apparent to those skilled in the art of visualization system and or process design and or other related fields that many other modifications and or substitutions can be made to the foregoing preferred embodiments without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. The preferred embodiments and the best mode of the present invention are described herein. However it should be understood that the best mode for carrying out the invention herein described is by way of illustration and not by way of limitation. Therefore it is intended that the scope of the present invention include all of the modifications that incorporate its principal design features and that the scope and limitations of the present invention should be determined by the scope of the appended claims and their equivalents.

