---

title: Bayesian methods for noise reduction in image processing
abstract: Improved methodology for image processing and object tracking that, inter alia, reduces noise. In one embodiment, the methodology is applied to moving targets, and comprises processing sequences of images that have been corrupted by one or more noise sources (e.g., sensor noise, medium noise, and/or target reflection noise). A likelihood or similar logical construct (e.g., Bayes' rule) is applied to the individual images (or aggregations thereof) of an image sequence in order to generate a posterior image for each observed image. The posterior images are fed-forward to the determination of the posterior image for one or more subsequent images (after smoothing), thereby making these subsequent determinations more accurate. The net result is a more accurate and noise-reduced representation (and location) of the target in each image.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07813581&OS=07813581&RS=07813581
owner: 
number: 07813581
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050506
---
The invention described herein was made in the performance of work funded by Air Force Research Laboratory under contract F29601 03 0189. The government may have rights to portions of this invention.

The present application is related to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 123 549 entitled TRACKING APPARATUS AND METHODS USING IMAGE PROCESSING NOISE REDUCTION filed contemporaneously herewith.

A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material which is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent files or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

The present invention relates to image processing and in one exemplary aspect to reducing noise in the optical image based tracking of objects through random media.

Image data processing is useful in a broad variety of different disciplines and applications. One such application relates to the tracking of objects or targets in a random or substantially randomized media. Object tracking through random media is used for example in astronomical and space imaging free space laser communication systems automated lasik eye surgery and laser based weapon systems. Each of these applications requires a high degree of precision.

Inherent in object tracking is the need to accurately locate the object as a function of time. A typical tracking system might e.g. gather a number of sequential image frames via a sensor. It is important to be able to accurately resolve these frames into regions corresponding to the object or target being tracked and other regions not corresponding to the object e.g. background . Making this more difficult are the various sources of noise which may arise in such systems including i noise generated by the sensing system itself ii noise generated by variations or changes in the medium interposed between the object being tracked and the sensor e.g. scintillation and iii object reflection or interference noise e.g. speckle .

One very common prior art approach to image location relies on direct spatial averaging of such image data processing one frame of data at a time in order to extract the target location or other relevant information. Such spatial averaging however fails to remove image contamination from the aforementioned noise sources. As result the extracted target locations have a lower degree of accuracy than is desired.

A number of other approaches to image acquisition and processing are disclosed in the prior art as well. For example U.S. Pat. No. 5 387 930 to Toh issued Feb. 7 1995 entitled Electronic image acquisition system with image optimization by intensity entropy analysis and feedback control discloses an image acquisition system wherein parameters associated with the system such as any of the lens aperture the lens focus and image intensity are adjusted. Incoming image data is processed to determine the entropy of the image and with this information the aperture can be optimized. By determining the dynamic range of the scene the black and white levels thereof can be identified and the gain and offset applied to the image adjusted to minimize truncation distortion. Specular highlights can be detected by calculating the ratio of changes in maximum and minimum intensities between different but related images.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 489 782 to Wernikoff issued Feb. 6 1996 entitled Method and apparatus for quantum limited data acquisition discloses a methodology of forming an image from a random particle flux. Particles of the flux are detected by a discrete cell detector having a cell size finer than conventionally used. The count data are filtered through a band limiting filter whose bandwidth lies between a bandwidth corresponding to the detector cell size and the flux bandwidth of interest. Outliers may be flattened before filtering. Neighborhoods around each cell are evaluated to differentiate stationary regions where neighboring data are relatively similar from edge regions where neighboring data are relatively dissimilar . In stationary regions a revised estimate for a cell is computed as an average over a relatively large neighborhood around the cell. In edge regions a revised estimate is computed as an average over a relatively small neighborhood. For cells lying in an edge region but near a stationary edge boundary a revised estimate is computed by extrapolating from data in the nearby stationary region.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 640 468 to Hsu issued Jun. 17 1997 entitled Method for identifying objects and features in an image discloses scene segmentation and object feature extraction in the context of self determining and self calibration modes. The technique uses only a single image instead of multiple images as the input to generate segmented images. First an image is retrieved. The image is then transformed into at least two distinct bands. Each transformed image is then projected into a color domain or a multi level resolution setting. A segmented image is then created from all of the transformed images. The segmented image is analyzed to identify objects. Object identification is achieved by matching a segmented region against an image library. A featureless library contains full shape partial shape and real world images in a dual library system. Also provided is a mathematical model called a Parzen window based statistical neural network classifier. All images are considered three dimensional. Laser radar based 3 D images represent a special case.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 850 470 to Kung et al. issued Dec. 15 1998 entitled Neural network for locating and recognizing a deformable object discloses a system for detecting and recognizing the identity of a deformable object such as a human face within an arbitrary image scene. The system comprises an object detector implemented as a probabilistic DBNN for determining whether the object is within the arbitrary image scene and a feature localizer also implemented as a probabilistic DBNN for determining the position of an identifying feature on the object. A feature extractor is coupled to the feature localizer and receives coordinates sent from the feature localizer which are indicative of the position of the identifying feature and also extracts from the coordinates information relating to other features of the object which are used to create a low resolution image of the object. A probabilistic DBNN based object recognizer for determining the identity of the object receives the low resolution image of the object inputted from the feature extractor to identify the object.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 226 409 to Cham et al. issued May 1 2001 entitled Multiple mode probability density estimation with application to sequential markovian decision processes discloses a probability density function for fitting a model to a complex set of data that has multiple modes each mode representing a reasonably probable state of the model when compared with the data. Particularly an image may require a complex sequence of analyses in order for a pattern embedded in the image to be ascertained. Computation of the probability density function of the model state involves two main stages 1 state prediction in which the prior probability distribution is generated from information known prior to the availability of the data and 2 state update in which the posterior probability distribution is formed by updating the prior distribution with information obtained from observing the data. In particular this information obtained from data observations can also be expressed as a probability density function known as the likelihood function. The likelihood function is a multimodal multiple peaks function when a single data frame leads to multiple distinct measurements from which the correct measurement associated with the model cannot be distinguished. The invention analyzes a multimodal likelihood function by numerically searching the likelihood function for peaks. The numerical search proceeds by randomly sampling from the prior distribution to select a number of seed points in state space and then numerically finding the maxima of the likelihood function starting from each seed point. Furthermore kernel functions are fitted to these peaks to represent the likelihood function as an analytic function. The resulting posterior distribution is also multimodal and represented using a set of kernel functions. It is computed by combining the prior distribution and the likelihood function using Bayes Rule.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 553 131 to Neubauer et al. issued Apr. 22 2003 entitled License plate recognition with an intelligent camera discloses a camera system and method for recognizing license plates. The system includes a camera adapted to independently capture a license plate image and recognize the license plate image. The camera includes a processor for managing image data and executing a license plate recognition program device. The license plate recognition program device includes a program for detecting orientation position illumination conditions and blurring of the image and accounting for the orientations position illumination conditions and blurring of the image to obtain a baseline image of the license plate. A segmenting program for segmenting characters depicted in the baseline image by employing a projection along a horizontal axis of the baseline image to identify positions of the characters. A statistical classifier is adapted for classifying the characters. The classifier recognizes the characters and returns a confidence score based on the probability of properly identifying each character. A memory is included for storing the license plate recognition program and the license plate images taken by an image capture device of the camera.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 795 794 to Anastasio et al. issued Sep. 21 2004 entitled Method for determination of spatial target probability using a model of multisensory processing by the brain discloses a method of determining spatial target probability using a model of multisensory processing by the brain includes acquiring at least two inputs from a location in a desired environment where a first target is detected and applying the inputs to a plurality of model units in a map corresponding to a plurality of locations in the environment. A posterior probability of the first target at each of the model units is approximated and a model unit with a highest posterior probability is found. A location in the environment corresponding to the model unit with a highest posterior probability is chosen as the location of the next target.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 829 384 to Schneiderman et al. issued Dec. 7 2004 entitled Object finder for photographic images discloses an object finder program for detecting presence of a 3D object in a 2D image containing a 2D representation of the 3D object. The object finder uses the wavelet transform of the input 2D image for object detection. A pre selected number of view based detectors are trained on sample images prior to performing the detection on an unknown image. These detectors then operate on the given input image and compute a quantized wavelet transform for the entire input image. The object detection then proceeds with sampling of the quantized wavelet coefficients at different image window locations on the input image and efficient look up of pre computed log likelihood tables to determine object presence.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 826 316 to Luo et al. issued Nov. 30 2004 entitled System and method for determining image similarity discloses a system and method for determining image similarity. The method includes the steps of automatically providing perceptually significant features of main subject or background of a first image automatically providing perceptually significant features of main subject or background of a second image automatically comparing the perceptually significant features of the main subject or the background of the first image to the main subject or the background of the second image and providing an output in response thereto. In the illustrative implementation the features are provided by a number of belief levels where the number of belief levels are preferably greater than two. The perceptually significant features include color texture and or shape. In the preferred embodiment the main subject is indicated by a continuously valued belief map. The belief values of the main subject are determined by segmenting the image into regions of homogenous color and texture computing at least one structure feature and at least one semantic feature for each region and computing a belief value for all the pixels in the region using a Bayes net to combine the features.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 847 895 to Nivlet et al. issued Jan. 25 2005 entitled Method for facilitating recognition of objects notably geologic objects by means of a discriminant analysis technique discloses a method for facilitating recognition of objects using a discriminant analysis technique to classify the objects into predetermined categories. A learning base comprising objects that have already been recognized and classified into predetermined categories is formed with each category being defined by variables of known statistical characteristics. A classification function using a discriminant analysis technique which allows distribution among the categories the various objects to be classified from measurements available on a number of parameters is constructed by reference to the learning base. This function is formed by determining the probabilities of the objects belonging to the various categories by taking account of uncertainties about the parameters as intervals of variable width. Each object is then assigned if possible to one or more predetermined categories according to the relative value of the probability intervals. The present invention does not require a library of known shapes even if only known in a statistical sense . The present invention instead classifies each pixel and shapes are inferred nonparametrically from the resulting posterior image.

United States Patent Publication No. 20030072482 to Brand published Apr. 17 2003 entitled Modeling shape motion and flexion of non rigid 3D objects in a sequence of images discloses a method of modeling a non rigid three dimensional object directly from a sequence of images. A shape of the object is represented as a matrix of 3D points and a basis of possible deformations of the object is represented as a matrix of displacements of the 3D points. The matrices of 3D points and displacements forming a model of the object. Evidence for an optical flow is determined from image intensities in a local region near each 3D point. The evidence is factored into 3D rotation translation and deformation coefficients of the model to track the object in the video.

United States Patent Publication No. 20030132366 Gao et al. published Jul. 17 2003 Cluster weighted modeling for media classification discloses a probabilistic input output system is used to classify media in printer applications. The probabilistic input output system uses at least two input parameters to generate an output that has a joint dependency on the input parameters. The input parameters are associated with image related measurements acquired from imaging textural features that are characteristic of the different classes types and or groups of possible media. The output is a best match in a correlation between stored reference information and information that is specific to an unknown medium of interest. Cluster weighted modeling techniques are used for generating highly accurate classification results.

United States Patent Publication No. 20040022438 to Hibbard published Feb. 5 2004 entitled Method and apparatus for image segmentation using Jensen Shannon divergence and Jensen Renyi divergence discloses a method of approximating the boundary of an object in an image the image being represented by a data set the data set comprising a plurality of data elements each data element having a data value corresponding to a feature of the image. The method comprises determining which one of a plurality of contours most closely matches the object boundary at least partially according to a divergence value for each contour the divergence value being selected from the group consisting of Jensen Shannon divergence and Jensen Renyi divergence.

Despite the foregoing plethora of different approaches to object location and image processing there is still an unsatisfied need for practical and effective methods that account for sensor based medium induced and or reflection related noise sources. Ideally such improved methods would be readily implemented using extant hardware and software and would utilize information on an inter frame frame to frame basis in order to isolate and remove unwanted noise artifact thereby increasing the accuracy of the image and location .

The present invention satisfies the foregoing needs by providing inter alia improved methods for image processing and noise reduction.

In a first aspect of the invention a method of reducing noise associated with a series of images obtained from a moving object is disclosed. In one embodiment the method comprises providing at least first and second frames of image data each of the frames comprising a plurality of pixels for the first frame calculating the posterior probability that each of the plurality of pixels is a pixel of the target based at least on part on a prior probability forming a posterior probability image based at least in part on the act of calculating and utilizing at least a portion of the posterior probability image for use as a prior probability for at least the second frame. The noise comprises at least one of sensor related noise medium related noise and target reflection noise and is removed via the application of a Bayesian function to at least a portion of the prior probability to generate a posterior probability image which is then used as the prior probability for one or more subsequent frames.

In another embodiment the method comprises for a plurality of pixels of a first image calculating a posterior probability that each pixel i j comprises a target pixel given an image observed at a first time using a prior probability value forming a posterior probability image based on the posterior probabilities for each of the pixels and smoothing the posterior probability image by filtering at least portions of the posterior image to produce a result and storing the result for use as a prior probability for an image observed at a time subsequent to the first time.

In a second aspect of the invention a method of processing image data comprising data comprising a plurality of pixels is disclosed. In one embodiment the method comprises classifying at least a portion of the pixels into one of a plurality of classes and processing the image data based at least in part on the act of classifying. Image data for at least a first frame is classified and processed for use in processing at least a second subsequent frame of image data. In one variant the processing of each frame of data comprises applying Bayes rule to develop a posterior probability which is then used as a prior probability for a subsequent frame.

In a third aspect of the invention a method of tracking a moving object is disclosed. In one embodiment the method comprises obtaining a first image having a plurality of pixels for the plurality of pixels calculating a first probability of the pixels comprising a pixel associated with the object the act of calculating being based at least in part on a second probability of an image obtained from an image prior to the first image determining a first location of the object based at least in part on the first probability obtaining a second image having a second plurality of pixels the second image being obtained after the first image for the second plurality of pixels calculating a third probability of the pixels comprising a pixel of the object the act of calculating being based at least in part on the first probability and determining a second location of the object based at least in part on the third probability.

In a fourth aspect of the invention a method of propagating the posterior forward in time is disclosed. In exemplary situations of dynamic target motion or of dynamic media perturbing the image process one embodiment of the method includes a prediction step to complement the correction step of the posterior determination from the prior and the likelihood. One variant includes a drift diffusion prediction mechanism. The posterior is shifted spatially if target and or medium dynamics have mean or deterministic motion over time. Fluctuations in the motion of a random nature are modeled as diffusive. Mathematical and algorithmic treatment of these two phenomena involves image shifting and image smoothing.

In one aspect the present invention discloses a method adapted to reduce noise and accordingly provide a sharp low noise image and location of a target or other object from a sequence of images.

In one embodiment the images are derived from active illumination and a segmentation approach is utilized in which the images resulting from such active illumination are segmented into two classes e.g. target and background by employing Bayes theorem to the probability density functions and a prior probability from a preceding frame. A posterior probability representing the likelihood that a pixel is target or background given the observation is then derived.

Temporal data processing may also be used with the aforementioned Bayesian segmentation by smoothing and or shifting the posterior probability and using the previous frame s posterior data as the prior data for a subsequent frame or frames. This processing is implemented in situations of target platform or medium motions.

The aforementioned approaches i.e. posterior probability generation and application across one or more successive frames of image data effectively isolates the components of the image that result from sensor medium or target reflection noise thereby advantageously allowing these components to be isolated and a sharper image of the target object and better determination of its location to be obtained at any point in time.

Salient advantages and features of the invention include inter alia i extraction of target information in the presence of very low signal to noise environments uncertain target shape and size noise sources of various types and different character ii obviation of multi modal likelihood functions since a small number of classes are used to enhance and segment the images processed iii probabilities associated with target likelihoods are propagated forward in time as additional data are collected as opposed to direct production of an estimate of target location iv no requirement for the use of or inference of a reference shape although one may be optionally used consistent with the invention and v significant robustness with respect to target and noise uncertainties.

It will be recognized by those of ordinary skill that the embodiments described herein are merely exemplary of the broader concept of providing enhanced image processing for inter alia target tracking. Many different variations of the methodology some of which are described herein may be employed consistent with the invention. For example while the exemplary embodiments described herein are used for tracking of targets or projectiles the present invention may be used for processing images in any number of different applications including without limitation astronomical and space imaging free space laser communication systems automated lasik eye surgery and weapon systems e.g. laser based any of which can benefit from enhanced image clarity and accuracy.

Referring now to an exemplary embodiment of the generalized method of image processing according to the present invention is described in detail. The methodology of is broadly applicable to processing image data derived from literally any kind of object of any scale whether by active illumination or other means e.g. passive sensing .

As shown in the first step in the exemplary method comprises obtaining the prior. Next per step a plurality of image data e.g. image frames are captured. This may be accomplished using any number of techniques including i obtaining the image data by actively illuminating the object with an illumination source such as e.g. a source of electromagnetic radiation including coherent laser light or infrared radiation and sensing the remitted or reflected energy therefrom or ii obtaining the image data via a passive sensor such as an optical or IR sensor to detect the reflected or remitted energy generated by ambient or indigenous illumination sources such as the Sun or Moon or by the object itself such as when detecting the object s IR signature .

The next step in the method comprises computation of one or more likelihood probabilities. Exemplary processing conducted during this step is described in detail below with respect to . In one approach a Bayesian segmentation is utilized in which the images obtained as part of step are segmented into multiple e.g. 2 classes by employing a logical construct or rule system here Bayes theorem to the probability density functions and prior probability. A posterior probability representing the likelihood that a pixel is within one class or another given the observation is then derived per step .

Lastly the final step in the method comprises temporal processing from one frame to the next i.e. using data from one frame to affect the decision making process of one or more subsequent frames . Specifically the aforementioned posterior probabilities for the current image frame of data are mapped into the prior probabilities for the next image. The propagation of posterior for current to prior for future is the means of capturing the dynamic processes of the moving target as well as those associated with the medium through which the images are being captured. Such medium may comprise for example air or other types of atmosphere the vacuum of space or even other media such as water or other liquids. The forward propagation of the posterior data provides an effective mechanism for isolating these dynamic processes and removing them from the underlying image in effect filtering image noise.

One exemplary embodiment of the image processing portion steps and of the generalized method of is described.

As in the method of Bayes rule is applied such that each pixel ij in an image I is designated as being either a target pixel or background pixel depending on the intensity level. A prior distribution is specified at the outset such as from the immediately prior image data frame and a measurement distribution is used to model likely pixel intensities for target or background. Thus it is assumed that an underlying image can be defined by a matrix u which is a matrix of 1 s and 0 s in the illustrated embodiment. Specifically the 1 s denote those pixels that are in the target class e.g. part of the missile or other object being tracked and the 0 s denote background or non target pixels i.e. those not part of the target . In this fashion the underlying image is divided into two sets of pixels i target pixels and ii background pixels.

It will be appreciated however that the invention is not limited to division into only two classes of pixels. For example in one alternate embodiment three 3 classes are created wherein the matrix u is resolved into a non binary system whether represented by binary variables or otherwise . For example in one variant the three classes may comprise 1 target 2 unresolved and 3 background wherein the unresolved class may be made subject to additional processing for resolution of the ambiguity. Instead of using a simple 0 and 1 system this variant may use a mathematical base other than base 2 binary to represent the three states for each pixel or alternatively simply use two or more binary bits e.g. 00 background 01 or 10 unresolved and 11 target . Other numbers of classes and categorization schemes can be used consistent with the present invention such alternates being readily implemented by those of ordinary skill in the mathematical or signal processing arts. In particular for larger targets with gradations of reflectivity due for example to three dimensional shapes multiple classes can be used to provide a higher resolution image of the target.

It will be appreciated that the nature of the various e.g. two pixel classes is dependent upon the particular problem domain in which the invention is applied. In the exemplary embodiment the prior distribution assigns a probability to each pixel denotes the probability that pixel ij is a target pixel that is the probability that u 1 . Then the application of Bayes rule provides the posterior distribution for pixel intensities step .

Bayes rule for computing the probability P of a target given visual input V can be generally stated as follows Eqn. 1 

Bayes rule essentially computes the conditional posterior probability of the target given a sensory input P T V by modifying the unconditional prior probability of the target P T on the basis of sensory input V. The conditional probability P V T is the likelihood of observing some combination of V given the target. The unconditional probability P V is the likelihood of observing the same input V under any circumstances.

Thus Bayes rule can be used to compute P T V by multiplying P T by the ratio of P V T to P V . As an example if the expectation of a target is 10 in the absence of sensory input then P T would equal 0.1. If an input e.g. V 20 is observed and if this input is twice as likely when associated with a target as under general circumstances then the ratio of P V T to P V is equal to 2. On the basis of this sensory input Bayes rule states that P T V should equal 0.2. Thus the prior target probability P T 0.1 has been modified by the sensory input to the posterior target probability P T V 0.2. Hence on the basis of the sensory input received the chances of a target are increased from 10 to 20 . See e.g. Berger J. O. Springer Verlag New York 1985 incorporated herein by reference in its entirety for a discussion of Bayes rule and related topics.

In the present context the posterior is the conditional probability that u 1 target pixel given the image that has been observed. This computation involves the exemplary formula of Eqn. 2 

The likelihood function of Eqn. 2 is used to model the specific nature of the image capture process including any noise processes associated therewith. In particular the function encodes sensor noise levels as well as medium induced noise levels.

The next step in the image processing methodology comprises the temporal processing from one frame to the next. In the exemplary embodiment the posterior probabilities for the current image frame of data are mapped into prior probabilities for the next image step . The implementation of this step depends on the application of interest. When the target and platform are stationary and the medium does not introduce image fluctuations the posterior may be used directly as the prior for the next frame. Conversely dynamic targets platforms and media require additional posterior processing. The posterior image is shifted according to known or estimated target and platform dynamics so that the posterior will overlay the target in the subsequence frame. Uncertainty or fluctuations in the dynamics may not allow the target to be predicted exactly in such a case the prior must be obtained by integrating the posterior against possible fluctuations. The algorithmic and mathematical embodiment of this integration comprises the application of a smoothing filter to the posterior and then storing the filtered result for use in the next iteration.

The propagation of posterior for current to prior for future is the means of capturing the dynamic processes of the target as well as the medium through which the images are being captured. The mapping of Eqn. 3 describes this process Eqn. 3 Here denotes the future prior which is determined from the current posterior by the mapping S. In one embodiment of the invention the mapping S comprises a Gaussian smoothing convolution to capture target motion 

It will be appreciated however that other mapping approaches may be used. The posterior to prior propagation can be implemented in a number of ways. Of particular importance is the generalization of Gaussian smoothing. Note that the Gaussian convolution is the Green s function solution of the convection diffusion equation ref here . That is per Eqn. 5 

The recognition that Gaussian filtering is equivalent to convection and diffusion leads to a large family of other embodiments of the posterior propagation. Nonlinear partial differential equation filters are another embodiment of the invention. For example the relationship of Eqn. 7 

The Eikonal equation comprises the phase function in a situation for which the phase and amplitude are slowly varying functions of position. Constant values of the eikonal represent surfaces of constant phase or wavefronts. The normals to these surfaces are rays. Hence the Eikonal equation gives a method for ray tracing in a medium of slowly varying index of refraction or the equivalent for other kinds of waves .

It will also be appreciated that while the foregoing embodiment of the methodology uses posterior probabilities of the current image as the prior probabilities for the next subsequent frame these posterior probabilities can be used for other subsequent frames e.g. they can be applied non sequentially and or used according to other schemes. For example in one variant the posterior probabilities for the prior n n comprising an integer frames are stored and mathematically or logically combined to generate an average prior probability value for the subsequent frame. In this fashion the prior probability value used in a subsequent frame calculation is akin to a moving average of sorts with the current posterior probability accordingly being the result of posterior data gathered over multiple prior frames. It will be recognized by those of ordinary skill that any number of different types of mathematical or logical processing of the multiple probability data can be used depending on the particular application. For example one variant envisaged comprises generating a simple mathematical average of the n values such as shown in Eqn. 11 p p . . . p n Eqn. 11 Alternatively a weighted average could be used such as where the data from the more recent frames is more heavily weighted than the data from earlier frames.

It will also be appreciated that the application of the Bayesian rules to the prior distribution to produce the posterior distribution for the current frame can be accomplished using multiple pixels from successive frames. For instance in the context of the foregoing example of n frames of data this data can be used to form an aggregated or composite prior distribution function to which the Bayesian rules are then applied. This approach is particularly useful in cases where processing of every frame is not desired possible or required such as where the image frame rate exceeds the indigenous processing capability of the image data processing device. Especially in cases of slow dynamics with temporally correlated fluctuations from the medium target or from platform induced noise processing of multiple frames of past data is an appropriate implementation of the invention.

It is also noted that while the foregoing embodiments utilize pixel intensity level i.e. the classification of a pixel as being either target or background is based on the sensor derived intensity associated with that pixel the methodologies of the present invention can utilize other metrics either alone or in combination with intensity for pixel classification. For example pixel position within the gate and or pixel position relative to other pixels in the gate may be useful in classifying a given pixel. Consider e.g. the case where for whatever reason a single higher intensity target pixel is surrounded completely by lower intensity background pixels. Such single target pixel would be highly suspect of having been mis classified since there is very little likelihood that it actually corresponds to a part of the target object. Hence one could fashion a second metric to be used with intensity for example a disparity metric which is a measure or index of the relative uniformity of a pixel with its immediate surroundings. Pixels with extremely low uniformity metric values could be selectively analyzed further or even discarded since they raise undesirable ambiguity. Myriad other such approaches and metrics for aiding in the classification of individual pixels or groups of pixels are envisaged and readily implemented by those of ordinary skill provided the present disclosure.

As previously noted the mapping of the posterior probabilities for the current image frame of data into prior probabilities for the next image is the mechanism by which the dynamic inter frame processes including the various noise sources such as sensor noise medium related scintillation and target reflection speckle are determined such that they can be accounted for. This approach is in contrast to the prior art approach of direct spatial averaging of image data wherein a single frame of data at a time is processed in order to extract the target location. As result the extracted target locations obtained using the present methodology are significantly more accurate since contamination by the aforementioned sensor based and medium induced noise sources is substantially removed.

It will be recognized that while certain aspects of the invention are described in terms of a specific sequence of steps of a method these descriptions are only illustrative of the broader methods of the invention and may be modified as required by the particular application. Certain steps may be rendered unnecessary or optional under certain circumstances. Additionally certain steps or functionality may be added to the disclosed embodiments or the order of performance of two or more steps permuted. All such variations are considered to be encompassed within the invention disclosed and claimed herein.

While the above detailed description has shown described and pointed out novel features of the invention as applied to various embodiments it will be understood that various omissions substitutions and changes in the form and details of the device or process illustrated may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the invention. The foregoing description is of the best mode presently contemplated of carrying out the invention. This description is in no way meant to be limiting but rather should be taken as illustrative of the general principles of the invention. The scope of the invention should be determined with reference to the claims.

