---

title: Audio user interface (UI) for previewing and selecting audio streams using 3D positional audio techniques
abstract: An audio user interface (UI) for comparing and selecting audio streams is presented. In general, the present invention allows a user to preview and navigate among multiple audio streams (audio sources) using three dimensional (D) positional audio techniques to position the various sources in an audio field programmatically in such a way as to fool the brain into thinking the sound is located at a particular location in the space surrounding the user. When the user selects a preview mode, the various streams are placed in the space in a carousel-like manner. The user can move the sources forward or backward. As this is done, other audio streams can be added and dropped. Selecting a sound source will cause it to fill the audio field and the other sources will then cease to play.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07953236&OS=07953236&RS=07953236
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07953236
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050506
---
The invention is related to audio user interfaces and more particularly to an audio user interface UI for comparing and selecting among multiple audio streams.

The use of visual user interfaces with small devices such as portable audio and media players cell phones and Microsoft Corporation s Smart Personal Object Technology devices is problematic. These types of devices have very small display screens or no screens at all. As such a user cannot reasonably rely on visual user interfaces to perform many tasks.

One of the tasks associated with the aforementioned devices involves selecting an audio stream from a number of candidate streams. In order to make a selection the user often has an existing selection which they want to compare to new candidate selections to make a decision between them. For example when a user is selecting a station on a radio often they are comparing the new station to their previous station. Current approaches to these comparison and selection tasks can be said to fall into two categories.

The first approach is simply channel changing where the user switches to a new audio stream for example pressing a preset on the radio or pressing the scan button . However this approach has some drawbacks. First it is very slow. Each possible channel has to be previewed individually. Second the user has no way of comparing their current selection to the new selection. Third the user has no way of knowing what is coming up if the next station will be better or worse.

The second approach is to use a textual display to provide information. For instance a MP3 player can provide a list of songs for the user to select or an internet radio can provide the names of the stations. This also has problems. Most glaring is that the user has to make the connection between the displayed text and the nature of the audio stream. A song title might suffice is the user is familiar with the song but the name of the radio station is less informative as is the name of song not known the user. Granted more information could be displayed. However many modern MP3 players are designed to be quite tiny and cannot support a large screen. Thus the amount of information that can be shown to the user is extremely limited. In addition the number of alternative selections that can be shown to the user is similarly limited when the display is small. Another disadvantage of the textual display approach is that there are times where it is inappropriate to look at the screen. For example when one is jogging riding a bike or driving a car.

One possible solution is to employ a 3D positional audio user interface to accomplish the comparison and selection tasks. 3D positional audio is an existing technology see Goose S and Moller C. A 3D Audio Only Interface Web Browser Using Spatialization to Convey Hypermedia Document Structure 1 1999 363 371 . It allows sound to be positioned in space programmatically. In essence a 3D audio system mixes and filters sound into two or more speakers in such a way as to fool the brain into thinking the sound is located at a particular location external to the user. The present invention employs this approach.

The present invention is directed toward an audio user interface UI for comparing audio sound sources and selecting one of the sources. This type of previewing and selecting among various audio streams can be done without the aid of a visual user interface particularly in handheld and mobile devices. In general the present invention allows a user to preview and navigate among multiple audio streams referred to alternately as audio sound sources sound sources or just sources herein using three dimensional 3D positional audio techniques to position the various sources in an audio field programmatically in such a way as to fool the brain into thinking the sound is located at a particular location in the space surrounding the user. When the user selects a preview mode the various streams are placed in the space in a carousel like manner. The user can move the carousel forward or backward. As the carousel rotates other audio streams can be added to and shifted off the carousel. Selecting a sound source will cause it to fill the audio field and the other sources will then cease to play.

More particularly the present audio UI runs on a computer system having multi channel audio equipment a 3D positional audio capability and a user interface input device. Initially a sound source chosen among a plurality of available sound sources is played in the space surrounding the user in a non positional multi channel playback mode e.g. in stereo or surround sound . The sound sources can be musical pieces a computer network radio station or non musical pieces among others which are resident in a memory of the computer system or accessible by the computer system via an external device or a computer network. The initial sound source can be a predetermined default choice a randomly chosen source or a user specified source.

Upon entry of a preview command to the computer system by the user via the aforementioned input device several things occur. First the audio source currently being played in the non positional multi channel playback mode is collapsed and played such that the source seems to a user to be coming from a location in the surrounding space adjacent to one of the user s ears. In one embodiment of the present invention this current source is played adjacent the user s non dominant ear. Which ear is dominate or non dominant can be specified ahead of time by the user. In addition a group of candidate audio sound sources is played such that it seems to the user that each of the candidate sources is coming from a separate location in the surrounding space adjacent the user s other e.g. dominant ear. These candidate sound sources are taken from the aforementioned plurality of available sources. By playing the current source adjacent one ear and the group of current candidate sources adjacent the user s other ear the user is able to compare each of the candidate sound sources to the current sound source. The user then has the option to select one of the candidate sound sources via the aforementioned input device or to enter a cancellation command that cancels the preview mode. If the user selects one of the candidate sound sources the present UI ceases playing the current source and the candidate sources in the above described positional modes and instead plays the selected sound source in the non positional multi channel playback mode. Similarly if the user enters the preview cancellation command the present UI ceases playing the current source and the candidate sources in the above described positional modes. However in this case the current sound source is once again played in the non positional multi channel playback mode.

In regard to playing the group of candidate audio sound sources such that it seems to the user that each of the group of candidate sources is coming from a separate location in the surrounding space adjacent one of the user s ears this is accomplished by making it seem each source is emanating from a separate consecutive location within a pattern of locations forming a path extending away from the user. This path can take several shapes. For instance in one embodiment the path extends away from the user in two directions such that one of the path locations is closest to the user s ear some of the locations are in the space in front and to one side of the user and the remaining locations are in the space behind and to the same side of the user. A version of this embodiment employs a path formed by a pair of convex arcs each extending away from the user from the path location that is closest to the user s ear. It is also noted that in one embodiment of the present UI the group of candidate sound sources is initially limited to a prescribed number which are played from consecutive locations on just one of the arcs starting with the location that is closest to the user s ear.

The aforementioned selection procedure involves the user bringing a desired sound source to the path location nearest his or her ear. This is accomplished by rotating the sources along the path in a carousel like fashion. More particularly upon entry of a command by the user via the aforementioned input device to shift the candidate sound sources in a forward direction each of the candidate sound sources currently being played is shifted to the next adjacent location along the path in the forward direction. This results in the candidate sound source that is closest to the user s ear being shifted to a location in the path in a direction away from the user and a different one of the current candidate sound sources being shifted to this closest location. In addition a new sound source taken from the plurality of sources is added to the group of candidate sound sources if one is available and played at the location on the path that was previously held by the current candidate sound source that was furthest away from the user in the direction opposite the forward direction prior to entry of the shift command. Further if all the path locations are filled when the shift command is entered then the current candidate sound source that resided at the path location furthest from the user in the forward direction along the path prior to entry of the shift command is removed. Still further if there is no candidate sound source available to shift to the location closest to the user s ear then the forward shift command is ignored and the candidate sound sources are left in there current locations.

In addition to a forward shift command the user can also enter a command via the input device to shift the candidate sound sources in a reverse direction. When the reverse shift command is entered each of the current candidate sound sources is shifted to the next adjacent location along the path in the reverse direction. The current candidate sound source that is closest to the user s ear is shifted to a location in the path in a direction away from the user and a different one of the candidate sound sources is shifted to the location closest to the user s ear unless there is no candidate sound source in the location adjacent the candidate sound source closest to the user s ear in the direction along the path opposite said reverse direction. In such a case the reverse shift command is ignored and the candidate sound sources are left in there current locations. In addition it is noted that the candidate sound sources can be sequentially ordered. If so then the reverse shift command can also result in adding a candidate sound source taken from the plurality of sound sources that represents the source in the sequential order immediately preceding the current candidate sound source that resided at the location furthest away from the user in the direction along the path opposite the reverse direction prior to entry of the reverse shift command. This added candidate sound source would be played at that furthest location but only if there was a candidate sound source there before the reverse shift command was entered. Still further if there is a current candidate sound source residing at the path location furthest away from the user in the reverse direction along the path prior to entry of the reverse shift command then the candidate sound source residing at that path location is removed.

The present UI can also include a categorization feature. This feature involves categorizing each of the plurality of sound sources in accordance with an identifying characteristic prior to playing them. The sound sources are then sequentially ordering based on the categorization. When the candidate sound sources are played they are played such that it seems to the user that each source is coming from a separate consecutive location within the path in the aforementioned sequential order. Further aurally distinct audio markers can be established. These markers are a continuously repeated letter word phrase or other sound indicative of a demarcation between the sound source categories. When the candidate sound sources are played the audio marker associated with one or more candidate sound sources is played in a path location preceding the location or locations where the associated sound sources are playing.

In addition to the just described benefits other advantages of the present invention will become apparent from the detailed description which follows hereinafter when taken in conjunction with the drawing figures which accompany it.

In the following description of the preferred embodiments of the present invention reference is made to the accompanying drawings which form a part hereof and in which is shown by way of illustration specific embodiments in which the invention may be practiced. It is understood that other embodiments may be utilized and structural changes may be made without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Before providing a description of the preferred embodiments of the present invention a brief general description of a suitable computing environment in which portions of the invention may be implemented will be described. illustrates an example of a suitable computing system environment . The computing system environment is only one example of a suitable computing environment and is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the invention. Neither should the computing environment be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or combination of components illustrated in the exemplary operating environment .

The invention is operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

The invention may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of the any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface . A camera such as a digital electronic still or video camera or film photographic scanner capable of capturing a sequence of images can also be included as an input device to the personal computer . Further while just one camera is depicted multiple cameras could be included as input devices to the personal computer . The images from the one or more cameras are input into the computer via an appropriate camera interface . This interface is connected to the system bus thereby allowing the images to be routed to and stored in the RAM or one of the other data storage devices associated with the computer . However it is noted that image data can be input into the computer from any of the aforementioned computer readable media as well without requiring the use of the camera .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

The exemplary operating environment having now been discussed the remaining parts of this description section will be devoted to a description of the program modules embodying the invention.

As indicated previously the present audio user interface UI for comparing and selecting audio sources employs 3D positional audio to solve the problem of providing a rich selection of audio sources for a user to compare and choose from. This is possible because a human being is able to isolate and comprehend individual sound sources from a plurality of such sources located within a space. This is the so called cocktail party effect where a person can stand in a crowded room full of people having a multitude of separate conversations at different locations around a room and still be able to select and concentrate on listening to any single conversation at a particular location while ignoring all the other conversations going on at other locations. In general the present UI employs standard 3D positional audio techniques to make it sound as if individual sound sources are emanating from different locations within a space surrounding the user. The user can then isolate and listen to each or some of the sound sources from a number of candidate sources. A candidate source of interest can then be compared to a previously selected current source. If the user prefers one of the candidate sources he or she can select that source to replace the current source.

A conventional multi channel audio system associated with a computing device such those described previously is used to produce the desired localized sound sources in conjunction with a conventional 3D positional audio program and the present audio source selection UI which are running on the computing device. This multi channel audio system can be a stereo system 5.1 system 7.1 system or others. In addition the audio system can employ two or more speakers placed about the user s space or involve the use of headphones.

The audio sources can be any multi channel or synthesized multi channel audio stream. For example each audio source could be a song or other musical piece an Internet radio station or any non musical audio track e.g. speech background sounds and the like .

The aforementioned UI for comparing and selecting audio sources will now be described in more detail in the sections to follow.

The present UI is initiated in a normal listening mode in which one of the available sound sources is played to the user. The sound is standard multi channel audio and as such is not positional audio. shows a representation of the listener looking from above and the initial sound source as coming to both ears from all points in space. The choice as to what source is initially played to the user when the present system and process is initiated can be a default choice or a randomly chosen source or even a source that the user has designated ahead of time.

When the user wants to compare the existing source to other available sources he or she enters a preview mode. This is accomplished in any conventional way using an input device that is in communication with the aforementioned computing device. For example entering the preview mode may entail pressing a prescribed key on a keyboard. Upon activation of the preview mode the multi channel field of source A will collapse into a single point of positional audio. In one embodiment of the present UI this point is near the user s non dominant ear. shows an example where the positional audio source A seems to the user to be coming from a point by his or her left ear. After source A is positioned additional audio streams corresponding to other ones of the available sources are positioned and played for previewing one by one in an audio field adjacent the user s other e.g. dominant ear. In one embodiment this is accomplished by making each audio stream seem to the user to be coming from a different point within the audio field. This is shown in where audio source B then C then D and then E being added to the soundscape with source B being placed nearest the user s ear and the others periodically positioned in an arc trailing away from and to the front of the user . In one embodiment of the present invention even if there are more sound sources available only the first four or so are initially previewed as shown in . It is noted that the dominant ear will vary from one individual to another. Accordingly the present system and process can include a provision for the user to pre select which ear is to be treated as the dominant ear.

The foregoing UI takes advantage of the human s ability to discern dozens of simultaneous sound sources the aforementioned cocktail party effect . Thus the user can easily shift their attention to any sound in the field easily comparing and contrasting different sounds.

Once in preview mode the user can move the sound source forward or backwards in a carousel fashion by invoking a navigation mode of the UI. This can be accomplished by initiating a next source or previous source command using the aforementioned input device. For example initiating the next or previous command might entail pressing different keys on a keyboard. It is noted that in the initial condition where only four or so sources are previewed in the manner shown in the user can only initiate the next command. Assuming that the user invokes the next command the result of the action is to cause the candidate sound sources to rotate such that source C is brought to the position previously held by source B and source B seems to the user to move to a new location along an arc stretching away from and to the rear of the user as shown in . In addition sources D and E move toward the user into the positions previously held by the source C and D sources respectively. Further a new source F is added to the candidate sources and is positioned in the location previously held by source E. If the user again initiates the next command the sources are again rotated in the manner described above with a new source G being added and source D being made closest to the user s ear as shown in . If the user initiates the next command once again the sources are rotated as before with a new source H being added and source E being made closest to the user s ear as shown in . Then if the user initiates the next command one more time the sources are rotated with a new source I being added the source F being made closest to the user s ear and source B dropping off as shown in FIG. . This process of bringing the next sound source in line to the position nearest the user s ear as well as adding a new one of the available sources to the candidate sources being previewed and dropping a previously previewed source can continue each time the next command is initiated until the last available sound source is brought to the position nearest the user s ear.

When the user initiates the previous command after having already initiated the next command at least once the candidate sources are rotated in the opposite direction than that described above. Thus for example if sources B H are initially positioned as shown in when the user initiates the previous command the sources are rotated such that source D is brought closest to the user s ear and source H is dropped as shown if . Each subsequent time the user initiates the previous command the sources rotate in the same manner. The limit of the previous command is when source B is brought closest to the user s ear and only the sources C D and E remain trailing in an arc away from and to the front of the user as shown in .

It is also noted that if the group of candidate sound sources had been previously rotated in the forward direction to an extent that a previously previewed source was dropped as illustrated in where source B was dropped from the candidate source configuration shown in then implementing the previous command can also result in such a previously dropped candidate source being added and played from the location in the path furthest from the user s ear in the direction opposite the reverse direction. In order to accomplish the foregoing resurrection of a previously dropped candidate sound source the sources are assigned a sequential order. In this case the candidate sources are added dropped and re added in accordance with the assigned sequential order. Thus for example the candidate source configuration of would return to that of when the previous command is entered by the user.

The foregoing example configurations employed an arc shaped pattern of source locations with a maximum of seven sound source positioned along it. This configuration is believed to provide the user with a clear distinction between the sources and to not put so many sources into play that it becomes overly confusing or causes the more distance ones be to overly faint. However the maximum number of sound sources could be increased or decreased as desired and the arc pattern could be replaced with other patterns such as a line extending front to back or a V shaped pattern among others. Regardless of the pattern the sound sources would be moved in response to a next or previous command in a manner similar to that described above.

When the user finds a source he or she would like to listen to in lieu of the source playing adjacent the user s opposite ear opposite e.g. source A positioned to the left of the user in the previously described example configuration it can be selected by moving the desired source to the position closest to the user s ear if not already in that position and initiating a selection command. For example this could entail pressing the aforementioned preview key again although any conventional selection technique appropriate to the input device employed could be used . Initiating the selection command causes the original sound source and the other non selected candidate sound sources to immediately cease playing or to fade out. In addition the selected sound source is expanded from a positional source to fill the soundscape thus returning to the normal listening mode shown in .

It is noted that the foregoing preview technique would allow a user to simulate the previously described channel changing mode of selecting a sound source. This is accomplished by the user first initiating the preview command. This results in the current source being listened to being positioned adjacent one of the user s ears and a group of candidate sources being played adjacent the user s other ear as described above. The user then initiates the selection command. This results in the candidate sound source playing in the position closest to the user s ear being selected and filling the soundscape as also described above. Thus the user can scan through the available sound sources by repeatedly initiating the preview command followed by the selection command. If the preview and selection commands are invoked by performing the same selection action on the input device being used such as having the same key initiate the preview mode and then initiate the selection command as suggested previously then the user need only perform the selection action twice in rapid succession to change the channel .

It is further noted that the user could after previewing the available sound source selections decide to keep the current source. In such a case the user would simply cancel the preview mode rather than selecting a candidate sound source. This is accomplished by invoking a cancel command in any conventional way such as by pressing a prescribed key on the aforementioned input device.

The present UI can be particularly useful when the candidate sound sources are arranged according in some linear fashion based on the type of source. For example if the sound sources are individual songs they could be arranged by how energetic the music would seem to a listener. Thus the sources could be arranged from the most energetic to the most mellow . Often a user is not sure how mellow they want their music. By previewing many songs at once the user can decide how far they have to go i.e. is it a big scroll or a small scroll.

The present UI can also be employed with very large audio collections that can include hundreds of songs. To assist the user in finding a particular song the songs would be categorized ahead of time. Audio markers would then be added to the carousel to delineate the various categories. For example the songs could be arranged alphabetically by artist title genre or any other appropriate identifying musical characteristic. The audio markers would then repeat an identifying letter word phrase or other sound in a loop at a position on the carousel preceding the song or songs identified by the marker. For instance the audio markers could be the name of the artist or even simply a letter corresponding to the last name of the artist. A combination of markers could also be employed. For example letter markers could be used to find a group of songs and then markers repeating the name of an artist would be included to let the user fine tune the search. The markers would have some audio filtering on them to make them stand out such as being louder or having a higher pitch.

If the foregoing marker technique is incorporated in the present audio UI it would also be possible to greatly increase the number of candidate sound sources playing at any one time. This is because the user could initially concentrate just on the category markers rather than the sound source to find the vicinity where a sound source of interest resides. The user would then concentrate on finding the particular sound source of interest in that part of the carousel. Thus the previously described confusion factor of having a large number of sound sources playing at once is reduced.

While the invention has been described in detail by reference to the preferred embodiment described above it is understood that variations and modifications thereof may be made without departing from the true spirit and scope of the invention. For example the present invention has been described in the context of a current sound source being positioned adjacent to one of the user s ears and candidate sources being played at locations adjacent the user s other ear. However it is also possible to locate the current sound source in back of the user and locate the candidate sources in a pattern of some type in front of the user or vice versa.

