---

title: Implementation of multiple simultaneous calls in a mobile communication system
abstract: In an implementation of multiple simultaneous calls for a mobile station in a mobile communication system, a common traffic channel is allocated to several simultaneous calls of the mobile station, so that the calls share capacity of the common channel. Logical links are established for each call inside a common radio link protocol or link access control protocol, established over the common traffic channel between the mobile station and an interworking function. The common traffic channel is allocated when the first call or calls are set up, and the capacity of the traffic channel is adjusted dynamically during the calls. The common traffic channel capacity is increased or the allocated capacity is reallocated when a new call is added to the traffic channel. Correspondingly, the capacity is decreased or reallocated when a call is cleared from the common traffic channel.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07466677&OS=07466677&RS=07466677
owner: Nokia Corporation
number: 07466677
owner_city: Espoo
owner_country: FI
publication_date: 20050714
---
This is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 647 784 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 227 849 filed on Oct. 5 2000 which is the U.S. Nationalization of International Patent Application No. PCT FI99 00294 filed Apr. 8 1999 which relies for priority upon Finnish Patent Application No. 980282 filed Apr. 9 1998 the contents of all of which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entireties.

The invention generally relates to mobile communication systems and particularly to multiple simultaneous calls in a mobile communication system.

In addition to conventional speech transmission modern mobile communication systems offer various data transmission services to subscribers. The services of mobile communication systems are generally classified into tele services and bearer services. A bearer service is a telecommunications service which provides signal transmission between the user interfaces and the network interfaces. An example of bearer services is a modem service. In the tele service terminal services are also offered by the network. Important tele services include speech telefax and videotex services. The bearer services are usually subdivided into groups such as asynchronous bearer services and synchronous bearer services on the basis of a certain feature. In the case of the asynchronous bearer service the transmitting terminal and the receiving terminal are able to maintain their synchronization only for each single character to be transmitted. In the case of the synchronous bearer service the transmitting terminal and the receiving terminal are synchronized with each other for the whole duration of data transmission. Each such bearer service group comprises a number of bearer services such as a transparent service and a non transparent service. In the transparent service the data to be transmitted is unstructured and transmission errors are corrected only by means of channel coding. In the non transparent service the data to be transmitted is structured into protocol data units PDU and transmission errors are corrected using retransmission protocols in addition to channel coding .

Calls have traditionally been calls with one service one connection i.e. each call has been clearly e.g. a speech call or a data call of a certain type and optimized for a certain service. Multimedia calls which simultaneously support various types of information transmission or services such as video speech file transfer have recently been introduced in fixed data networks particularly in the Internet.

Existing mobile communication systems do not offer any special bearer services for multimedia calls or for simultaneous use of multiple data services. There is only one traffic channel available for a data call the channel being either transparent T or non transparent NT . Depending on the required transmission rate a traffic channel may consist of one sub channel e.g. TDMA time slot or several sub channels e.g. several TDMA time slots for high speed data transmission such as HSCSD in the GSM system . Any shared use of the traffic channel has to be implemented on the application layer i.e. in the end user s applications. Time critical multimedia calls e.g. video phoning have to use transparent circuit switched bearer services because other data services cannot guarantee as small variation of the transmission delay as the video service requires. Too long a transmission delay causes visible interference in the video picture at the receiving end. Applications which are not time critical and require accurate transmission usually use non transparent bearer services. An example of such an application is transfer of data files.

As was stated above the problem related to the present mobile communication systems is that they either provide a transparent or non transparent traffic channel or a packet service such as GPRS General Packet Radio Service for a multimedia call between two mobile stations or between a mobile station and a terminal or server in a fixed communication network. Packet radio services and the non transparent traffic channel are not suitable for video phoning or other time critical applications. On the application layer the transparent bearer service requires an error correction protocol which is usually not optimized for a radio connection. This means that a multiservice and or multimedia channel has to always use a transparent bearer service and perform multiplexing and error correction on the application layer in the end users terminals.

In the future it will be required of the mobile communication systems particularly of the 3generation systems such as UMTS Universal Mobile Telecommunications Systems that the mobile communication network and mobile station should support several simultaneous calls between the mobile station and several other parties at different destinations. The calls may be traditional calls with one connection or above described multimedia calls or calls with multiple connections. It is also required that it should be possible to add or drop different connections or calls independently of one another.

The key factor in the design and implementation of mobile communication networks is the effective utilization of the radio spectrum. Multiple calls should also be implemented by making the maximum use of the channel capacity. Control of multiple calls e.g. handover should be as simple as possible both for the mobile communication system and the mobile station.

One of the objectives of the invention is to meet the above mentioned requirements particularly the effective utilization of the available channel capacity and simple handover procedure of multiple simultaneous calls.

This is achieved with a method of providing two or more simultaneous data calls for one mobile station in a mobile communication system. The method is characterized by the following steps of

The invention also relates to a mobile station according to claim and to a mobile communication network according to claim .

According to the basic idea of the invention one common traffic channel is reserved for several or all simultaneous calls of a mobile station and the capacity of the channel is shared between the calls. Here the term traffic channel refers both to a single channel and to a set of two or more parallel sub channels used in high speed multichannel data transmission e.g. the HSCSD channel of the GSM system . The term call means both a traditional call with one connection and a multimedia call or a multiple connection call. The traffic channel is reserved when the first call or calls are being set up. If several calls are set up simultaneously the capacity of this one common traffic channel is determined by the combined total capacity requirement of the different calls. In the preferred embodiment of the invention the capacity of the traffic channel is adjusted dynamically. The capacity of a traffic channel which is already allocated to one or more ongoing calls is increased or the allocated capacity is reallocated when a new call or a new connection of an old call is added to the traffic channel. Correspondingly the capacity is reduced or the allocated capacity is reallocated when a call or a connection of a call is cleared dropped from a traffic channel. The traffic channel is released after the last call has been cleared.

The calls may be non transparent calls NT transparent calls T or multimedia calls which contain both NT and T connections. Thus the transparent connection of the multimedia call can be used for transmitting time critical information which does not allow the use of an error correction protocol based on retransmission and the non transparent connection can be used for transmitting less time critical information which allows error correction based on retransmission. Thus the invention enables implementation of multiservice calls through the traditional traffic channel of the mobile communication network. The necessary multiplexing and demultiplexing can be carried out in the terminals and interworking functions of the mobile communication network. Thus these functions do not need to be performed on the application layer by the end user like in prior art solutions.

In an embodiment of the invention NT calls T calls and separate T or NT connections use logical links inside a common radio link protocol RLP or link access control protocol LAC which is established between the mobile station and the interworking function.

The call may also be a packet switched call in which case packet switched traffic is transmitted over the same traffic channel with circuit switched traffic. The packet switched traffic preferably shares the traffic channel capacity available for NT traffic. The packets are transmitted e.g. interleaved with RLP or LAC protocol frames or encapsulated in the protocol frames.

According to another embodiment of the invention if the mobile communication network is temporarily unable to allocate more transmission capacity or the required amount of capacity when a new call or connection is established the available capacity is reallocated to the calls. The mobile communication network allocates the requested capacity later when capacity becomes available in the network.

According to still another embodiment the mobile station and or the network monitor s the traffic of at least one call or connection and if there is temporarily no data traffic in the call or connection it temporarily uses the free resources for the traffic of another call calls or connection connections . Thanks to this all capacity that is free in the traffic channel can be utilized to the maximum extent every moment.

The invention optimizes the use utilization of the traffic channel capacity compared to a case in which separate simultaneous calls of a mobile station use different traffic channels. In the case of congestion i.e. during the traffic peaks the mobile communication network can support a higher number of calls with the same amount of available traffic channel capacity. The traffic channel capacity can be adjusted dynamically and allocated depending on the number of calls and their requirements. Control of simultaneous calls is simpler. For example handover of several calls is simple to implement both in respect of the mobile communication network and the mobile station because only one traffic channel needs to be handed over. Consequently traditional handover procedures can be applied as such which is an advantage particularly when multicall service is introduced into existing mobile communication systems.

The present invention is applicable to all digital wireless telecommunications systems such as cellular systems WLL Wireless Local Loop and RLL Radio Local Loop networks satellite based mobile communication systems etc. Here the term mobile communication system or network generally refers to all wireless telecommunications systems. There are several multiple access modulation techniques which facilitate traffic involving a large number of mobile users. These techniques include time division multiple access TDMA code division multiple access CDMA and frequency division multiple access FDMA . The physical concept of the traffic channel varies in different multiple access methods being primarily defined by means of a time slot in TDMA systems by means of a spreading code in CDMA systems by means of a radio channel in FDMA systems by means of a combination of these etc. In modern mobile communication systems it is possible to allocate a set of two or more basic rate traffic channels sub channels i.e. a high speed traffic channel to a mobile station for high speed data transmission. Here the term traffic channel refers both to a single basic rate traffic channel and to a high speed traffic channel consisting of two or more basic rate traffic channels. The basic idea of the present invention is independent of the type of the traffic channel and the multiple access method used.

The present invention is particularly suitable for data transmission applications in the 3generation mobile communication systems such as UMTS in digital GSM mobile communication systems Global System for Mobile Communications and in other GSM based systems such as DSC1800 Digital Communication System in the US digital cellular system PCS Personal Communication System and in WLL systems which are based on the above mentioned systems. The invention will be described below using the GSM mobile communication system as an example. The structure and function of the GSM system are very familiar to a person skilled in the art and they are defined in the GSM specifications of ETSI European Telecommunications Standards Institute . Reference is also made to M. Mouly and M. Pautet Palaiseau France 1992 ISBN 2 9507190 0 7.

The basic structure of the GSM system is illustrated in . The GSM system consists of two parts a base station system BSS and a network subsystem NSS. The BSS and mobile stations MS communicate over radio connections. In the base station system BSS each cell is served by a base transceiver station BTS. A number of base transceiver stations are connected to a base station controller BSC which controls the radio frequencies and channels the BTS uses. The BSCs are connected to a mobile services switching centre MSC. Certain MSCs are connected to other telecommunications networks such as the public switched telephone network PSTN and comprise gateway functions for calls transmitted to those networks and calls arriving from those networks. These MSCs are known as gateway MSCs GMSC . There are also at least two databases a home location register HLR and a visitor location register VLR.

The mobile communication system comprises adaptation functions for adapting the internal data connection of the mobile communication network to the protocols used by the terminals and other telecommunications networks. The adaptation functions typically include a terminal adaptation function TAF on the interface between the mobile station and the data terminal connected to the mobile station and an interworking function IWF on the interface between the mobile station and another telecommunications network typically in association with the mobile services switching centre. Usually the mobile services switching centre comprises various kinds of adapter equipment pools for supporting different data services and data protocols such as a modem pool which comprises modems and telefax adapters for modem and telefax services UDI RDI rate adapter pool etc. Referring to in the GSM system a data connection is established between the terminal adaptation function TAF of the mobile station MS and the interworking function IWF in the mobile communication network. In the case of data transmission in the GSM system this connection is an UDI coded digital full duplex connection adapted to V.24 interfaces. In non transparent data services the GSM connection also uses a radio link protocol RLP. The TAF adapts the data terminal equipment DTE connected to the mobile station MS to said GSM data connection which is established over a physical connection using one or more traffic channels. The IWF connects the GSM data connection to a V.110 or V.120 network such as an ISDN network or another GSM network or to another transit network such as the public switched telephone network PSTN. The CCITT recommendation for a V.120 rate adapted connection is disclosed in the publication CCITT White Book V.120.

As was explained above modern mobile communication systems support different tele services and bearer services. The bearer services of the GSM system are defined in the GSM specification 02.02 and the tele services in the GSM specification 02.03.

The protocol structure of the transparent bearer service and GSM telefax service is very similar to that illustrated in except that the L2R RLP function has been replaced with another function. In an asynchronous transparent bearer service the IWF needs asynchronous synchronous conversion RA and a modem or a rate adaptation function in the direction towards the fixed network. In the telefax service the IWF needs GSM telefax protocol functions and a modem. The telefax connection is also transparent. The GSM telefax service is defined in the GSM recommendation 03.45.

In the HSCSD concept of the GSM system a high speed data signal is splitted into separate data flows which are then transmitted via N subchannels N traffic channel time slots on the radio interface. After the data flows have been splitted they are carried on subchannels as if they were independent of one another until they are combined again in the IWF or MS. However logically these N subtraffic channels belong to the same HSCSD connection i.e. they form one HSCSD traffic channel. According to the GSM recommendations data flows are splitted and combined in a modified RLP which is thus common to all subchannels. Below this common RLP each subchannel has the same protocol stack RA FEC FEC RA RAA RAA RA RA RA between the MS TAF and the MSC IWF the protocol stack being illustrated for one traffic channel in . Thus the HSCSD traffic channel according to the GSM recommendations will still use the common RLP for different subchannels even though the bit rate of an individual subchannel may be up to 64 kbits s.

As was stated above solutions are being developed for the GSM system which enable data rates up to 64 kbits s per time slot or data rates exceeding 64 kbits s in the multi slot constellation HSCSD . However this development work does not affect the protocol structures described above but only the bit rate of the HSCSD traffic channel. Thus the HSCSD traffic channel according to the GSM recommendations will still use the common RLP for different subchannels even though the bit rate of an individual subchannel may be up to 64 kbits s and the total rate of the HSCSD traffic channel n 64 kbit s.

As was explained above in the future it will be required of the mobile communication systems particularly of the 3generation systems such as UMTS Universal Mobile Telecommunications Systems that the mobile communication network and the mobile station should support several simultaneous calls between the mobile station and several other parties at different destinations. The calls may be traditional calls with one connection or multimedia calls or calls with several connections. It is also required that it should be possible to add or drop separate connections or calls independently of one another. The channel capacity should be utilized as efficiently as possible. In addition control of multiple calls such as handover should be as simple as possible both for the mobile communication system and the mobile station.

According to the basic idea of the invention one common traffic channel is allocated to several or all simultaneous calls of the same mobile station and the capacity of the channel is shared between the calls.

The calls may be for example non transparent calls NT transparent calls T or multimedia calls which comprise both NT and T connections. Furthermore one or more calls may be packet switched.

The capacity of the common traffic channel can be allocated to the calls e.g. by allocating specific information bits transmitted through the traffic channel to each call or connection of a call. In the GSM system for example V.110 frames are transmitted between the rate adaptation function RA and the rate adaptation function RA. A specific number of the data bits of these frames may be reserved for each call.

In the preferred embodiment of the invention NT calls T calls and separate T or NT connections use logical links inside a common radio link protocol RLP or link access control protocol LAC which is established through the traffic channel between the mobile station MS and the interworking function IWF or IWU A .

Referring to the terminal TE such as a personal computer of the mobile station MS comprises a number of applications . . . n some of the applications requiring transparent calls T and some non transparent calls NT . The applications . . . n are connected to the radio terminal part MT of the mobile station MS through an application interface such as Mobile API MEXE Mobile Application Programming Interface Mobile Execution Environment . The MT comprises an RPL LAC unit which supports the radio link protocol RLP or another suitable link access control protocol LAC. The RLP LAC unit comprises two functional parts i.e. a control unit and a retransmission mechanism . The control unit performs all functions related to the RLP LAC protocol including framing timing buffering of data allocation of virtual channels multiplexing demultiplexing of different calls to the virtual channels of the common traffic channel and control of RLP LAC protocol functions. Only functions and mechanisms related to retransmission have been transferred to the unit . Applications requiring a transparent T connection or call have been directly connected to the unit whereas applications requiring a non transparent NT call or connection have been connected to the unit via the retransmission unit . This allows to transmit both transparent and non transparent connections inside the common RLP LAC link in one GSM traffic channel.

Referring further to the interworking function IWF which is preferably located in the mobile services switching centre MSC comprises an RLP LAC unit which corresponds to the unit in the mobile station MS. In other words the RLP LAC unit comprises a control unit and retransmission mechanism which have the same functionality as the respective units and in the mobile station MS. The I O ports of the unit which are intended for transmitting and receiving transparent T data to and from the fixed network PSTN ISDN are connected to a switching unit which may connect each port selectively to a rate adaptation unit RA modem or telefax protocol adapter FAX for example. Units and are connected to other telecommunications networks such as PSTN or ISDN. Correspondingly the ports of the unit which are intended for transmitting and receiving non transparent data to and from another telecommunications network are connected to the switching unit which can selectively connect the ports to units to according to the service a given call requires. Thanks to the IWF according to different calls or connections one in each port of the unit or can thus be connected selectively and independently of other calls to a separate individual physical channel in another telecommunications network. Alternatively it may be advantageous in some situations to connect two calls or connections to the same physical channel in another telecommunications network e.g. when the calls have the same destination.

One common traffic channel is allocated between the mobile station MS and the interworking function IWF when the first call or calls are set up. If several calls are set up simultaneously the capacity of the common traffic channel is determined by the combined total capacity requirement of the different calls.

In normal GSM call set up the MSC receives a BCIE element Bearer Capability Element in the set up message from the mobile station or from the subscriber database or another switching centre . The BCIE element includes information on the call type as well as on the bearer services and the protocol the call requires. On the basis of this information the MSC can select and initialize the IWF equipment suitable for the call in question. In an embodiment of the invention the BCIE element can be provided with a new parameter or parameter value which enables the MSC to choose the IWF equipment supporting the functionality of the invention for the call.

When the common traffic channel is established an RLP LAC protocol link is established between the RLP LAC units and in the manner defined for the RLP LAC protocol e.g. according to the RLP protocol in the GSM mobile communication system. In the preferred embodiment of the invention the RLP LAC units also negotiate with each other about the establishment of virtual channels circuits inside the common RLP LAC protocol link by means of internal signalling of the traffic channel. In the GSM system for example this inband negotiation may be implemented by means of the XID mechanism and XID frames of the radio link protocol RLP which are normally used for signalling through a non transparent connection. The logical subchannels circuits can be established e.g. by determining logical channel identifiers inside the information field of the RLP LAC frames for instance. illustrates an RLP LAC frame provided with a logical channel identifier. The frame comprises a header H information field and frame check sequence FCS. The virtual channel identifier VCI of the invention is located at the beginning of the information field. The VCI preferably consists of a call identifier which distinguishes calls from one another and a connection identifier which distinguishes the connections of a call from one another . Such use of several logical channels allows to run several point to point service sessions simultaneously through one RLP LAC connection.

The above mentioned inband negotiation process may be for example the following kind of process. When a common RLP LAC link has been established in the common traffic channel the RLP LAC unit sends a XID frame including a suggestion for a certain virtual channel allocation to the RPL LAC unit . If necessary the unit acknowledges with a XID frame after which the units and start to multiplex calls to subchannels in the negotiated manner. Allocation of subchannels comprises both allocation of subchannel identifiers VCI and allocation of a certain amount of channel capacity to each virtual channel. In the mobile station the unit links each virtual channel with the corresponding application call . Correspondingly in the interworking function IWF the RLP LAC unit and switching unit provide coupling of the virtual channels to the separate physical channels in another telecommunications network. Alternatively it is also possible to include definition of the virtual channel capacity e.g. bit rate needed for each call or connection in the above mentioned BCIE element or another signalling element. In that case the capacity of the common traffic channel is allocated in the IWF according to this information and no inband negotiation is needed unless negotiation is needed for another reason .

After the multiple call according to the invention has been set up the capacity of the common traffic channel can be adjusted dynamically. The capacity of a traffic channel to which one or more ongoing calls have been allocated is increased or the allocated capacity is reallocated when a new call or a new connection of an old call is added to the channel. When the MS requires one more call it sends a call set up request to the mobile services switching centre MSC which changes the configuration of the traffic channel so that the total capacity corresponds to the capacity required by all calls. A corresponding procedure is carried out when the MS clears a call from the traffic channel. Increase or decrease of capacity may mean for example that 1 more or fewer subchannels or subflows are allocated in multiple channel configuration such as HSCSD 2 the channel coding is changed in order to increase or decrease the data rate 3 the ratio of chip rate to data rate chip rate over data rate is changed in the code division multiple access system CDMA or other means provided by the mobile communication system in question are used. After the configuration and capacity of the common traffic channel have been changed the RLP LAC units and negotiate a virtual channel for the new call delete the virtual subchannel of the cleared call or possibly negotiate about reallocation of the capacity to the calls. A connection can be added or deleted within an existing call as was described above or negotiation about allocation deallocation of a virtual channel and reallocation of the capacity may be carried out only between the units and due to the addition deletion of a connection.

Also if the MS is temporarily unable to allocate more transmission capacity to the traffic channel when a new call or connection is being added the RLP LAC units and perform negotiation in which case a new virtual channel is established for a new call or connection and the available capacity is reallocated.

When the MS sets up a new call or connection in addition to the ongoing ones the MSC notices that the MS is already engaged in a data call and reroutes the call connection to the same IWF element.

Transparent T data is packed into RLP LAC frames i.e. a virtual channel is also allocated to T connections in the common traffic channel. However retransmission functions are not applied to the T data but an unacknowledged mode transmission because transparent T data is supplied directly to the RLP LAC units and and not via the retransmission mechanism . Furthermore the transmitting RLP LAC unit guarantees that a frame is transmitted to each connection at regular intervals so that a constant or nearly constant delay and a constant rate are kept up.

Transparent calls require a constant capacity and thus the capacity of the transparent calls cannot be reduced when the total capacity of the traffic channel is inadequate. However non transparent calls and packet connections can be maintained with minimal traffic channel capacity using flow control buffering and congestion control at both ends of the traffic channel e.g. in the RLP LAC units and .

According to an embodiment of the invention the RLP LAC units and monitor the traffic of transparent T calls and connections. If the MS for example detects that application transmits fill data according to the protocol e.g. flags or control frames in a transparent call the RLP LAC unit does not transmit the fill data to the traffic channel. Instead the RLP LAC unit transmits RLP LAC frames or packets of one or more non transparent or packet switched connections i.e. RLP LAC frames which contain the virtual channel identifier VCI of the non transparent connections instead of the VCI of the transparent channel. At the receiving end the RLP LAC unit returns the missing protocol fill data to the transparent data flow even though the fill data is not transferred via the traffic channel. This may happen e.g. so that the RLP LAC unit automatically adds a certain fill to outgoing transparent data flow when it detects that the traffic channel does not receive the RLP LAC frame related to the T connection within a predetermined time from the previous RLP LAC frame. The units and function correspondingly in the opposite transmission directions. Thanks to the additional feature of this invention all free capacity in the traffic channel is utilized efficiently every moment.

The present invention is also suitable for simultaneous transmission of circuit switched data and packet switched data. Packet switched traffic is transmitted on the same channel with the circuit switched traffic. The packet switched traffic preferably shares the capacity of the traffic channel which is available for NT traffic. Packets are transmitted e.g. interleaved with RLP or LAC protocol frames or encapsulated in the protocol frames.

The mobile services switching centre MSC comprises an interworking function IWF which is preferably identical to the interworking function IWF illustrated in . To be more precise the IWF comprises an RLP LAC unit switching unit and rate adaptation function RA modem and telefax unit which are connected to physical channels in another telecommunications network such as PSTN or ISDN. The RLP LAC unit and the interworking function IWF establish an RLP LAC link between themselves via the common traffic channel. The RLP LAC link comprises virtual channels for each call or connection as was described above with reference to and . Circuit switched data is transferred between the unit and the IWF in RLP LAC frames.

Referring further to the application n or alternatively several data applications is a packet data application which requires a packet data call in a packet data network. In the embodiment illustrated in packet data frames are transmitted interleaved with the RLP LAC frames in the common traffic channel. For this purpose the packet data frames produced by the application N and the RLP LAC frames produced by the unit are supplied to a multiplexing and demultiplexing unit which multiplexes the LAC frames and packet data frames to the common traffic channel in proportion to the transmission channel capacity allocated to them. There is a corresponding multiplexing and demultiplexing device in the mobile services switching centre MSC which demultiplexes the RLP LAC frames from packet data frames. The RLP LAC frames are supplied to the interworking function IWF. The packet data frames are supplied to a packet data node or packet data handler PDN which transmits them further to the packet network. Multiplexing of the LAC frames and packet data frames their interleaved transmission on the common traffic channel and demultiplexing according to the invention are illustrated graphically in . Transmission of packet data and circuit switched data occurs in the same way in the opposite direction MSC MS.

In the above described preferred embodiments of the invention the different calls or connections had a common LAC RLP protocol inside of which logical channels were established. Alternatively a separate LAC RLP protocol entity which forms a logical channel of its own via the common traffic channel can be established for each connection or call or for a group of two or more calls or connections. In that case the LAC RLP frames belonging to different LAC RLP entities can be distinguished from one another by means of the VCI identifier of for example. Equipment configurations and functions can otherwise be implemented as was described above in connection with preferred embodiments except that the RLP LAC units process parallelly several RLP LAC frames.

The invention has been described above by means of preferred embodiments. It should be noted that there are alternative solutions and variations which are obvious to a person skilled in the art and can be implemented without deviating from the scope and spirit of the appended claims.

