---

title: Flow-through aerosol photoacoustic systems and methods
abstract: Embodiments of photoacoustic devices, systems, and methods are disclosed. One device embodiment, among others, comprises a flow-through configuration for a test sample gas and a modular set of two or more solid-state or gaseous based lasers.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07304742&OS=07304742&RS=07304742
owner: United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07304742
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051011
---
This application is related to and claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 617 406 filed Oct. 9 2004 the complete disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The invention described herein can be manufactured used and licensed by or for the United States Government without the payment of any royalties thereon.

The present disclosure is generally related to photoacoustic systems and methods and more particularly is related to aerosol photoacoustic systems and methods.

Recent terrorist activities in the United States and elsewhere have demonstrated the susceptibility of both military and civilian personnel to chemical biological aerosol attacks and the need to develop some type of early warning system. The majority of point sensors deployed in the field today fall into two basic categories 1 chemical analysis on captured aerosol samples very specific identification and 2 an optical approach that relies on measuring the fluorescence phenomena inherent in most living things very general discrimination . However both approaches suffer from limitations. See J. Ho Real Time Detection of Biological Aerosols Defense Research Establishment Suffield 96001 P. Hairston J. Ho F. R. Quant Design of an Instrument for Real Time Detection of Bioaerosols using Simultaneous Measurement of Particle Aerodynamic Size and Intrinsic Fluorescence 28 no.3 471 1997 .

Chemical methods that rely on various forms of antibody tagging and or chemical analysis often require periods on the order of several minutes in order for the chemical reaction to occur. In addition to the undesirable long periods of time needed to complete the analysis these wet chemistry approaches generate quantities of toxic waste that require special handling and disposal.

Optical methods that are based on fluorescence operate in a more real time manner however resultant measured fluorescent spectra is extremely sensitive to small quantities of contaminating media and or particle morphology resulting in false alarms. See G.W. Faris R.A. Copeland Spectrally Resolved Absolute Fluorescence Cross Section of B. Globigii and B. Cereus Stanford Research Institute 2913 1992 B. Bronk L. Reinisch Variability of steady state bacterial fluorescence with respect to growth conditions vol. 47 no. 4 pp. 436 440 1993 . When high quality uncontaminated fluorescence spectra is recorded it is often quite broad and featureless making species discrimination and or identification very difficult. See R. Pinnick S. Hill P. Nachman Aerosol fluorescence spectrum analyzer for rapid measurement of single micrometer sized airborne biological particles . vol. 28 no. 2 pp. 95 104 1998 .

A more desirable approach would be an optically based detection scheme that is sensitive enough to warn of the presence of a harmful airborne agent but not so sensitive that it would result in many false positives e.g. presence of residual growth media and changes in particle size or shape due to agglomeration.

Early development of aerosol photoacoustics was limited to single wavelength operation and as a result the method was thought to have little utility outside of the area of analytic spectroscopy. See C.W. Bruce N.M. Richardson Propagation at 10 m through smoke produced by atmospheric combustion of diesel fuel . vol. 22 no. 7 pp. 1051 1056 1983 C.W. Bruce T.F. Stromberg K.P. Gurton Trans Spectral Absorption and Scattering of Electromagnetic Radiation by Diesel Soot . vol. 30 no. 12 pp. 1537 1546 1991 . A brief description of the photoacoustic method is as follows.

Consider a sample volume containing a collection of optically absorbing particles e.g. an aerosol. When a laser is passed through this volume a portion of the light will be absorbed by the aerosol particles resulting in particle heating. Heat energy from the absorbing particle will transfer to the surrounding media and result in a pressure rise within the sample volume. If the laser is modulated at some convenient acoustic frequency e.g. 1 kHz a resultant acoustic signal will result at that same 1 kHz modulation frequency. This acoustic signal is then detected and amplified using a variety of means. It is established that the power of the resultant acoustic signal is directly proportional to the optical absorption cross section of the absorbing particles. See A. Rosencwag Krieger Pub. New York 1990 .

In principle aerosol photoacoustics depends only on the fraction of light absorbed by the media and thus requires no a priori knowledge of aerosol particle shape size or complex refractive index. By designing a system in which the probe laser s also serve as a coincident short pass transmissometer an independent absolute measure of the total extinction is also obtained. As a result accurate values of the single scatter albedo are also determined by taking the difference between the total extinction and absorption. See C. Bohren D. Huffman Wiley Interscience Press New York NY 1983 .

Prior attempts at applying conventional photoacoustic spectroscopy to an aerosol media used a single monochromatic source and a closed sample volume geometry. See D.M. Roessler F.R. Faxvog Optoacoustic measurement of optical absorption in acetylene smoke . vol. 69 no. 12 pp. 1699 1704 1979 . As a result these methods were subject to problems associated with non uniform aerosol concentrations due to e.g. particle settling. In addition these closed systems relied on optical windows to transmit the optical energy into the photoacoustic cell. Often for moderately absorbing aerosols the residual absorption due to the window substrate is comparable or greater than the absorption of the aerosol in question. See C.W. Bruce R.G. Pinnick In situ measurements of aerosol absorption with a resonate cw laser spectrophone . vol. 16 no. 7 pp. 1762 1765 1977 .

U.S. Patents relating to particle testing systems and methods include U.S. Pat. No. 6 694 799 issued to Small U.S. Pat. No. 6 662 627 to Arnott et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 408 681 to Gurton et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 396 058 Gurton U.S. Pat. No. 4 740 086 to Oehler et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 657 397 to Oehler et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 415 265 to Campillo et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 4 187 026 to Schaffer et al. the teachings of each of which are fully incorporated herein by reference.

Embodiments of photoacoustic devices systems and methods are disclosed. One method embodiment among others comprises determining an infrared IR absorption spectra of the chemical biological agent of interest modulating at least two lasers in a photoacoustic device each modulated laser operating at one of at least two identified wavelengths from the IR spectra introducing a test sample into the photoacoustic device and drawing it through the device measuring an acoustic signal of the test sample as light from the lasers pass through the test sample measuring the path integrated extinction signal of each laser wavelength as the laser signal passes through the test sample and determining the presence or absence of the chemical biological agent of interest in the test sample.

One system embodiment among others comprises a photoacoustic device comprising a central hollow axial region configured to admit a gas at a first end and allow the gas to exit at a second end a pump mounted to the second end of the central axial region the pump adapted to pull the gas into the central axial region through the central axial region and out of the central axial region at least two IR lasers located adjacent the central axial region the lasers irradiating the central axial region with the light traveling from the laser through the central axial region and a microphone mounted to an inner wall in the central hollow axial region the microphone configured to detect an acoustic signal generated by absorption of the light by the particles in the gas the acoustic signal proportional to the optical absorption by particles in the gas at the laser wavelengths of the light and the microphone also configured to generate an electrical signal proportional to the acoustic signal.

Other devices systems methods features and advantages of the present disclosure will be or become apparent to one with skill in the art upon examination of the following drawings and detailed description. It is intended that all such additional devices systems methods features and advantages be included within this description and be within the scope of the disclosure.

As will be described in detail here photoacoustic based devices systems and methods are provided. The photoacoustic based devices are designed specifically for optical analysis of aerosols and generally include a windowless flow through design. In particular the photoacoustic devices and systems employ two or more infrared wavelengths where the individual optical signals are deconvolved using a phase sensitive detection scheme. By choosing wavelength values to coincide with absorption characteristics of a particular chemical biological warfare agent the photoacoustic device will function as an effective point sensor that is capable of detecting the presence of harmful chemical biological aerosols.

Having thus generally described the photoacoustic based devices and systems reference will now be made to the embodiments depicted in the drawings. illustrates one embodiment of the disclosed photoacoustic devices e.g. a multi wavelength flow through photoacoustic spectrophone . Included in the multi wavelength spectrophone is a modular set of two or more solid state or gaseous based lasers operating at different IR wavelengths 1 2 3 . . . n . With the advent of compact IR laser diode technology e.g. quantum cascade laser diodes a modular set of laser sources e.g. operating primarily in approximately the 2 14 m wavelength range can be employed in one embodiment where the lasers are configured to be interchangeable. Interchangeability of the set of lasers allows for a choice of a particular wavelength set that may be desired to tune the photoacoustic device for detection of a particular agent or group of agents. By operation in the mid to long wave IR region the photoacoustic device is configured to directly measure absorption bands that result from vibrational rotational and translational modes inherent in most complex organic and inorganic molecules.

The numerous laser signals can be deconvolved by modulating each source at different frequencies 1 2 3 . . . n by employing various optical choppers . By modulating the different laser sources at different frequencies a multi channel lock in amplifier can separate the absorption response for each laser wavelength. Because the disclosed photoacoustic systems and methods employ multiple wavelength information the ability to identify the presence of a particular airborne toxin or agent is greatly improved over a conventional single wavelength photoacoustic approach.

The IR laser beams are made coincident and directed through the spectrophone by a series of beam splitters and mirrors . Where desired these optical elements can incorporate a fresh air flush in order to keep the reflective surface s clean. The coincident lasers are directed down through the center axial region of the spectrophone in which the aerosol gas in question is drawn. The outer cylindrical cavity of the spectrophone is machined from an acoustically dense material in order to suppress the ambient acoustic noise originating from the operational environment. For example the outer cavity can be machined out of thick stainless steel or high density polyethylene. Further suppression of the ambient acoustic noise that can transverse down through the axial region of the spectrophone can be accomplished by the use of a series of acoustic dampeners positioned above and below the photoacoustic active region.

Shown in is a representation of an exploded cross sectional schematic of the top set of three cylindrical dampeners that fit within the spectrophone and serve to dissipate acoustic noise that enters the spectrophone from the top opening. An identical set can also used at the bottom as shown in the embodiment of to suppress ambient noise originating from the bottom of the spectrophone. A simplified description of how the dampeners operate is described as follows. Although the arrows in demonstrate the aerosol and acoustic noise moving from top to bottom one skilled in the art would understand the aerosol and acoustic noise movement can be in the opposite direction.

Both the aerosol and acoustic noise originating from the operating environment can flow freely through the center cylindrical region of the spectrophone . Acoustic noise that enters the spectrophone from the top and bottom of the flow through design manifest themselves as pressure fluctuations radially distributed across the diameter of the column e.g. point A of . The area at point A can be for example about 1.0 cm. As a pressure wave propagates down toward the inner cavity that houses the electret microphone the pressure wave encounters one or more small apertures in the inlet column depicted as points B in . At points B the pressure wave is redistributed over a much larger area.

The larger redistribution area can be for example about 30.0 cm. Thus the net pressure experienced across the spectrophone is effectively reduced. This reduction can be repeated at each aperture B until the desired noise reduction is achieved. For example in one embodiment a series of three or four dampeners placed above and below the electret cavity are sufficient to suppress typical noise levels encountered in the laboratory. With the dampeners a reduction of about 20 db is easily achieved at 1 kHz. Acoustic noise becomes an increasing problem at frequencies below about 100 Hz where acoustic filters become virtually impractical. Thus in one embodiment the laser modulation frequency is greater than about 100 Hz. In one embodiment the possible laser modulation frequencies range from approximately 200 to 10 000 Hz for desired noise suppression.

The test aerosol gas is drawn through the hollow axial region of the spectrophone by a pump located at the exit point . The modulated laser beam s is are directed down through the well defined column of aerosol gas where a portion of the incident energy is absorbed. Because of the flow through configuration of the photoacoustic device problems previously associated with non homogeneous aerosol concentrations are eliminated or reduced. The aerosol is more uniform due to the free flowing nature of the media. In addition because of the flow through design the sensitivity of the photoacoustic device is not limited by residual absorption due to transmission windows.

The multi wavelength absorption results in a multi component acoustic signal that is detected by a small for example about 6 mm in diameter highly sensitive electret microphone that can be in one embodiment mounted to the wall of the inner cavity. The electret microphone is externally powered through a simple resistor capacitor RC circuit via a direct current DC power supply not shown . The alternating current AC voltage s resulting from acoustic signal s can then be amplified and deconvolved using a first multi channel lock in amplifier tuned to the modulation frequencies 1 2 3 . . . n . As noted previously the acoustic signal s are proportional to the actual optical absorption at the laser wavelengths 1 2 3 . . . n where the constant of proportionality is found via a calibration process.

The attenuated laser beam s are directed out of the spectrophone column via a reflective mirror and are detected by an appropriate infrared IR optical detector . Again the resultant optical signal s can be amplified and deconvolved using a second tuned multi channel lock in amplifier . Because the primary electromagnetic interaction relied on is optical absorption the detection signal is relatively insensitive to particle shape and or size. As a result the response of the device is far more stable than techniques that rely on optical scattering.

The proposed design includes a de facto short path transmissometer. This allows for an additional measure of the total absolute extinction. By taking the difference between the absorption and the total extinction one can calculate an additional identifying parameter e.g. the total scatter. By measuring changes in the laser beam s s attenuation and noting the extinction path length defined by points a and b of the total extinction coefficient s for each wavelength considered can be calculated by applying Beers law.

Calibration of the flow through photoacoustic spectrophone can be accomplished by inserting an appropriate IR absorbing gas into the spectrophone cell. Typical gas vapor used in prior single wavelength applications include isopropyl alcohol methanol and acetone.

The calibration gas is drawn through the system using the same flow dynamics and pump as described previously. A portion of the laser beam s s energy is absorbed by the gas which results in a measurable extinction measured by the detector and absorption detected by the electret microphone . Because the attenuating media is a gas there is no scattering present and thus the extinction seen at the detector for the path length defined by points a b is equal to the measured optical absorption. The measured optical absorption is represented as an AC voltage from the electret microphone . The electret raw response in mV is converted to absolute path integrated absorption coefficients 1 m via a simple Beers Law equation.

The set of the resultant spectral absorption 1 2 . . . n and extinction 1 2 . . . n form a uniquely identifiable series of parameters that are associated with a particular chemical biological warfare agent in question.

Having described an exemplary embodiment of the disclosed aerosol photoacoustic device with respect to given below is an example of the photoacoustic device in practice.

A preferred embodiment for of the photoacoustic device includes the following 1 two or more modulated monochromatic IR sources of radiation 2 an acoustically isolated region within the spectrophone that houses a sensitive electret microphone 3 a short path transmissometer configured to accurately measure the total optical extinction and 4 a phase sensitive detection set of electronics appropriate to amplify and deconvolve the individual response from multiple excitation wavelengths.

An exemplary application of the disclosed photoacoustic device includes detecting identifying an airborne chemical toxin. For example the IR absorption spectra for the chemical warfare simulant dimethyl methylphosphanate DMMP is shown in . In order to detect the presence of DMMP the flow through photoacoustic device is configured with three laser diode modules each laser operating at one of the identified three wavelengths shown in . Each laser is modulated at the frequency 1 2 or 3.

For example the laser can be modulated using an optical modulator chopper . For DMMP two wavelengths are chosen that are on two absorption bands and one wavelength of any absorption. If the spectrophone draws in a sample of the air toxin mixture the wavelengths labeled and seen in the DMMP spectra will be partially absorbed by the toxin resulting in a proportional acoustic signal s .

Resultant AC signals are recorded by a multi channel lock in amplifier tuned to detect only signals modulated at 1 2 and 3and are then converted to the absorption coefficients 1 2 and 3 . Additionally the resultant path integrated extinction for each laser wavelength is detected in a similar fashion using phase sensitive detection e.g. 1 2 and 3 . These six independent spectrally resolved parameters represent a measure of the total extinction 1 2 3 and absorption 1 2 and 3 and as such form a unique set of parameters that can be used to signify the presence and concentration of the chemical warfare simulant DMMP.

The utility of the flow through photoacoustic device can be expanded by incorporating additional instrumentation see . illustrates an exemplary configuration of a photoacoustic system in which an external laser source is used to heat a particular bulk sample e.g. a contaminated surface in order to form a chemical vapor that is then sampled by the spectrophone. By configuring the proposed flow through photoacoustic device with an external means for heating of a bulk sample e.g. a laser the photoacoustic system can detect trace chemical and or biological contaminates on any macroscopic surfaces e.g. vehicles buildings furniture soil etc.

To improve S N ratio when operating at ambient conditions a commercially available aerosol concentrator could be fashioned to the input of the photoacoustic spectrophone system illustrated in . The concentrator effectively increases the number of aerosol particle per unit volume and improves the spectrophone s sensitivity when sampling very low concentrations of a chemical biological agent.

In view of the above description it will be appreciated that one embodiment of a photoacoustic method may include as illustrated in determining the IR absorption spectra of a chemical biological agent of interest modulating at least two lasers in a photoacoustic device each modulated laser operating at one of two identified wavelengths from the IR spectra introducing a test sample into the photoacoustic device and drawing it through the device measuring an acoustic signal of the test sample as the laser passes through the test sample measuring the path integrated extinction signal of each laser wavelength as the laser signal passes through the test sample and determining the presence or absence of the chemical biological agent of interest in the test sample .

Any process descriptions or blocks in the flow diagrams as described in should be understood as representing steps in the process and alternate implementations are included within the scope of the preferred embodiments in which functions can be executed out of order from that shown or discussed including substantially concurrently or in reverse order depending on the functionality involved as would be understood by those reasonably skilled in the art.

It should be emphasized that the above described embodiments of the present disclosure particularly any preferred embodiments are merely possible examples of implementations merely set forth for a clear understanding of the principles of the disclosed systems and methods. Many variations and modifications can be made to the above described embodiment s without departing substantially from the principles of the systems and methods. All such modifications and variations are intended to be included herein within the scope of this disclosure.

