---

title: Child restraint system
abstract: A child restraint system that is adapted to be mounted within a vehicle is provided. The child restraint system includes a child seat configured to receive a child occupant. The child seat has a frame, at least first and second docking stations, and a child seat monitoring device. The first and second docking stations are disposed at first and second locations on the frame. Both of the first and second docking stations are configured to receive and hold the child seat monitoring device therein.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07410212&OS=07410212&RS=07410212
owner: Delphi Technologies, Inc.
number: 07410212
owner_city: Troy
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050908
---
The application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional application Ser. No. 60 607 988 filed Sep. 8 2004 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference thereto.

This application is also related to the following United States Patent Applications CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM CHILD SEAT MONITORING SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR DETERMINING A TYPE OF CHILD SEAT CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING WEIGHT SENSOR CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING CONTROL UNIT FOR EVALUATING HARNESS ADJUSTMENT CHILD RESTRAINT SYTSEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM the contents of which are each incorporated herein by reference thereto.

Child restraint systems have been utilized to hold infants or children therein within vehicles. One type of child restraint system includes a child seat and a base portion for holding the seat that are rearward facing with respect to a vehicle seat. The child restraint system however does not have a child seat monitoring device that provides visual feedback messages to a person installing the child restraint system indicating whether the child restraint system has been properly installed on the vehicle seat. Further the child restraint system does not have a plurality of docking stations on the child seat for allowing the child seat monitoring device to be disposed in one of the docking stations that can be easily viewed by the person installing the child restraint system.

A child restraint system that is adapted to be mounted within a vehicle in accordance with an exemplary embodiment is provided. The child restraint system includes a child seat configured to receive a child occupant. The child seat has a frame at least first and second docking stations and a child seat monitoring device. The first and second docking stations are disposed at first and second locations on the frame. Both of the first and second docking stations are configured to receive and hold the child seat monitoring device therein.

A child seat monitoring device in accordance with another exemplary embodiment is provided. The child seat monitoring device includes a removable housing configured to be removably secured to at least one docking station disposed on a child seat. The child seat monitoring device further includes a processing unit disposed in the housing. The processing unit is configured to be electrically coupled to at least a first sensor when the housing is disposed in the docking station on the child seat. The first sensor generates a first signal indicative of a child seat parameter. The processing unit is further configured to receive the first signal and to determine whether the child seat is installed in a vehicle in accordance with a predetermined installation parameter based on the first signal.

Referring to a child restraint system that can be secured to a vehicle seat in accordance with an exemplary embodiment is provided. In particular the child restraint system is secured to the vehicle seat utilizing the seat belt webbing . The child restraint system includes a child seat a base portion and a child seat monitoring system .

Referring to the child seat comprises a rearward facing child seat that is configured to accommodate a child therein for transporting the child both inside and outside of a vehicle. The child seat is configured to be fixedly secured to the base portion and the base portion is further secured via the seat belt webbing to the seat or to a frame of a vehicle. The child seat includes a shell or frame a child seat monitoring device docking stations a handle and the cushion .

The frame defines a compartment for accommodating the child therein. The frame includes a back portion a seat portion . The back portion supports a back of the child and the seat portion supports the buttocks and legs of the child.

Referring to the child seat monitoring device is provided to provide visual feedback messages to a person who is installing the child restraint system on the vehicle seat on whether the child restraint system has been installed in accordance with predetermined installation guidelines. The child seat monitoring device includes an integrated circuit board not shown having a processing unit such as a central processing unit CPU a read only memory ROM a random access memory RAM a battery an input output I O interface a switch light emitting diodes LEDs and a photodiode . The child seat monitoring device further includes a housing for holding the integrated circuit board therein. The CPU is provided to execute software algorithins stored in either the ROM or the RAM for determining whether the child restraint system has been installed in accordance with the predetermined installation guidelines. The CPU operably communicates with the ROM the RAM and the I O interface . The switch is provided to allow a person to induce the CPU to monitor the various sensors of the child seat monitoring system and to provide visual feedback information to a person. In particular the CPU generates a signal to induce the LED to emit light when the CPU has completed the check on the installation of the child restraint system . Further the CPU generates a signal to induce the LED to emit light when a seat belt coupled to the base portion is not cinched properly. Further the CPU generates a signal to induce the LED to emit light when a latching device not shown which latches the child seat to the base portion has not been latched properly. Further a CPU generates a signal to induce the LED to emit light when a buckle harness on the child seat has not been latched properly. Further the CPU generates a signal to induce the LED to emit light when the child seat is not orientated within a desired angular range. Further the CPU generates a signal to induce the LED to emit light when a battery is outputting a voltage less than a predetermined voltage level. The photodiode is provided to indicate when an ambient light is less than a predetermined light level. When the ambient light is less than the predetermined light level the CPU increases an intensity of light emitted from the LEDs.

Referring to the housing is provided to enclose the CPU the ROM the RAM and the I O interface . Further the housing is provided to hold the switch and the LEDs thereon. The housing include side walls latching members tab portions and two guiding members one of which is shown . The switch and the LEDs are disposed on the side wall . The side walls are coupled to the side wall and extend in a first direction generally parallel to one another. The side walls are also coupled to the side wall and extend in a first direction generally parallel to one another. The side wall is operably coupled to the side walls and is disposed opposite the side wall . The latching members extend from the side wall and are provided to latch the child seat monitoring device to one of the docking stations . The tab portions extend from the sidewall and are also provided to hold the child seat monitoring device in one of the docking stations . Guiding members extend outwardly from side walls and are provided to assist a person in guiding the child seat monitoring device into an interior region of one of the docking stations .

Referring to the docking stations are disposed on opposite sides of the child seat . The docking stations are configured to allow a person to latch the child seat monitoring device into either of the docking stations . Further the docking stations are configured to allow the person to remove the child seat monitoring device from either of the docking stations . Thus the docking stations allow the person to locate the device at one of the docking stations that is most easily viewable by the person when installing the child restraint system . Of course more than two docking stations could be utilized on the child seat . Further the position of the docking stations can be varied based upon a desired viewing location. In one exemplary embodiment the docking stations are attached to the child seat via screws. Of course in an alternate embodiment the docking stations can be molded as a portion of the child seat . Because the configuration of the docking station is substantially similar to the docking station only the configuration of the docking station will be described in greater detail below for purposes of simplicity.

Referring to and a non limiting example of a docking station is illustrated. As shown the docking station includes an outer peripheral wall a rear wall and a plurality of electrical terminals . The outer peripheral wall and the rear wall define an interior region for receiving the child seat monitoring device . The outer peripheral wall is a generally rectangular ring shaped wall extending from an end to an end . The rear wall encloses the end of the outer peripheral wall . The outer peripheral wall includes grooves extending from the second end towards the first end . The outer peripheral wall further includes wall portions disposed in the grooves respectively proximate the end for holding portions of the latching members respectively therein. The latching members have a first operational position where the members engage the wall portions respectively and a second operational position where the members disengage from the wall portions respectively. The outer peripheral wall includes grooves extending from the end towards the end . The outer peripheral wall further includes wall portions disposed in the grooves respectively proximate the end for holding the tab portions respectively of the child seat monitoring device therein. The outer peripheral wall further includes centering tabs disposed proximate the rear wall . The centering tabs extend inwardly into the interior region of the docking station for centering the housing of the child seat monitoring device within the interior region. The outer peripheral wall further includes guiding slots extending from the side inwardly into the wall . The guiding slots are configured to receive a pair of the guiding members disposed on the child seat monitoring device for guiding the device into the interior region of the docking station . The rear wall includes cantilever beam portions thereon. The cantilever beam portions are formed within the rear wall and are provided to urge the housing of the child seat monitoring device toward the end of the docking station . As a result the latching members engage the wall portions respectively of the outer peripheral wall and the tab portions engage the wall portions respectively for latching the child seat monitoring device within the interior region of the docking station . The rear wall further includes a plurality of apertures extending therethrough for receiving the plurality of electrical terminals therethrough. The electrical terminals electrically couple the child seat monitoring device to the sensors . Finally the rear wall further includes apertures extending therethrough for receiving screws not shown therein. The screws can be utilized to mount the docking station to the frame of the child seat . Of course other types of conventional coupling means can be utilized for mounting the docking station to the child seat .

During installation of the child seat monitoring device within the docking station the tab portions are initially disposed in the grooves respectively of the docking station proximate the wall portions respectively. Next the device is moved into the interior region of the docking station such that the latching members engage the wall portions respectively of the docking station .

During removal of the child seat monitoring device from the docking station the latching member are pushed upwardly to release the latching members from the wall portions respectively of the docking station . Next the device is moved outwardly from the interior region of the docking station such that the tab portions are removed from the grooves respectively.

An advantage of the child seat monitoring device is that the device can be removed from either of the docking stations. Also the device can be removed from a docking station and reprogrammed with a different software algorithm. For example the child seat monitoring device could initially be programmed to determine whether the child seat has been installed properly for holding a child having a weight in a range of 10 20 pounds. Thereafter the device could be removed from a docking station and reprogrammed to determine whether the child seat has been installed properly for holding a child having a weight in a range of 20 30 pounds. Of course many other parameters may be programmed into device .

Another advantage of the child seat monitoring device is that the device can be removed from a docking station for replacement of the battery .

Referring to the child seat monitoring system for determining whether the child restraint system has been installed properly on the vehicle seat based on child seat parameters is provided. For purposes of understanding a child seat parameter comprises any value or signal that indicates a functional characteristic of a child seat a sensor associated with the child seat or a device coupled to the child seat. For example a child seat parameter can comprise a signal or value indicating whether a seat belt coupled to a child seat is latched or a signal or value indicating whether a buckle harness on the child seat is latched. Further a predetermined installation parameter comprises any value or signal that represents a desired installation characteristic of a child seat. For example a predetermined installation parameter can comprise a latched condition of a seat belt or a latched condition of a buckle harness. The child seat monitoring system includes the child seat monitoring device a seat belt latch sensor a child seat latch sensor a buckle harness sensor and an incline sensor .

The seat belt latch sensor is provided to generate a signal indicating when a seat belt device coupled to the child restraint system is properly latched. The seat belt latch sensor is electrically coupled to the I O interface . When the CPU receives a signal from the sensor the CPU determines that the seat belt device has been properly latched. Otherwise the CPU determines that the seat belt device has not been properly latched and induces the LED to emit light.

The child seat latch sensor is provided to generate a signal indicating when a child seat is properly latched to the base portion . The child seat latch sensor is electrically coupled to the I O interface . When the CPU receives a signal from the sensor the CPU determines that the child seat has been properly latched to the base portion . Otherwise the CPU determines that the child seat has not been properly latched to the base portion and induces the LED to emit light.

The buckle harness sensor is provided to generate a signal indicating when a buckle harness not shown disposed between a child s legs is properly latched. The buckle harness sensor is electrically coupled to the I O interface . When the CPU receives a signal from the sensor the CPU determines that the buckle harness has been properly latched. Otherwise the CPU determines that the buckle harness has not been properly latched and induces the LED to emit light.

The incline sensor is provided to generate a signal indicating an orientation angle of the child seat . The incline sensor is electrically coupled to the I O interface . When a signal from the incline sensor indicates the child seat is disposed at an angle within a predetermined angular range the CPU determines that the child seat has been positioned at a proper orientation. Otherwise the CPU determines that the child seat has not been positioned at a proper orientation and induces the LED to emit light.

Referring again to the handle is coupled to the frame and is provided to allow a user to easily lift the child seat . The handle is constructed from a rigid polymeric material.

The base portion is provided to receive the child seat therein. The base portion has a shell constructed from a rigid polymeric material. The shell includes an aperture extending therethrough for receiving the seat belt webbing therethrough.

The child restraint system and the child seat monitoring device provide a substantial advantage over other systems and methods. In particular the child restraint system utilizes a child seat with a plurality of docking stations that are each configured to receive a child seat monitoring device. Thus a person can position the child seat monitoring device at one of the docking stations that can be best viewed by the person when installing the child restraint system on a vehicle seat to obtain visual feedback messages indicating whether the child restraint system has been properly installed.

As described above the child seat monitoring device can implement methods for monitoring installation of the child restraint system where the methods are embodied in the form of computer implemented methods and apparatuses for practicing those methods. In an exemplary embodiment the method is embodied in computer program code executed by one or more elements. The computer program code contains instructions embodied in tangible media such as floppy diskettes CD ROMs hard drives flash memory or any other computer readable storage medium.

While the invention has been described with reference to exemplary embodiments it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes may be made and equivalents may be substituted for elements thereof without departing from the scope of the invention. In addition many modifications may be made to adapt a particular situation or material to the teachings of the invention without departing from the essential scope thereof. Therefore it is intended that the invention not be limited to the particular embodiment disclosed for carrying out this invention but that the invention will include all embodiments falling within the scope of the appended claims. Moreover the use of the terms first second etc. do not denote any order or importance but rather the terms first second etc. are used to distinguish one element from another. Furthermore the use of the terms a an etc. do not denote a limitation of quantity but rather denote the presence of at least one of the referenced item.

