---

title: System and method for information handling system software registration code management
abstract: Registration codes associated with applications loaded on an information handling system are stored in a registration code table by a registration code module and retrieved for use when needed by an application to perform a restricted function, such as install or maintenance functions. The registration code table is populated at manufacture of the information handling system or automatically based on user preferences as a user inputs registration codes. The registration code table is secured with authentication information on the information handling system or, alternatively, at a network location accessible by the information handling system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07623684&OS=07623684&RS=07623684
owner: Dell Products, L.P.
number: 07623684
owner_city: Round Rock
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050719
---
The present invention relates in general to the field of information handling system software applications and more particularly to a system and method for information handling system software registration code management.

As the value and use of information continues to increase individuals and businesses seek additional ways to process and store information. One option available to users is information handling systems. An information handling system generally processes compiles stores and or communicates information or data for business personal or other purposes thereby allowing users to take advantage of the value of the information. Because technology and information handling needs and requirements vary between different users or applications information handling systems may also vary regarding what information is handled how the information is handled how much information is processed stored or communicated and how quickly and efficiently the information may be processed stored or communicated. The variations in information handling systems allow for information handling systems to be general or configured for a specific user or specific use such as financial transaction processing airline reservations enterprise data storage or global communications. In addition information handling systems may include a variety of hardware and software components that may be configured to process store and communicate information and may include one or more computer systems data storage systems and networking systems.

Information handling systems have tremendous flexibility in the tasks that they perform at least in part because of their ability to run a wide variety of software applications. Standardized operating system platforms such as WINDOWS and LINUX typically support the interaction of other types of software applications with information handling system components to perform desired tasks. For example the OFFICE suite of applications run on information handling systems over the WINDOWS operating system to perform word processing spreadsheet and presentation functions. Other common types of applications have functions varying from supporting networking such as virtual private networks to playing multimedia such as DVD movies and playing games such as chess. Application developers and information handlings system manufacturers generally try to have applications install and run on information handling systems in as seamless a manner as possible. In some instances information handling system manufacturers install applications as part of the manufacture process and provide support with purchased systems such user manuals and system recovery media. In other instances applications are sold separately for installation by a user from various media such as CDs DVDs and network locations.

One difficulty often faced by application developers is that individuals and businesses sometimes pirate applications both intentionally and unintentionally. Although a wide variety of security measures are available for reducing piracy or catching pirates the most simple piracy prevention tool is generally considered the securing of an application with a unique registration code typically known as a product identification code PIC or software registration code SRC . These registration codes are typically included with the user manual or on the physical medium that comes with an application or an information handling system having the application installed. When the user attempts to install or change an application such as with updates that require the use of a CD or a network download the user typically must have the registration code. In this manner the physical media included with the application is required to use the application since the registration code is associated with the physical media. This prevents widespread copying of an application for general public use however it also is viewed a nuisance by users especially if the physical media having the registration code is lost or misplaced. In such an event the user typically calls the application developer or information handling system manufacturer to attempt to get the application working.

Therefore a need has arisen for a system and method which manages information handling system software registration codes.

In accordance with the present invention a system and method are provided which substantially reduce the disadvantages and problems associated with previous methods and systems for managing information handling system software application registration codes. Software application registration codes associated with applications loaded on an information handling system are stored to be automatically accessible by the applications if needed to perform restricted functions.

More specifically a registration code module is stored on an information handling system to manage registration codes of applications loaded on the information handling system. An auto save module detects a user input of a registration code such as at installation of an application and saves the registration code to a registration code table according to predetermined parameters such as automatically without a separate user request or automatically with a user confirmation. In addition the registration code table is populated at manufacture of the information handling system with registration codes for applications loaded on the information handling system as part of the manufacture process. A registration API of the registration code module receives calls from applications when a registration code is needed and automatically provides the registration codes to the applications such as for application installations or maintenance. An import export interface supports communication by the registration code module through a network interface with a network location such as for remote storage of registration codes or for remote access for use by technical support to aid in information handling system maintenance.

The present invention provides a number of important technical advantages. One example of an important technical advantage is that users are less likely to lose the software application registration codes for applications associated with an information handling system. Automated saving of the registration codes under password protection reduces the amount of user interaction when registration codes are needed such as at install during maintenance or for communication with the support technicians. Inclusion of a registration code table at the time of manufacture of an information handling systems provides a secure electronic version for users and the manufacturer to reference. Networked based import to and export from a registration code table ensures an up to date reference source accessible by the manufacturer of the information handling system if a user needs technical support. Further in the event the user cannot access a registration code on an information handling system the user may use another information handling system to access the registration code through a network.

A registration code table stores software application registration codes associated with applications loaded on an information handling system. For purposes of this disclosure an information handling system may include any instrumentality or aggregate of instrumentalities operable to compute classify process transmit receive retrieve originate switch store display manifest detect record reproduce handle or utilize any form of information intelligence or data for business scientific control or other purposes. For example an information handling system may be a personal computer a network storage device or any other suitable device and may vary in size shape performance functionality and price. The information handling system may include random access memory RAM one or more processing resources such as a central processing unit CPU or hardware or software control logic ROM and or other types of nonvolatile memory. Additional components of the information handling system may include one or more disk drives one or more network ports for communicating with external devices as well as various input and output I O devices such as a keyboard a mouse and a video display. The information handling system may also include one or more buses operable to transmit communications between the various hardware components.

Referring now to a block diagram depicts an information handling system having application registration codes stored in a registration code table . Information handling system is built with a physical hardware layer having a plurality of processing components that process information such as a CPU a hard disk drive HDD RAM and a network interface card NIC . Above hardware layer a firmware layer coordinates the basic physical interaction of the processing components such as with a BIOS . An operating system layer includes an operating system such as WINDOWS or LINUX which supports the interaction of applications operating at an application layer . A registration code module resides at the operating system layer to manage the software application registration codes associated with information handling system such as operating system registration code SRCand application registration codes SRCthrough SRC. Registration code module manages registration codes in registration code table stored locally in hard disk drive stored remotely accessible through NIC and network such as the Internet at a distally located registration code server or stored in a removable medium such as a USB key. In alternative embodiments registration code module and registration code table may reside at other layers of information handling system such as application layer or firmware layer . In one embodiment registration code table is populated at manufacture of information handling system with the registration codes for applications loaded during imaging of information handling system so that the registration codes are electronically available to a user at delivery of a newly purchased system.

Referring now to a block diagram depicts a system for managing registration codes of applications loaded on an information handling system. Registration code module has an authentication module that provides password and user identification protection for access to the module such as with Passport for WINDOWS. An auto save module is configurable to save registration codes according to save preferences . For instance when auto save module detects that a user has input a software application registration code auto save module can automatically save the registration code to table without further input by the user can require confirmation to a prompt by the user before saving the registration code to table or can take no action. A registration application programming interface API is available for applications to call their registration code from table when the code is needed to perform a restricted function such as at installation or during maintenance. Alternatively an import export interface supports user interaction with registration code table to manually import and export registration codes. For instance when queried by an application for a registration code a registration code graphical user interface GUI is presented by import export interface to allow the user to copy the applicable registration code such as in a password protected zip containing a text XML or comma delimited file or as a text XML or comma delimited file. In addition the user may enter metadata fields through registration code GUI to describe applications or make notations. Import export interface also supports network communication of registration code information to allow for instance a manufacturer or third party to keep a duplicate of registration code table for aid in recovery of a failed information handling system. Thus for instance the user may retrieve codes for a failed system by connecting with the stored codes through the network using an operational system.

Referring now to a flow diagram depicts a process for managing registration codes of applications loaded on an information handling system. At step installation begins of an application that is supported by a registration code module. Information handling system interaction with the registration code module may be initiated by instructions within the application instructions within the operating system or instructions of a separate module that monitors application installation. At step a determination is made of whether a registration code module is installed on the information handling system. If not the process continues to step at which the registration code module is loaded onto the information handling system and step for the manual entry of the registration code to install the application. If at step the registration code module is detected already installed on the information handling system the process continues to step to begin the installation of the application. Once installation of the application is completed at step the process continues to step at which the application installer calls the registration API to register the code. At step the registration code module checks the user preferences for storing registration codes so that at step the registration code table is updated according to the user preferences. For instance updates can be made automatically can be made with or without user notification can be made with or without user confirmation can be automatically declined or can be automatically made to a network location such as at the manufacturer of the information handling system.

Although the present invention has been described in detail it should be understood that various changes substitutions and alterations can be made hereto without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims.

