---

title: Availability data service
abstract: Real time availability data (free/busy data) is provided for potential meeting attendees and/or assets. An availability service is queried for availability data for one or more attendees and/or meeting assets. The availability service determines the identity of an electronic mailbox server on which is stored current real time calendaring data for the desired attendees and/or assets. The requested data is retrieved by the availability service from one or more mailbox servers having data for each attendee and/or asset. Potential attendees may set permissions on their respective availability data to restrict the amount and types of data that may be retrieved by a given data requester. Data queries and data responses may be structured according to the Extensible Markup Language (XML) and application programming interfaces (API) may be exposed for allowing requesting applications to efficiently call the availability service for availability data.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07849102&OS=07849102&RS=07849102
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07849102
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051104
---
This patent application claims priority to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 60 714 680 filed Sep. 7 2005 and entitled Free Busy Service Outlook Exchange the disclosure of which is expressly incorporated herein in its entirety by reference.

Modern electronic calendaring systems allow users to manage calendar data such as meetings appointments holidays personal time and the like via an electronic calendar user interface in a manner similar to managing such data in a manual calendar except with all the added efficiencies expected from electronic systems such as the ability to easily enter and edit data and the ability to review data in a variety of different views for example daily views weekly views etc. One particular benefit of electronic calendaring systems is the ability to schedule meetings with one or more attendees and or assets e.g. conference rooms video teleconference equipment and the like based on free or busy data availability data that may be retrieved for desired meeting attendees and or assets before scheduling is performed. For example if a meeting organizer desires to set up a meeting with three attendees in a given conference room the organizer may request data as to when the desired attendees and conference room are available.

According to prior methods and systems availability data for potential attendees for example employees of a given organization and or availability data for organization assets for example conference rooms video teleconference equipment etc. is published on a periodic basis to one or more public data folders for access by meeting organizers calendaring applications. Unfortunately with such methods and systems the free busy availability data for potential attendees and or potential assets is only as good as the last publication of data to the public data folders. Thus the availability data is often out of date at the time a meeting organizer schedules a meeting. If the organizer schedules a meeting during a period in which the availability data is out of date the meeting may be scheduled based on erroneous availability data for one or more attendees or assets. As a result the meeting may not be attended by one or more persons and a desired asset may be in use by another party during the scheduled meeting. Additionally with such systems the ability to retrieve availability data is typically restricted to relatively short periods into the future and potential attendees have very little control over who may retrieve their availability data.

This summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the detailed description. This summary is not intended to identify key features or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

The present invention solves the above and other problems by providing methods systems and computer products for providing real time availability data free busy data for potential meeting attendees and or assets. According to an embodiment of the invention an availability service is queried for availability data for one or more attendees and or meeting assets. The availability service determines the identity of an electronic mailbox server on which is stored current real time calendaring data for the desired attendees and or assets. If the electronic mailbox for one or more attendees or assets is maintained on an electronic mailbox server associated with a different availability service the availability data query is passed from the first availability service to a second availability service associated with the appropriate mailbox server.

The requested data is retrieved by the availability service from the one or more mailbox servers having data for each attendee and or asset. According to one embodiment attendees may set permissions on their respective availability data to restrict the amount and types of data that may be retrieved by a given data requestor. Once requested availability is returned to the availability service from the appropriate mailbox server the availability service then forwards the returned availability data back to the requesting calendaring application for use in scheduling a meeting with the desired attendees and or assets.

According to another embodiment data queries and data responses sent and received between a requesting calendaring application and the availability services and one or more mailbox servers are formatted according to the Extensible Markup Language XML to allow data requests and retrieval to be more efficient. Additionally application programming interfaces API are exposed for allowing third party requesting applications to understand the formatting and layout of data requests and responses sent to and returned via the application services.

These and other features and advantages which characterize the present invention will be apparent from a reading of the following detailed description and a review of the associated drawings. It is to be understood that both the foregoing general description and the following detailed description are explanatory only and are not restrictive of the invention as claimed.

As briefly described above embodiments of the present invention are directed to methods systems and computer products for retrieving real time availability data free busy data via an availability service for use by a requesting calendaring application for scheduling meetings and or asset use with one or more meeting attendees and or assets. In the following detailed description references are made to the accompanying drawings that form a part hereof and in which are shown by way of illustrations specific embodiments or examples. These embodiments may be combined other embodiments may be utilized and structural changes may be made without departing from the spirit or scope of the present invention. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense and the scope of the present invention is defined by the appended claims and their equivalents.

Referring now to the drawings in which like numerals refer to like elements through the several figures aspects of the present invention and an exemplary computing operating environment will be described. and the following discussion are intended to provide a brief general description of a suitable computing environment in which the invention may be implemented. While the invention will be described in the general context of program modules that execute in conjunction with an application program that runs on an operating system on a personal computer those skilled in the art will recognize that the invention may also be implemented in combination with other program modules.

Generally program modules include routines programs components data structures and other types of structures that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention may be practiced with other computer system configurations including hand held devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

Embodiments of the invention may be implemented as a computer process method a computing system or as an article of manufacture such as a computer program product or computer readable media. The computer program product may be a computer storage media readable by a computer system and encoding a computer program of instructions for executing a computer process. The computer program product may also be a propagated signal on a carrier readable by a computing system and encoding a computer program of instructions for executing a computer process.

With reference to one exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a computing device such as computing device . In a basic configuration the computing device typically includes at least one processing unit and system memory . Depending on the exact configuration and type of computing device the system memory may be volatile such as RAM non volatile such as ROM flash memory etc. or some combination of the two. System memory typically includes an operating system suitable for controlling the operation of a networked personal computer such as the WINDOWS operating systems from MICROSOFT CORPORATION of Redmond Wash. The system memory may also include one or more software applications and may include program data . This basic configuration is illustrated in by those components within dashed line .

According to embodiments of the invention the application may comprise many types of software applications such as an electronic mail program a calendaring program an Internet browsing program and the like. An example of such programs is OUTLOOK manufactured by MICROSOFT CORPORATION. The application may include a number of other types software applications including a multiple functionality software application for providing many other types of functionalities. Such a multiple functionality application may include a number of program modules such as a word processing program a spreadsheet program a slide presentation program a database program and the like. An example of such a multiple functionality application is OFFICE manufactured by MICROSOFT CORPORATION. According to embodiments of the present invention the application is illustrative of any software application with which an electronic document including electronic mail messages may be created or edited and in which a lightweight information user interface may be utilized for providing information associated with a selected text item data item or other object in the electronic document.

The computing device may have additional features or functionality. For example the computing device may also include additional data storage devices removable and or non removable such as for example magnetic disks optical disks or tape. Such additional storage is illustrated in by removable storage and non removable storage . Computer storage media may include volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. System memory removable storage and non removable storage are all examples of computer storage media. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computing device . Any such computer storage media may be part of device . Computing device may also have input device s such as keyboard mouse pen voice input device touch input device etc. Output device s such as a display speakers printer etc. may also be included. These devices are well known in the art and need not be discussed at length here.

The computing device may also contain communication connections that allow the device to communicate with other computing devices such as over a network in a distributed computing environment for example an intranet or the Internet. Communication connection is one example of communication media. Communication media may typically be embodied by computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. The term computer readable media as used herein includes both storage media and communication media.

According to embodiments the availability service is a software application having sufficient computer executable instructions for receiving an availability data query from the application and for passing the availability data query to one or more mailbox servers for obtaining real time availability data for one or more potential attendees and or assets. As described below the availability service is further operative to pass an availability data query to an alternate availability service if data requested by a given data query is located on an alternate mailbox server that is accessible from an alternate availability service . According to this embodiment when data is returned from the alternate mailbox server to the alternate availability service the data is then passed back to the first or requesting availability service for ultimate transmission back to the requesting application .

The mailbox servers are software applications having sufficient computer executable instructions for receiving and storing electronic mail data calendar data availability state data free busy data contacts data tasks data and the like for one or more persons potential attendees and or assets. For example a given mailbox server may be operated by an organization for storing receiving and sending electronic mail data including calendaring data and asset utilization data for persons and assets associated with and operated or maintained by the organization.

A client access server not shown in may also be provided which is a software application having sufficient computer executable instructions for allowing access to electronic mail and calendaring data by client side electronic mail and calendaring applications operated by permitted users of an associated mailbox server. That is the client access server operates as a conduit from individual client electronic mail and calendaring applications to mailbox servers at which electronic mail and calendaring information may be stored. As should be appreciated according to embodiments of the present invention the availability service may take the place of a client access server for allowing availability data to be retrieved from a given mailbox server by a client application .

According to embodiments of the invention each of the availability services the mailbox servers and the client access server may operate as independent applications that are co located on a single operating platform for example a single server . An example of such a single operating platform for co locating and operating the availability services mailbox servers and client access servers is EXCHANGE manufactured by MICROSOFT CORPORATION of Redmond Wash. Alternatively each of the availability service mailbox server or client access server may be operated on separate operating platforms for example separate servers where separate components may access each other as described herein via a distributed computing network . For example as described below an availability data query received at a first availability service may be passed to a second or alternate availability service operating on a different platform or server if availability data responsive to the query is associated with the second availability service. Alternatively a number of mailbox servers or different instances of a single mailbox server may be co located on a single server platform and a different operating instance of a single availability service may be programmed for retrieving data from each mailbox server .

As should be appreciated the meeting request may be prepared using a meeting request user interface of the application with which the organizer may enter the desired names identifications of the desired attendees or with which the organizer may select the desired attendees from a directory of potential attendees and assets maintained by the organizer s organization or institution. At resolution block after submitting the meeting request to determine whether each of the potential attendees may be scheduled at a desired meeting time the application resolves the attendees against a directory of persons and or assets to determine whether the entered names and or identifications are accurate. For example if the meeting organizer manually types the name of a desired attendee into a user interface of the application and the organizer misspells the name of one of the potential attendees the organizer may be presented with an error that the entered potential attendee is not located in a directory of potential attendees to which the organizer may send meeting requests.

At send operation the application passes an availability data query free busy data query to the availability service for retrieving availability data for each of the desired meeting attendees. That is the data query passed from the application is for purposes of determining whether the desired meeting attendees are free nothing presently scheduled or busy a meeting or other appointment currently scheduled at the desired meeting time. As should be appreciated if it is determined that one or more of the desired attendees are busy at the desired meeting time the meeting organizer may select an alternate meeting time for the desired meeting. That is the availability service provides the organizer with free busy information to allow the organizer to make decisions about when to schedule a meeting.

At determination operation the availability service receives the availability data query from the application and determines whether it is associated with a mailbox server containing the names identifications for the desired meeting attendees. According to an embodiment the availability service parses the list of desired attendees and or assets received in the data query to determine what mailbox server contains electronic mail and or calendaring data for each of the referenced attendees. According to one embodiment the application service compares the desired attendees against a list of persons and or assets in an information directory that identifies persons and or assets of a given organization and that identifies a mailbox server on which electronic mail and calendaring information for those persons and or assets is maintained. An example of such an information directory includes Active Directory manufactured by MICROSOFT CORPORATION. As should be appreciated any number of databases of persons and or assets may be utilized for storing information such as mailbox server location associated with given persons and or assets and may be queried by an application service as described herein.

If the availability service determines that availability data for one or more of the desired attendees is located on a mailbox server not associated with the receiving availability service the availability service may pass the data query to an alternate availability service associated with the alternate mailbox server on which information for one or more of the desired attendees is maintained. As should be appreciated information for one or more of the desired attendees may be maintained on one mailbox server and availability information for a second one or more of the desired attendees may be maintained on an alternate mailbox server operated by a different organization to which the second one or more desired attendees assets belong.

As described above each of the availability service and alternate availability service may be separate instances of a single availability service operated by a single organization for retrieving availability data from different mailbox servers or different instances of single mailbox server associated with different entities within a single organization. For example a first availability service and associated mailbox server may be operated for a manufacturing division of an organization and an alternate availability service and mailbox server may be operated for a different division of the same organization for example a sales division. The first availability service may determine an identification for an alternate availability service associated with an alternate mailbox server on which desired information is maintained from an information directory that associates information on desired meeting attendees with a given mailbox server and an associated alternate availability service .

At data retrieval operation the availability service determines whether the meeting organizer has permissions to retrieve the requested availability data for the desired attendee or asset as described below. If the organizer has the appropriate permissions the availability data query is sent to the mailbox server by one of the associated availability services and availability data free busy data for the referenced attendees is retrieved. For example if the meeting request is for Tuesday at 2 30 p.m. the availability data query will retrieve from the mailbox servers data for each of the referenced attendees assets for determining whether each of the referenced attendees and or assets are free or busy on Tuesday at 2 30 p.m.

According to embodiments of the present invention individual persons potential attendees may set data retrieval permissions on their individual calendar data that will restrict the types of availability data that may be retrieved. Likewise permissions may be set for restricting the types of availability data that may be retrieved for a given organization asset for example video teleconference equipment . As should be appreciated calendaring data maintained by a given person may be data that is considered private or otherwise sensitive information. For example a given person may desire that availability data may not be obtained for her during a period in which she is conducting meetings regarding sensitive information. Or a given person may limit or restrict the retrieval of availability data beyond a certain time in the future. For example a given person may desire that no availability data from her calendar be available beyond six months from the current date. Similarly an organization may restrict access to certain organization assets to certain requesting meeting organizers or for certain periods of time.

An individual potential attendee or an administrator for organization assets may set permissions on availability data via a user interface operated by a client calendaring application . As should be appreciated according to this embodiment an organization administrator may set certain restrictions and or limitations on retrievable availability data for all potential meeting attendees of a given organization and or for all available assets of an organization or the administrator may set different types of information retrieval permissions for different persons or classes of persons and or assets.

Because the availability data for requested attendees is being retrieved by the availability services from the mailbox servers on which availability information for various persons and or assets is maintained the information is real time as of the time the data query is received at the mailbox server . That is the mailbox servers contain real time calendaring information entered by or for each potential attendee for a given organization as opposed to a periodically published snapshot of availability information. Thus the difficulty of receiving out of date availability data as is the case with prior methods and systems is avoided.

At return operation availability data responsive to the availability data query is returned to the availability service from the mailbox server . Alternatively if the availability data is returned from an alternate mailbox server the data is returned to the alternate availability service and is then forwarded to the requesting availability service . The availability data responsive to the data query is then passed from the availability service back to the requesting application . At meeting setup operation the requesting application utilizes the returned availability data to determine whether the desired meeting may be established at the date and time requested by the meeting organizer. That is if all desired attendees and or assets are available at the requested meeting date and time then a meeting may be established for the desired attendees and or assets at the requested date and time. However if the returned availability data indicates that one or more of the desired attendees are busy at the requested meeting time then the process described herein may be repeated for determining availability data for the desired attendees at a different meeting time.

As should be appreciated according to embodiments of the present invention a user interface may be provided by the application to allow the meeting organizer to request availability data for each of the potential attendees for a lengthy period into the future so that the meeting organizer may schedule a meeting at a date and time that is available for all desired attendees. That is the organizer is not required to submit a particular date and time to determine if all desired attendees and or assets are available at that particular date and time followed by a second request for a second potential date and time if the first date and time are not available for all desired attendees. The organizer may utilize embodiments of the present invention to see availability data for each of the desired attendees and or assets for a given period of time for example the next six months so that the meeting organizer may select a desired meeting date and time from the returned availability data. The routine illustrated in ends at termination block .

According to embodiments of the present invention the data queries and responses sent between the components described above including the availability data queries sent from the application to the mailbox servers via the availability services and the responsive data returned to the requesting application from the availability services is structured according to a self describing language such as the Extensible Markup Language XML for enhancing the efficiency with which the components may operate on the data queries or responses. As is well known to those skilled in the art the Extensible Markup Language allows data to be formatted and structured such that components of the data may be identified according to self describing markup tags. For example an availability data query according to embodiments of the present invention may be passed between the components described in as an XML structured message where each component of the message is associated with a self describing markup tag. For example meeting time may be associated with a meeting time tag meeting date may be associated with a meeting date tag an attendee may be associated with an attendee tag a desired asset may be associated with an asset tag and the like.

An XML schema file may be associated with the XML structured data query that defines the XML grammar syntax and definitions associated with the XML structured data query. That is the XML schema file associated with the data query defines the meaning of each of the XML tags applied to the data query. Thus any receiving component for example the availability service or individual mailbox servers may utilize the data query according to the XML structure in accordance with the definitions applied to the query according to the XML schema file. Thus any receiving or utilizing component of the data query that is operable to consume XML may read and utilize the data query based on the associated XML schema file.

According to this embodiment if an alternate availability service and alternate mailbox server are operated by an organization different from the meeting organizer where the alternate availability service and alternate mailbox server are operated according to different or perhaps incompatible computer programming and operating systems from the meeting organizer s systems the alternate availability service and alternate mailbox server may nonetheless read and respond to the data query if the alternate availability service and alternate mailbox server are operable to consume XML according to an associated XML schema file. For example if the desired attendee names and desired meeting times are associated with XML tags that are defined by the associated XML schema file the receiving alternate availability service and receiving alternate mailbox server according to the present example may understand the data that is requested by the data query by extracting the attendee names and meeting times from the data query by locating that data in the data query according to the XML tags associated with that data in the query and defined for that data by the associated XML schema file. Likewise availability data returned from the availability services and the mailbox servers may be structured according to the Extensible Markup Language for passing back to the application to allow the application to more efficiently read and understand the returned data.

According to another embodiment one or more application programming interfaces API may be exposed for allowing one or more calendaring applications to obtain availability data from the mailbox servers via the availability services described herein. Thus each requesting application including third party calendar applications is not required to develop separate methods for retrieving data from the appropriate mailbox servers. For example an application programming interface such as GetCalendarViews may be made available to requesting applications for querying one or more mailbox servers via the availability services as described above. A number of parameters may be passed with the API for requesting different amounts and types of data. For example one parameter may identify a potential attendee or asset by electronic mailbox address. Another parameter may specify a time period during which availability data is requested. Other parameters may be used for filtering the data that is returned in response to the query based on one or more filtering properties.

As described herein methods and systems are provided for retrieving real time availability data for one or more potential meeting attendees or assets. It will be apparent to those skilled in the art that various modifications or variations may be made in the present invention without departing from the scope or spirit of the invention. Other embodiments of the present invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from consideration of the specification and practice of the invention disclosed herein.

