---

title: Vehicle seat having active head restraint system
abstract: A vehicle seat assembly that includes a seatback frame and an active head restraint system. The active head restraint system includes a head restraint adapted to move between an upright position and an operative position relative to the seatback frame in response to an input force applied to the active head restraint system. The head restraint is biased to resist movement away from the upright position and toward the operative position. Also, the resistance to movement of the head restraint decreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07393052&OS=07393052&RS=07393052
owner: Lear Corporation
number: 07393052
owner_city: Southfield
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050608
---
The following is a continuation in part application of U.S. Ser. No. 10 950 713 filed Sep. 27 2004 and entitled VEHICLE SEAT HAVING ACTIVE HEAD RESTRAINT SYSTEM. 

The present invention relates generally to a vehicle seat and more specifically to a vehicle seat having an active head restraint system.

Conventional vehicle seat designs of the type commonly found in the related art typically include a seatback assembly a lower seat assembly recliner mechanism manual or power adjustment mechanism for adjusting a number of positions of either the seatback or lower seat assemblies as well as a number of safety features including occupant restraint devices such as seatbelts. The seatback assembly also includes a headrest or head restraint that is typically mounted at the top or upper end of the seatback.

In the context of vehicle seating design there is an ongoing effort to improve the safety of the vehicle occupant in the event of a rear end collision. More specifically there continues to be an ongoing effort to provide safety mechanisms that reduce the chance of injury in the region of the passengers neck. In the event of a rear end collision the occupant is forced against the seat and can experience a large energy pulse. In such circumstances the pelvis lumbar and shoulder or thoracic areas of the occupant can exert force on the seatback and there is often a separation between the neck and head areas of the occupant and the head restraint. Depending on the force of the rear end collision this separation can be quickly and violently closed by movement of the upper torso neck and head of the passenger toward the seatback in an event commonly known as whiplash. Thus there has been an ongoing effort to address this problem in the context of vehicle seating safety.

In the past the head restraint was a relatively static device that was typically moveable up and down or slightly tiltable but usually in connection with adjustments made for the comfort of any given occupant of the seat during normal driving conditions. However in order to address the problems encountered during a rear end collision dynamic or active head restraint mechanisms have been proposed in the related art.

For example U.S. Pat. No. 5 938 279 issued to Schubring et al. and assigned to the assignee of the present invention discloses a dynamic vehicle head restraint assembly that is designed to reduce the amount of separation between the occupant and the head restraint in the event of a rear end collision. The head restraint assembly includes an impact or target plate that is supported by the seatback frame in the general area corresponding to the thoracic or shoulder region of the occupant. The impact plate is pivotally mounted to a linkage that is connected to the head restraint. In the event of a rear end collision the force of the occupant on the target plate actuates the linkage to cause the head restraint to move toward the head of the occupant thereby reducing the amount of separation between the occupant and the seatback.

While the dynamic head restraint systems of the type known in the related art were an improvement over the previously known static head restraints there remains a need in the art to better absorb and dissipate the energy generated by the force acting on the seatback in the event of a rear end collision especially at the pelvic and lumbar areas which are generally remote from the head restraint.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 565 150 assigned to the assignee of the present invention discloses a vehicle seat having an active head restraint that is designed to address this problem. More specifically the seat has a pivotal support assembly that is mounted to the seatback frame and is operatively connected to the head restraint such that the head restraint moves toward the occupant in the event of a rear end collision. The pivotal support assembly includes a lower impact target that is located in the pelvic and lumbar regions to dissipate the forces that are first translated to the seatback in this area. The lower target is operatively connected to a reaction plate that is pivotally mounted to the seatback. In turn the head restraint is mounted to the reaction plate.

While the dynamic head restraint systems known in the related art have generally worked for their intended purposes and have improved safety there remains a need in the art for a vehicle seat assembly that more efficiently and more quickly transfers forces from the occupant to the head restraint system for more effective actuation of the head restraint toward the occupant during a collision. There also remains a need in the art for a vehicle seat assembly with an active head restraint system that is less expensive lighter and easier to assemble.

The disadvantages of the related art are overcome in a vehicle seat assembly that includes a seatback frame and an active head restraint system. The active head restraint system includes a head restraint adapted to move between an upright position and an operative position relative to the seatback frame in response to an input force applied to the active head restraint system. The head restraint is biased to resist movement away from the upright position and toward the operative position. Also the resistance to movement of the head restraint decreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position.

Because resistance to movement of the head restraint decreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position the head restraint is less likely to move toward the operative position when the occupant applies low levels of force to the active head restraint system. However when the occupant applies force above a predetermined level the head restraint moves more easily and more quickly toward the operative position for improved support of the occupant s head and neck area. Also the head restraint is more likely to remain in the operative position for a longer period of time once the head restraint begins moving toward the operative position. Accordingly the active head restraint system supports the occupant s head and neck area more effectively especially in the event of a rear end vehicular impact.

Referring now to the drawings where like numerals are used to designate like structure throughout the Figures a vehicle seat assembly of the present invention is generally indicated at in . The vehicle seat assembly includes a seatback generally indicated at and a lower seat assembly generally indicated at that is supported on a seat track mechanism as is commonly known in the art. The seatback may be pivotally connected to the lower seat assembly by means of a bracket via pivot point that forms a part of the seat track mechanism . In this way the vehicle seat assembly may be adapted to recline or adjust in a number of ways that are commonly known in the art. In addition to these common elements the seat assembly of the present invention may include various controls and restraint systems such as seatbelts etc. that are not shown but that are well known in the art.

An occupant generally indicated at is shown in phantom seated upon the vehicle seat assembly . The occupant has a pelvic area which is proximate to both the lower seat assembly and to the lower end of the seatback . The occupant also has a lumbar area supported above the pelvic area and a shoulder or thoracic area supported above the lumbar area . Furthermore the occupant has a head and neck area supported above the thoracic area .

The vehicle seat assembly also includes an active head restraint system generally indicated at operatively supported by the seatback . The active head restraint system includes a head restraint proximate to the head and neck area of the occupant . The head restraint is adapted to move between an upright position shown in solid in and an operative position shown in phantom in wherein the head restraint is pivoted forward and upward relative to the seatback toward the head and neck area of the occupant . The operative position is broadly defined as any position of the head restraint away from the upright position. In the event of a rear end collision the forces that are generated can cause the occupant to be driven generally rearward toward the seatback . As will be described in greater detail below input forces from the occupant on the seatback are transferred through the active head restraint system to ultimately move the head restraint from the upright position to the operative position toward the head and neck area of the occupant . This movement of the head restraint better supports the head and neck area of the occupant during the rear end collision reducing the likelihood of a whiplash injury.

Referring to the seatback of the vehicle seat assembly is shown in more detail. The vehicle seat assembly includes a seatback frame generally indicated at . The seatback frame includes a pair of side frame members that are disposed in a generally vertical orientation and are spaced horizontally relative to one another. The seatback frame also includes upper and lower cross members respectively that extend horizontally between the pair of side frame members . As such the seatback frame defines a forward side and a rearward side of the seatback . The seatback frame may have a unibody construction wherein the side frame members as well as the upper And lower cross member are integrally formed. In addition the seatback frame may be assembled from separate components making up the side frame members and upper and lower cross members that are then welded or otherwise permanently fixed to each other. Thus and from the description that follows those having ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that a number of different means of operatively interconnecting the components of the seatback frame may be employed without departing from the scope of the present invention.

As shown in the active head restraint system generally includes an upper armature generally indicated at and a lower armature generally indicated at . The upper armature is moveably mounted to the seatback frame so as to be disposed proximate the upper cross member of the seatback frame . The head restraint is mounted to the upper armature so as to be disposed proximate to the head and neck area of the occupant . Also the lower armature is disposed below and is operatively attached to the upper armature so as to be disposed proximate to the pelvic lumbar and thoracic areas of the occupant . As will be described in greater detail below the lower armature is operable to act on and move the upper armature in response to an input force applied to the lower armature to thereby move the head restraint away from the upright position and toward the operative position. For instance in the embodiment shown the lower armature is operable to move toward and act upon the upper armature in response to a predetermined input force applied to the lower armature to thereby move the head restraint toward the occupant . In the embodiment shown the lower armature is also operable to move toward the rearward side of the seatback in response to a predetermined input force applied to the lower armature and act upon the upper armature to move the head restraint toward the occupant .

As shown in the lower armature includes a pelvic support mechanism disposed proximate to the pelvic area of the occupant a lumbar support mechanism disposed proximate to the lumbar area of the occupant and a thoracic support mechanism disposed proximate to the thoracic area of the occupant . In the event of a rear end collision the occupant will exert forces on the lower armature . If these forces exceed a predetermined level the lower armature transfers the forces to pivot the upper armature thereby moving the head restraint toward the head and neck area of the occupant . Specifically forces from the pelvic area of the occupant transfer to the pelvic support mechanism forces from the lumbar area of the occupant transfer to the lumbar support mechanism and forces from the thoracic area of the occupant transfer to the thoracic support mechanism . As will be described in greater detail below the pelvic lumbar and thoracic support mechanisms cooperatively transfer the forces to pivot the upper armature thereby moving the head restraint toward the head and neck area of the occupant . As such the head and neck area of the occupant is better supported during a rear end collision.

One embodiment of the upper armature is illustrated in . The upper armature includes a cross bar and a plurality of posts . The cross bar is disposed horizontally and the posts are spaced on the cross bar and extend vertically therefrom. The head restraint is mounted to an upper end of each post such that movement of the cross bar coincidentally moves the posts and head restraint . The head restraint can be rigidly mounted to the upper end of the posts or the head restraint could be moveably mounted to the posts in a known manner to allow the head restraint to be tilted raised and or lowered relative to the posts without departing from the scope of the invention.

The upper armature also includes at least one and preferably a plurality of linkages shown in and . In the embodiment shown there are linkages rigidly mounted to opposite ends of the cross bar . The linkages can be rigidly mounted to the cross bar in any suitable manner such as welds fasteners or the like. Each linkage is also pivotally mounted to the seatback frame at pivot point . For instance in the embodiment shown the seatback frame includes a plurality of L shaped brackets each rigidly mounted to one of the side frame members and each linkage is pivotally connected to one of the L shaped brackets . The linkages can be attached to the L shaped brackets by fasteners bearings or the like. As such the linkages moveably and pivotally attach the upper armature to the seatback frame at the pivot points . Each of the linkages is also attached to the lower armature in a manner to be described and this attachment allows forces from the lower armature to transfer to the upper armature thereby moving the head restraint toward the head and neck area of the occupant .

The head restraint of the upper armature is biased to resist movement away from the upright position and toward the operative position. For this purpose the vehicle seat assembly further includes at least one and preferably a plurality of biasing members and in the embodiment shown. Each biasing member is operatively attached to one of the linkages and the seatback frame . The biasing member is a coiled extension spring in the embodiment shown but the biasing member could be any other suitable member such as a torsion spring without departing from the scope of the invention. In the embodiment shown each linkage includes an L shaped bracket . One end of each biasing member is operatively attached to the bracket at an attachment point as shown in . For instance the biasing member is operatively attached to the bracket through an aperture at attachment point as shown in . The opposite end of each biasing member is mounted to the side frame member in any suitable manner. The biasing members bias the upper armature toward the upright position. Thus the biasing members are operative to provide resistance to movement of the head restraint away from the upright position and toward the operative position. As will be described in greater detail below when the lower armature causes the head restraint to move from the upright position to the operative position toward the head and neck area of the occupant the biasing members return the head restraint back to the upright position.

Referring specifically to one embodiment of the lower armature is shown. The lower armature includes an impact body generally indicated at . The impact body is generally planar but can be of any suitable shape without departing from the scope of the invention. The impact body is disposed toward the forward side of the seatback and is oriented generally vertical. The impact body can be made out of any suitable material and in one preferred embodiment the impact body is made out of a flexible material such that the impact body is comfortable for the occupant to sit against. In the embodiment shown the impact body includes an upper end disposed proximate to the lumbar area and a lower end disposed proximate to the pelvic area of the occupant . The impact body is moveable in relation to the seatback frame . As will be described in greater detail below force from the occupant generated during a rear end collision is transferred to the upper armature via the impact body .

As stated above the lower armature includes a lumbar support mechanism that acts to transfer force from the lumbar area of the occupant to the upper armature . In the embodiment shown the lumbar support mechanism includes a linkage shown in . The linkage is operatively mounted to the impact body such that force from the occupant transfers into the linkage . To this end the lumbar support mechanism further includes a mounting bracket generally indicated at in . The mounting bracket is operatively mounted to the impact body and the linkage is operatively mounted to the mounting bracket . More specifically the linkage is a bent rigid rod that is disposed behind the impact body . The mounting bracket is a bent elongate sheet that is disposed between the linkage and the impact body . The linkage defines a middle section which is straight and extends generally perpendicular to each of the side frame members and two end sections each of which extend from the middle section toward the forward side of the vehicle seat assembly . The mounting bracket defines a middle section which is straight and extends generally perpendicular to each of the side frame members and two end sections each of which are generally U shaped. The mounting bracket also includes a plurality of attachment members each of which extend from the respective end section and wrap around the middle section of the linkage as shown in . Preferably the attachment members pivotally mount the linkage to the mounting bracket . Furthermore the mounting bracket is operatively mounted to the impact body in a manner to be described such that forces from the occupant transfer through the impact body through the mounting bracket through the linkage and to the upper armature thereby moving the head restraint toward the head and neck area of the occupant .

In one embodiment the mounting bracket can also be used for mounting other components within the vehicle seat assembly . In the embodiment shown the vehicle seat assembly includes a plurality of motors shown in phantom that are mounted to the mounting bracket . The motors are operable to adjust the height and curvature of the impact body for increased comfort of the vehicle seat assembly . Those having ordinary skill in the art will appreciate however that the impact body could be nonadjustable suspension system without departing from the scope of the invention.

Also as mentioned above the lower armature includes a thoracic support mechanism for transferring force from the thoracic area of the occupant to the upper armature . In the embodiment shown in and the thoracic support mechanism includes a crossbar generally indicated at . The crossbar extends horizontally between the side frame members and the crossbar defines a middle section and two end sections . The middle section of the crossbar is disposed proximate to the rearward side of the seatback and the end sections extend from the middle section toward the forward side of the vehicle seat assembly proximate to the side frame members . The crossbar can be made from an elongate plate.

In the embodiment shown the thoracic support mechanism also includes at least one and preferably a plurality of enlarged portions . Each of the enlarged portions are generally flat and rectangular and are mounted on one of the end sections of the crossbar by welding or other suitable method. Forces from the occupant especially from the thoracic area of the occupant transfer to the crossbar and to the upper armature in a manner to be described in greater detail below. The enlarged portions have an increased surface area so as to provide a larger impact area especially near the shoulders of the occupant .

The lower armature also includes at least one and preferably a plurality of couplers generally indicated at in and . Each of the couplers is operatively mounted to the upper armature . At least one of the couplers interconnects the lumbar support mechanism and the upper armature so as to transfer force from the lumbar support mechanism to the upper armature . Likewise at least one of the couplers interconnects the thoracic support mechanism and the upper armature so as to transfer force from the thoracic support mechanism to the upper armature . In the embodiment shown the couplers are common to both the lumbar and thoracic support mechanisms such that the same couplers interconnect both the lumbar and thoracic support mechanisms to the upper armature . However those having ordinary skill the art will appreciate that a coupler could connect the lumbar support mechanism to the upper armature and a separate coupler could connect the lumbar support mechanism to the upper armature without departing from the scope of the invention. As will be described in greater detail below the couplers are operable to move toward the rearward side of the seatback in response to a predetermined force applied to the impact body and or the crossbar and in so doing the couplers act on the upper armature to move the head restraint toward the occupant .

In the embodiment shown the couplers are each disposed adjacent and are generally parallel to respective side frame members . The couplers each include an upper member and a lower member and each is flat and elongate. The lower member is pivotally mounted to the side frame member at pivot point . The upper member is pivotally mounted to the lower member at pivot point . The upper member is pivotally mounted to the linkage of the upper armature at coupling point as shown in . As such the lower armature is operatively attached to the upper armature at the coupling points . The pivoting movement of pivot points and coupling points is achieved via fasteners bearings or other suitable means.

Each end of the crossbar and each enlarged portion of the thoracic support mechanism are attached via welds or other suitable means to one of the upper members of the respective coupler . Likewise the end sections of the linkage of the lumbar support mechanism are mounted within corresponding apertures in the upper members of the respective coupler as shown in . As such forces transfer from the lumbar and thoracic support mechanisms to actuate the couplers thereby pivoting the upper armature as will be described in greater detail below.

As mentioned above the lower armature includes a pelvic support mechanism for transferring force from the pelvic area of the occupant to the upper armature . In the embodiment shown the pelvic support mechanism includes at least one transfer rod generally indicated at in . The transfer rod includes a lower cross bar and at least one and preferably a plurality of linking rods . The lower cross bar is disposed horizontally and extends between the two side frame members and the linking rods are mounted to the cross bar by welding or other suitable manner and extend vertically therefrom toward the upper armature . The linking rods are spaced horizontally away from each other. As shown in the mounting bracket includes a plurality of mounting members which extend from the middle section of the mounting bracket and wrap around one of the linking rods for fixed attachment. The transfer rod is also operatively mounted to the impact body . For instance in the embodiment shown the impact body includes a plurality of apertures through which the linking rods of the transfer rod extend. One set of apertures is disposed on the lower end of the impact body as shown in and another set of apertures is disposed on the upper end of the impact body as shown in . Each linking rod extends through one aperture of each set of apertures . The transfer rod is also operatively mounted to the upper armature . More specifically in the embodiment shown the upper armature includes a plurality of tabs . The tabs are mounted to the crossbar of the upper armature and extend toward the forward side of the vehicle seat assembly. The tabs each include an aperture and the linking rods each extend through one of the apertures . In the embodiment shown the tabs include a bushing such that the linking rods can more easily move within the apertures . Also each of the linking rods includes a bend included proximate and below the corresponding tab as shown in . The bend abuts against the corresponding tab as the transfer rod moves upward. As will be described the transfer rod is operable to move toward and act upon the upper armature in response to a predetermined force applied to the impact body to move the head restraint toward the occupant .

The vehicle seat assembly further includes at least one and preferably a plurality of ramps as shown in . Each ramp is mounted to the lower cross member of the seatback frame behind the lower end of the impact body . Each ramp also includes at least one cam surface extending generally upward toward the upper armature . In the embodiment shown each ramp includes a first cam surface that is in communication with a second cam surface . The first cam surface is disposed nearer the lower cross member in comparison with the second cam surface . The first cam surface extends from the forward side and toward the rearward side of the seatback and from the lower cross member toward the upper armature and the second cam surface extends upward toward the upper armature and is generally parallel to the side frame members . Those having ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the ramp can include any number of cam surfaces oriented in any manner toward the upper armature without departing from the scope of the invention. Both ends of the lower crossbar of the transfer rod are slidably supported within the ramp on the cam surfaces for guided upward and rearward movement thereon. As such the lower crossbar of the transfer rod moves toward the upper armature on said cam surfaces in response to a predetermined force applied to the impact body . In the preferred embodiment shown in the cam surfaces are enclosed by the corresponding ramp to retain the lower crossbar within the ramps . The transfer rod can include retainers not shown such as washers fixed to the lower crossbar that abut against the ramps to further retain the lower crossbar therein.

In operation of the pelvic support mechanism a rear end collision causes the occupant to apply a force to the impact body and the impact body coincidentally moves toward the rearward side of the seatback . This movement causes the impact body to abut against the transfer rod especially at the lower end of the impact body where the linking rods are mounted to the impact body . This abutment moves the lower crossbar of the transfer rod within the ramps on the cam surfaces for guided upward movement of the transfer rod toward the upper armature . More specifically the lower crossbar initially moves upward and rearward on the first cam surface and if the impact is sufficient the lower crossbar subsequently moves upward on the second cam surface . This movement causes the bends of the linking rods to abut against the tabs of the upper armature thereby pivoting the upper armature and ultimately moving the head restraint toward the head and neck area of the occupant . Those having ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the ramps and the impact body could be disposed anywhere in the seatback such that input forces from any area of the occupant including the lumbar and thoracic areas could cause the lower armature to move upward toward and act upon the upper armature to thereby move the head restraint to move toward the occupant .

Movement of the impact body also actuates the lumbar support mechanism . More specifically movement of the impact body moves the mounting bracket and the linkage toward the rearward side of the seat back thereby pulling the couplers toward the rearward side of the seatback . The couplers in turn pull the linkages of the upper armature and cause the upper armature to pivot about the pivot points thereby pivoting the upper armature and ultimately moving the head restraint toward the head and neck area of the occupant .

Additionally force from the occupant actuates the thoracic support mechanism . More specifically force from the occupant applied to the crossbar and enlarged portions causes movement of the coupler toward the rearward side of the seatback thereby pivoting the upper armature and ultimately moving the head restraint toward the head and neck area of the occupant .

The biasing members return the upper support armature to the upright position. The biasing members also inhibit the upper armature from unnecessarily moving when lower levels of force are applied from the occupant such as when the occupant leans back in the vehicle seat assembly . Preferably the stiffness of the biasing members is adjusted such that only forces exceeding a predetermined level will cause the lower armature to actuate the upper armature . The predetermined level of force is preferably selected based upon the forces involved in an average rear end collision.

Each of the pelvic lumbar and thoracic support mechanisms act cooperatively to pivot the upper armature thereby causing the head restraint to move toward the head and neck area of the occupant for improved support of the head and neck area of the occupant during a rear end collision. Those having ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the kinematics of the vehicle seat assembly allows the pelvic lumbar and thoracic support mechanisms to operate cooperatively. For instance the coupling points are disposed relative to the pivot points specifically below and rearward of the pivot points such that generally rearward movement of the couplers cause rotation of the upper armature . Likewise the tabs of the upper armature are disposed forward of the crossbar and rearward of the pivot points such that generally upward movement of the transfer rod causes rotation of the upper armature . Also those having ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the vehicle seat assembly could include only one or two of the pelvic lumbar and thoracic support mechanisms without departing from the scope of the invention.

Thus the vehicle seat assembly of the present invention provides an active head restraint system that is more responsive to forces that are imparted to the seatback by the occupant . The vehicle seat assembly more efficiently and more quickly transfers forces from the occupant to the head restraint for more effective actuation of the head restraint toward the occupant thereby better supporting the occupant during a rear end collision. Finally the vehicle seat assembly of the present invention addresses these specific problems in a system that is relatively efficient lightweight robust and cost effective.

As described above the head restraint is biased to resist movement away from the upright position and toward the operative position. In the preferred embodiment the resistance to movement of the head restraint decreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position as will be explained in connection with . illustrates only one side of the vehicle seat assembly and only one linkage biasing member coupler etc. is shown. The following discussion will refer to the mechanics of the components shown on that side of the seat assembly . However it should be appreciated that the following discussion could equally apply to similar components on the opposite side of the seat assembly . Also the head restraint is not illustrated in for clarity. Instead a cross section of the crossbar is illustrated and as explained above movement of the cross bar coincidentally moves the head restraint between the upright and operative positions. Therefore it should be understood that movement of the head restraint is illustrated in by movement of the crossbar .

As shown in the lower armature applies a coupling force F to the upper armature when the lower armature actuates. As explained above the coupling force F is initiated by the input force from the occupant acting on the lower armature . The coupling force F is applied to the upper armature at the coupling point . The vector of the coupling force F points substantially upward and toward the rearward side of the seat assembly but those having ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the vector of the coupling force F could be in any suitable direction. The coupling point is offset in spaced relationship from the pivot point . In other words the coupling force F has a coupling moment arm A relative to the pivot point . As such the coupling force F imparts a coupling moment M at the respective pivot point . The coupling moment M generally tends to pivot the linkage of the upper armature about the pivot point thereby moving the head restraint away from the upright position and toward the operative position. See wherein the active head restraint system illustrated in solid lines is indicative of the head restraint in the upright position and wherein the active head restraint system illustrated in phantom is indicative of the head restraint in the operative position. 

Moreover the biasing member applies a bias force F applied to the upper armature at the attachment point . In the embodiment shown the vector of the bias force F is generally along a line of action L defined by the biasing member and the line of action L of the biasing member corresponds with the axis of the biasing member . The attachment point is offset in spaced relationship to the pivot point . In other words the bias force F has a bias moment arm A relative to the pivot point . As such the bias force F imparts a bias moment M at the respective pivot point . The bias moment M generally causes a resistance to movement of linkage to thereby cause a resistance to movement of the head restraint away from the upright position and toward the operative position.

The coupling moment arm A and the bias moment arm A each change as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position. In the embodiment shown the coupling moment arm A increases and the bias moment arm A decreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position. To explain this phenomenon includes the variable Ato denote the coupling moment arm occurring when the head restraint is in the upright position. also includes the variable A to denote the coupling moment arm occurring when the head restraint is in the operative position. As shown A is greater than A. similarly includes variables Aand A to denote the bias moment arm occurring when the head restraint is in the upright and operative position respectively. As shown Ais greater than A . The coupling moment Mincreases and the bias moment Mdecreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position. Accordingly the resistance to movement of the head restraint decreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position.

In one embodiment the attachment point of the biasing member relative to the pivot point is chosen such that the resistance to movement of the head restraint reduces as the head restraint moves away from the upright position toward the operative position. For instance as shown in a reference line R extending from the pivot point to the attachment point is offset at a positive angle relative to the bias moment arm A. In one embodiment the angle is between approximately twenty five degrees 25 and thirty five degrees 35 and in one embodiment the angle is approximately thirty degrees 30 . Those having ordinary skill in the art will recognize however that the angle could be of any suitable magnitude without departing from the scope of the invention.

As such the mechanical advantage of the biasing member changes as the head restraint moves. The mechanical advantage of the biasing member is higher when the head restraint is positioned at the upright position as compared to when the head restraint is positioned at the operative position. In one embodiment the mechanical advantage of the biasing member is highest when the head restraint is at the upright position and the mechanical advantage of the biasing member continuously decreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position. However those having ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the mechanical advantage of the biasing member could increase as the head restraint moves away from the upright position but then decrease as the head restraint approaches the operative position.

It should be appreciated that the above discussion is simplified for purposes of clarity. For instance the above discussion does not take into account frictional forces force imparted at the tabs changes in magnitude of the coupling force F and bias force F changes in vector direction of the coupling force F and bias force F and the like. However these factors can also influence the movement of the head restraint without departing from the scope of the invention. It should also be appreciated that in the embodiment shown the reduction of resistance to movement of the head restraint is largely accomplished by proportionate changes in the coupling moment arm A and bias moment arm A. However reduction of resistance to movement of the head restraint could also be accomplished by any other suitable means without departing from the scope of the invention.

Because the resistance to movement of the head restraint decreases as the head restraint moves away from the upright position and toward the operative position the head restraint is less likely to move toward the operative position when the occupant applies low levels of force to the active head restraint system . However when the occupant applies force above a predetermined level the head restraint moves more easily and more quickly toward the operative position for improved support of the occupant s head and neck area . Also the head restraint is more likely to remain in the operative position for a longer period of time once the head restraint begins moving toward the operative position. Accordingly the active head restraint system supports the occupant s head and neck area more effectively in the event of a rear end vehicular impact.

The invention has been described in an illustrative manner. It is to be understood that the terminology which has been used is intended to be in the nature of words of description rather than of limitation. Many modifications and variations of the invention are possible in light of the above teachings. Therefore within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced other than as specifically described.

