---

title: High magnetostriction of positive magnetostrictive materials under tensile load
abstract: An elongate structure having a magnetostrictive material composition is subjected to tensile stress in the longitudinal-axial direction, thereby generally orienting the magnetization of the elongate structure in the longitudinal-axial direction. Electrical current is conducted through the elongate structure and/or through at least one adjacent elongate conductor, thereby generally orienting the magnetization of the elongate structure in the transverse direction, generally in parallel with the transverse direction of the magnetic field concomitant the conduction of current through the elongate structure. The elongate structure magnetostrictively contracts due to the (generally 90°) repositioning of the magnetization of the elongate structure. Examples of inventive configurational variants include: (i) an elongate structure itself conducting current; (ii) a hollow elongate structure accommodating placement therethrough of at least one elongate conductor; (iii) an elongate structure flanked by a pair of elongate conductors conducting current in opposite directions; (iv) plural elongate structures bordering a centralized elongate conductor.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07564152&OS=07564152&RS=07564152
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07564152
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050131
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. provisional application No. 60 543 650 filed 12 Feb. 2004 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Preparation of Positive Magnetostrictive Materials for Operation under Tension joint inventors Arthur E. Clark James B. Restorff and Marilyn Wun Fogle.

This application is related to U.S. nonprovisional application No. 11 007 953 filed 7 Dec. 2004 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Magnetostrictive Materials Devices and Methods using High Magnetostriction High Strength Fe Ga Alloys joint inventors Arthur E. Clark James B. Restorff and Marilyn Wun Fogle which is a continuation of U.S. nonprovisional application No. 10 182 095 filed 24 Jul. 2002 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Magnetostrictive Materials Devices and Methods using High Magnetostriction High Strength Fe Ga Alloys joint inventors Arthur E. Clark James B. Restorff and Marilyn Wun Fogle which claims the benefit of PCT application No. PCT US01 02795 filed 29 Jan. 2001 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Magnetostrictive Devices and Methods using High Magnetostriction High Strength Alloy joint inventors Arthur E. Clark James B. Restorff and Marilyn Wun Fogle which claims the benefit of U.S. provisional application No. 60 178 615 filed 28 Jan. 2000 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Strong Ductile and Low Field Magnetostrictive Alloys joint inventors Arthur E. Clark James B. Restorff and Marilyn Wun Fogle.

This application is related to U.S. nonprovisional application No. 10 750 634 filed 24 Dec. 2003 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Magnetostrictive Materials Devices and Methods using High Magnetostriction High Strength Fe Ga Alloys joint inventors Arthur E. Clark James B. Restorff and Marilyn Wun Fogle which is a continuation in part of the aforementioned U.S. nonprovisional application No. 10 182 095 filed 24 Jul. 2002 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Magnetostrictive Materials Devices and Methods using High magnetostriction High Strength Fe Ga Alloys joint inventors Arthur E. Clark James B. Restorff and Marilyn Wun Fogle.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates to magnetostriction more particularly to the utilization of positive magnetostrictive materials while being subjected to mechanical stresses.

The so called active materials include magnetostrictives e.g. Terfenol D electrostrictives piezoelectrics e.g. PZT PMN PT and shape memory alloys acronym SMA . Active materials are used as sensors and actuators in various devices such as smart structures that integrate active and passive material systems. Typically the active material system is subjected to significant mechanical stresses during operation of the device. With the notable exception of the recently discovered Galfenol class of alloy modern active materials e.g. Terfenol D PZT PMN PT are robust under compressive stress but break relatively easily when a tensile stress is applied. Iron gallium Fe Ga alloys known as Galfenol newly developed by the United States Navy s Naval Surface Warfare Center Carderock Division are materials that have large positive magnetostrictions but that are strong in both compression and tension. Certain other magnetostrictive materials such as aluminum alloys exhibit varying degrees of robustness in response to tensile stress however Galfenol is superior to all other magnetostrictive materials in this respect by at least a factor of two.

In a magnetostrictive material the dimensions change as the material s magnetization direction varies. According to conventional practice involving magnetostriction a magnetic field is applied to a magnetostrictive material to manipulate the material s magnetization direction. The magnetization direction tends to align itself parallel to the applied magnetic field. The magnetostrictive material acts as a transducer or motor converting electrical to mechanical energy. A positive magnetostrictive material i.e. a material that is characterized by positive magnetostriction is one that while subjected to longitudinally axially directed compressive stress expands e.g. enlarges or lengthens in the longitudinal axial direction when then placed in a longitudinally axially directed magnetic field created by an electrically conductive coil circumferentially circumscribing the magnetostrictive material in the case of a positive magnetostrictive material its magnetization shifts from transversely directed side by side orientation brought about by the longitudinally axially directed compressive stress to longitudinally axially directed end to end orientation brought about by the longitudinally axially directed magnetic field . A negative magnetostrictive material i.e. a material that is characterized by negative magnetostriction is one that while subjected to longitudinally axially directed tensile stress contracts e.g. shrinks or shortens in the longitudinal axial direction when then placed in a longitudinally axially directed magnetic field created by an electrically conductive coil circumferentially circumscribing the magnetostrictive material in the case of a negative magnetostrictive material its magnetization shifts from transversely directed orientation brought about by the longitudinally axially directed tensile stress to longitudinally directed end to end orientation brought about by the longitudinally axially directed magnetic field .

Positive magnetostriction materials are traditionally used with compressive stresses. Although heretofore unrealized it would be desirable in many contexts to use positive magnetostriction materials with tensile stresses. The recent advent of Galfenol has whetted the technological world s appetite for such capabilities. For instance one can contemplate various kinds of active apparatus that would prove useful in sonar vibration damping and other application. To achieve this goal however magnetic manipulation techniques commonly applied when using positive magnetostriction materials with compressive stresses would prove rather awkward to effectuate when using positive magnetostriction materials with tensile stresses.

The following references incorporated herein by reference are informative regarding magnetostriction in general and Galfenol in particular. Wun Fogle et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 139 648 issued 31 Oct. 2000 entitled Prestress Imposing Treatment of Magnetostrictive Material Wun Fogle et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 176 943 B1 issued 23 Jan. 2001 entitled Processing Treatment of Amorphous Magnetostrictive Wires Tensile Properties of magnetostrictive Iron Gallium Alloys R. A. Kellogg A. M. Russell T. A. Lograsso A. B. Flatau A. E. Clark and M. Wun Fogle vol. 52 pp 5043 5050 available online 25 Aug. 2004 at www. sciencedirect.com Extraordinary Magnetoelasticity and Lattice Softening in b.c.c. Fe Ga Alloys A. E. Clark K. B. Hathaway M. Wun Fogle J. B. Restorff T. A. Lograsso V. M. Keppens G. Petculescu and R. A. Taylor vol. 93 no. 10 pp 8621 8623 15 May 2003 Texture and Grain Morphology Dependences of Saturation Magnetostriction in Rolled Polycrystalline FeGa R. A. Kellogg A. B. Flatau A. E. Clark M. Wun Fogle and T. A. Lograsso 93 no. 10 pp 8495 8497 15 May 2003 Structural Transformations in Quenched Fe Ga Alloys T. A. Lograsso A. R. Ross D. L. Schlagel A. E. Clark and M. Wun Fogle vol. 350 pp 95 101 17 Feb. 2003 Magnetostrictive Properties of Galfenol Alloys under Compressive Stress A. E. Clark M. Wun Fogle J. B. Restorff and T. A. Lograsso vol. 43 no. 5 pp 881 886 The Japan Institute of Metals Special Issue on Smart Materials Fundamentals and Applications 2002 Temperature and Stress Dependence of the Magnetic and Magnetostrictive Properties of FeGa R. A. Kellogg A. Flatau A. E. Clark M. Wun Fogle and T. A. Lograsso 91 no. 10 pp 7821 7823 15 May 2002 Magnetostriction of Ternary Fe Ga X Alloys X Ni Mo Sn Al J. B. Restorff M. Wun Fogle A. E. Clark T. A. Lograsso A. R. Ross and D. L. Schlagel vol. 91 no. 10 pp 8225 8227 15 May 2002 Effect of Quenching on the Magnetostriction of FeGa 0.13

In view of the foregoing it is an object of the present invention to provide method and apparatus for using a positive magnetostriction material while subjecting it to tensile stress.

According to typical inventive embodiments a method for producing magnetostrictive contraction comprises a applying longitudinally axially directed tension to an elongate structure so that the magnetization of the elongate structure tends generally to be longitudinally axially directed and b applying a transversely e.g. circumferentially directed magnetic field to the elongate structure so that the magnetization tends generally to be transversely e.g. circumferentially or tangentially directed. The ensuing longitudinally axially directed magnetostrictive contraction of the elongate structure is associated with the directional change of the magnetization from the longitudinally axially directed general tendency to the transversely e.g. circumferentially or tangentially directed general tendency. The production of a transversely e.g. circumferentially or tangentially directed magnetic field will frequently result from according to inventive practice at least one of the following 1 conduction of longitudinally axially directed electrical current through the elongate structure 2 conduction of longitudinally axially directed electrical current through at least one elongate electrical conductor that is placed exterior e.g. adjacent to the elongate structure 3 conduction of longitudinally axially directed electrical current through at least one elongate electrical conductor that is placed interior to e.g. inside a longitudinal axial bore of the elongate structure.

The present invention represents a unique methodology for using a positive magnetostrictive material under tensile loading. The conventional methodology for operating a positive magnetostrictive material in a device involves utilization of an excitation coil so as to supply an axial magnetic field to a magnetostrictive rod or other elongate structure . This conventional methodology does not work for positive magnetostrictive materials under tensile load since the magnetization is often already along the axial direction. The present invention applies a transverse e.g. circumferential or tangential magnetic field to magnetostrictie material with respect to which tensile stress is being exerted. The generation of a transverse magnetic field is accomplished according to at least one of three inventive modes. This transverse magnetic field rotates the magnetostrictive material s magnetization from the axial direction to the transverse direction resulting in the desired magnetostrictive effect.

To elaborate according to inventive principles the magnetization of the magnetostrictive material is induced by tensile stress to be directed parallel to the longitudinal axis of the magnetostrictive material. An electrical current is applied so as to create a transverse perpendicular magnetic field. The tensilely induced longitudinally axially directed magnetization of the magnetostrictive material is caused by the electrically induced transverse magnetic field i.e. the magnetic field induced via application of electrical current to move rotate ninety degrees so as to be transversely directed because of the tendency of the magnetization to become parallel with align with the transverse direction of the electrically induced magnetic field. That is the magnetization changes orientation from one of parallelness with respect to the longitudinal axis to one perpendicularity with respect to the longitudinal axis. The magnetization becomes perpendicular orthogonal or normal or at right angles to the longitudinal axis in the sense that every or nearly every magnetization vector magnetic moment or magnetic domain shifts orientation so as to at least approximately lie in a geometric plane that perpendicularly intersects the magnetostrictive material s geometric longitudinal axis. Otherwise expressed every or nearly every vector of magnetization shifts orientation so that the dot product between the vector of magnetization and the vector along the longitudinal axis equals or approaches zero. Expressed more simply the magnetization becomes perpendicular to the direction of the length of the magnetostrictive material. The term transverseness as used herein to describe directions of physical phenomena such as magnetic field or magnetization that are associated with inventive practice denotes perpendicularity with respect to the length of the magnetostrictive structure. For instance a magnetic field or a magnetization that is transverse with respect to a magnetostrictive rod is perpendicular to at right angles to the length of the rod.

According to typical embodiments of a first inventive mode for applying a transverse magnetic field to a magnetostrictive material structure an electric current is provided through the magnetostrictive material structure itself thereby applying a circumferentially transverse magnetic field . According to typical embodiments of a second inventive mode for applying a transverse magnetic field to the magnetostrictive material structure an electric current is provided through one or more low resistance wires that are situated adjacent to the inside surface or surfaces of e.g. inserted into one or more magnetostrictive material structures thereby applying a circumferentially transverse magnetic field . According to typical embodiments of a third inventive mode for applying a transverse magnetic field to the magnetostrictive material structure an electric current is provided through one or more low resistance wires that are situated adjacent to the outside surface or surfaces of one or more magnetostrictive material structures thereby applying a tangentially transverse magnetic field . According to some inventive embodiments two or all three inventive modes are combined for applying a transverse magnetic field to the magnetostrictive material. According to one instance of such inventive embodiments an electric current is provided through low resistance wires situated both inside the magnetostrictive material s axial bore and outside the magnetostrictive material s exterior surface. In the light of the instant disclosure the ordinarily skilled artisan will be capable of practicing any of multifarious embodiments of the present invention.

The present invention affords new capabilities especially the construction of devices that operate while effecting tensional stress. Such inventive devices are useful for example in sonar transducers and in vibration damping of structures and machinery. The present invention admits of implementation of a variety of active structural materials and admits of practice in a variety of technologies and applications.

Other objects advantages and features of this invention will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

In positive magnetostrictive materials tensile loading tensile stress causes the magnetization to rotate toward the stress axis. Referring to elongate magnetostrictive structure is made of a positive magnetostrictive material. Although elongate magnetostrictive structure is shown to be cylindrical magnetostrictive properties have been known to manifest in non cylindrical e.g. prismatic elongate shapes. In the absence of stress elongate magnetostrictive structure is characterized by directional randomization of magnetization M. When elongate magnetostrictive structure is subjected to tension tensile stress T in the direction of its geometric longitudinal axis a the magnetization M of elongate magnetostrictive structure becomes parallel to tension T which is coincident with geometric longitudinal axis a.

Accordingly as depicted in current I creates a magnetic field H along the same axis viz. longitudinal axis a and therefore does not result in any change in the direction of magnetization M since the magnetization M is already parallel to the magnetic field H direction. That is illustrates the non responsiveness of the elongate magnetostrictive structure material to the magnetic field H. With reference to a magnetic field H applied transverse to the elongate magnetostrictive structure material rotates the magnetization M and results in a change in length L. As shown in current I is conducted by a coil . Current carrying coil is oriented so that the geometric longitudinal axis w of current carrying coil is perpendicular to the geometric longitudinal axis a of elongate magnetostrictive structure . Current I produces a magnetic field H that is perpendicular to magnetization M of the elongate magnetostrictive structure . Magnetization M is directed along longitudinal axis a because the tension T that the elongate magnetostrictive structure is experiencing is directed along longitudinal axis a. Hence the magnetic field H thus produced causes a change in direction of magnetization M of elongate magnetostrictive structure so as to be parallel to the magnetic field H. The change in direction of the magnetization M of elongate magnetostrictive structure thereby results in a change in the length L of elongate magnetostrictive structure .

Similarly as elongate magnetostrictive structure is shown to be cylindrical in through the inventively practiced elongate magnetostrictive structures shown herein in through are shown to be cylindrical. Thus elongate magnetostrictive structure is shown to be cylindrical in and elongate annular magnetostrictive structure is shown to be cylindrical in and elongate magnetostrictive structure shown to be cylindrical in and magnetostrictive structure is shown to be cylindrical in and . Nevertheless in inventive practice the elongate magnetostrictive structures are not necessarily cylindrical albeit they are typically but not necessarily axially symmetrical. Magnetostrictive properties manifest analogously for cylindrical and non cylindrical e.g. prismatic shapes. Generally speaking an elongate magnetostrictive structure used in inventive practice is characterized by a shape defining the lateral surface of a cylindric solid. A cylindric solid is a three dimensional geometric figure that includes a lateral surface and two congruent bases lying in parallel geometric planes. Cylindric solids include but are not limited to cylinders wherein the bases are circular cylindroids wherein the bases are elliptical and prisms wherein the bases are polygonal . The present invention s elongate magnetostrictive structures can be embodies for instance as a rod a wire or a bar. It is to be understood that the present invention s elongate magnetostrictive structures illustrated herein in through though sometimes referred to herein as wires can be inventively practiced in multifarious forms and shapes.

Referring to and elongate magnetostrictive structure conducts electrical current I along the longitudinal axis a of elongate magnetostrictive structure . The current I is supplied by an electrical current source such as a battery or other direct current power supply device and is conducted to elongate magnetostrictive structure via an electrical connection means such as a wire lead electrode or other electrical conductor device . Generally speaking inventive practice similarly involves utilization of an electrical current source and electrical connection means . As illustrated in current I produces a magnetic field H that is circumferentially transverse relative to longitudinal axis a of elongate magnetostrictive structure . That is current I conducted through elongate magnetostrictive structure generates a transverse magnetic field H.

The elongate magnetostrictive structure in and is similar to the elongate magnetostrictive structure shown in through insofar as having a positive magnetostrictive material composition and describing a cylindrical shape. Typical magnetostrictive structures consist of or substantially consist of magnetostrictive material and are thus electrically conductive. Some magnetostrictive structures however are not electrically conductive as they have a composite construction including a resinous matrix and magnetostrictive material reinforcement or filler. The elongate magnetostrictive structures that can be inventively implemented are not limited to structures having a positive magnetostrictive material composition but can include any structure regardless of material composition that is capable of exhibiting positive magnetostriction.

As illustrated in elongate magnetostrictive structure is subjected to longitudinal axial tension tensile stress T. According to typical inventive practice longitudinal axial tensile stress T is exerted by means of attaching elongate magnetostrictive structure to one or more other structures diagrammatically represented in as housing . Such attachment can be effected by any of various known techniques for attaching metal materials to other objects. For instance elongate magnetostrictive structure can be bored e.g. drilled at each end and the resultant holes used for fastening e.g. screwing or bolting to housing . Alternatively elongate magnetostrictive structure can threaded at each end and the resultant threaded ends used for fastening e.g. screwing or bolting to housing . As another alternative elongate magnetostrictive structure can be welded at each end to housing .

As further illustrated in a magnetostrictive effect ensues when elongate magnetostrictive structure is subjected to longitudinal axial tension T. The current I produces a magnetic field H that is circumferentially transverse relative to the magnetization M of elongate magnetostrictive structure magnetization M being directed along longitudinal axis a because of the tension T along longitudinal axis a that elongate magnetostrictive structure is experiencing. Hence the magnetic field H thus produced causes a change in direction of magnetization M of elongate magnetostrictive structure so that magnetization M is parallel to the produced magnetic field H. The change in the direction of magnetization M of elongate magnetostrictive structure thereby results in a change in the length L of elongate magnetostrictive structure .

With reference to and the present invention s integral elongate structure includes two coaxial sections viz. annulus the exterior annular magnetostrictive section and core the interior solid cylindrical electrically conductive section which share longitudinal axis a. Annulus is an elongate hollow cylindrical structure. Core is an elongate solid cylindrical structure. Core conducts current I in the direction of longitudinal axis a. Annulus is subjected to tension T along longitudinal axis a. Current I produces a magnetic field H that is perpendicular to the magnetization M of annulus . Magnetization M is longitudinally axially directed because of the longitudinal axial tension T that annulus section is experiencing. Hence the magnetic field H produced by current I causes a change in direction of the magnetization M of annulus so that magnetization M is parallel to magnetic field H as shown in . The change in the direction of magnetization M of annulus thereby results in a change in length L of annulus .

According to generally preferred inventive practice core is detached from e.g. slidably engages annulus thus annulus and not necessarily core is subjected to tension T along longitudinal axis a. According to some inventive embodiments however annulus and core are attached to each other here by virtue of the integral or coupled nature of elongate structure the subjection of annulus to tension T along longitudinal axis a will be accompanied by subjection of core to longitudinal axial tension. In principle the joining of core with annulus might interfere somewhat with magnetostrictive change in length L of annulus nevertheless it can be expected that such resistance imparted by core when annulus experiences magnetostrictive contraction will usually be negligible.

Now referring to and a current I is conducted by wire which is a central electrically conductive elongate structure. The peripheral wires and are magnetostrictive structures that are shown to be symmetrically arranged with respect to longitudinal axis a of the central electrically conductive wire . The inventive embodiment shown in and is similar to that shown in and in that the active material surrounds the current carrying wire. However as shown in and the active material is discrete whereas as shown in and the active material is continuous.

Still referring to and each peripheral magnetostrictive wire has a longitudinal axis b and is contiguous to the central electrically conductive wire so that every longitudinal axis b of a corresponding peripheral wire is parallel to longitudinal axis a of central wire . Each peripheral wire is subjected to tension T along its longitudinal axis b. Tensions T T T T T T Tand Tcorrespond to peripheral wires and respectively. Current I is conducted by central wire along its longitudinal axis a so as to produce a magnetic field H that is perpendicular to the magnetization M of each peripheral wire . Magnetization M is directed along each longitudinal axis b because of the tension T along longitudinal axis b that each peripheral wire is experiencing. Hence the magnetic field H produced by the current I causes a change in direction of magnetization M of each peripheral wire so that magnetization M is parallel to the produced magnetic field H as shown in . Although magnetizations M Mand M only are indicated in due to illustrative limitations it is understood that each peripheral wire has associated therewith its own magnetization M that is magnetizations M M M M M M Mand Mcorrespond to peripheral wires and respectively. The change in direction of magnetization M of each peripheral wire thereby results in a change in length L of that peripheral wire .

With regard to attachment versus detachment of components of the inventive device similar considerations apply to the inventive embodiment shown in and as apply to the inventive embodiment shown in and . According to generally preferred inventive practice central wire is detached from e.g. slidably engages every peripheral wire thus peripheral wires and not central wire are each subjected to tension T along its longitudinal axis b. According to some inventive embodiments however peripheral wires are attached to central wire here by virtue of the attachment the subjection of peripheral wires to tension T along corresponding longitudinal axes b will be accompanied by subjection of central wire to tension along longitudinal axis a. In principle the joining of central wire with peripheral wires might interfere with magnetostrictive change in length L of peripheral wires nevertheless it can be expected that such resistance imparted by central wire when peripheral wires experience magnetostrictive contraction will usually be negligible.

Reference now being made to and this inventive configuration includes a central elongate magnetostrictive structure wire and two peripheral locationally opposite electrically conductive elongate structures wires and that conduct electrical current I in opposite directions. The central magnetostrictive wire is symmetrically flanked by the two peripheral electrically conductive wires . Currents Iand Iare conducted by peripheral wires and respectively. Each of peripheral wires and has a longitudinal axis b and is contiguous to the central wire so that longitudinal axis b is parallel to longitudinal axis a of central wire . As shown in peripheral current carrying wire carries current Iout of the page whereas peripheral current carrying wire carries current Iinto the page.

Still referring to and central magnetostrictive elongate structure is subjected to tension T along its longitudinal axis a. Each of currents Iand Iis conducted in a direction parallel to longitudinal axis a. Currents Iand Iproduce magnetic fields Hand H respectively each of which is perpendicular to the magnetization M of central magnetostrictive structure . illustrates the two parallel counter rotational magnetic flux patterns of magnetic field H which corresponds to current I and magnetic field H which corresponds to current I . The overall magnetic field H Hand H wherein magnetic field H is perpendicular to the magnetization M of central magnetostrictive structure . Magnetic field H is the sum magnetic field as manifested additively and intermediately i.e. between current carrying wires and and in the vicinity of central magnetostrictive structure . Magnetization M is directed along longitudinal axis a because of the tension T along longitudinal axis a that central magnetostrictive structure is experiencing. Hence the magnetic field H produced cumulatively by the currents Iand Icauses a change in direction of magnetization M of central magnetostrictive structure so that magnetization M is parallel to the cumulatively produced magnetic field H as shown in . The change in direction of magnetization M thereby results in a change in length L of central magnetostrictive structure .

Some analogies or commonalities can be noted among the various inventive embodiments shown in through . The inventive embodiment shown in and is similar to that shown in and in that there are two or more discrete elongate structures proximately situated with corresponding geometric axes in parallel at least one structure is made of active material and at least one other structure is made of electrically conductive material. As a general rule the elongate structures need not be actually touching but according to usual inventive practice the elongate structures are at least close in space. Further the inventive embodiment shown in and is similar to that shown in and in that active material surrounds electrically conductive material however as shown in and the active material is discrete whereas as shown in and the active material is continuous. Moreover the inventive embodiment shown in and is similar to those shown in and and in and in that two or more discrete elongate structures at least one structure made of active material and at least one other structure made of electrically conductive material are proximately situated a main difference being that according to the inventive embodiment shown in and the corresponding geometric axes are coincident whereas according to the inventive embodiments shown in and and in and the corresponding geometric axes are parallel. Again inventive practice generally provides for nearness or contiguousness of a magnetostrictive structure with respect to an electrically conductive structure but actual contact therebetween is generally not an inventive requirement. The present invention s individual components typically adjoin one another but generally speaking need not actually contact one another. Furthermore although the inventive embodiments shown in through are characterized by symmetry this is generally not a requirement of inventive practice.

It is to be understood that the present invention can be practiced with practically any number of one or plural active material structures and practically any number of one or plural electrically conductive material structures. For instance a plurality of elongate magnetostrictive structure can be inventively implemented similarly as shown in and . As another example a plurality of integral elongate structures can be inventively implemented similarly as shown in and . As a further example one or fewer than eight or more than eight elongate magnetostrictive structures can be inventively implemented similarly as shown in and . As another example a plurality of elongate magnetostrictive structures can be inventively implemented each similarly as shown in and each elongate magnetostrictive structure having associated therewith any number of elongate electrically conductive structures . As yet another example a plurality of elongate magnetostrictive structures can be inventively implemented each similarly as shown in and each elongate magnetostrictive structure having associated therewith on opposite sides a pair of elongate electrically conductive structures conducting electrical current in opposite directions.

The following numerical examples of inventive practice are explained with reference to and other specified figures presented herein. SI units metric units in accordance with the International System of Units are used in these examples. As demonstrated by each example using a ten 10 meter length of magnetostrictive material characterized by a magnetostriction of three hundred parts per million 300 ppm which is typical of FeGaalloys a length change of three millimeters 3 mm is expected as the voltage is applied. Variables and constants used in the calculations are listed in . The resistance R of a wire is calculated by

With reference to and in this example the voltage is applied directly to the magnetostrictive material . A load of 40 lb 178 N is applied to a magnetostrictive electrically conductive wire of single crystal or highly textured FeGathat is 3 mm inch in diameter and 10 meters in length. To calculate the cross sectional area a of magnetostrictive wire a r 7.07 10m. The resistance R of FeGawire 10 m a 1.06 . Force F 178 N. The tensile stress T 25.2 MPa. Setting the magnetic and mechanical energies equal the following equation obtains M H T S. The magnetic field needed H is calculated as follows H 25.2 10Pa 300 10 1.7 T 4450 A m. The magnetic field at the surface H is assumed to be 1.2 H 5340 A m. The current needed is calculated as follows I 5340 A m 0.3 10m 50.3 A. Voltage V IR 50.3 A 1.06 53.3 V. Power P VI 53.3 V 50.3 A 2680 W. Thus in this case of a small diameter 3 mm 10 meter FeGawire subjection of wire to a 40 lb tensile load and application of a voltage of 53.3 V to wire result in a 3 mm contraction of wire .

With reference to and in this example a load of 40 lb 178 N is applied to the present invention s integral configuration a cable like structure that includes a Cu wire core 1.5 mm in diameter and surrounding Cu wire a magnetostrictive ring annulus 10 meters in length 3 mm in diameter made of FeGatextured magnetostrictive alloy. Core has a radium of r annulus has a radius of r. The cross sectional area a of the annular active material is calculated as a r r 5.3 10m. The resistance R of the Cu wire is calculated as R 0.102 . The force F 178 N. The tensile stress T 33.6 MPa. Setting the magnetic and mechanical energies equal the following equation obtains M H T S. Magnetic field H the magnetic field needed in the FeGaring is calculated as follows H 33.6 10Pa 300 10 1.7 5930 A m 74.2 Oe. To achieve this magnetic field H the magnetic field at the surface of the copper wire core is assumed to be 1.5 H 8900 A m. The current needed is calculated as follows I H r 8900 A m 0.0015 m 41.9 A. Voltage V IR 41.9 A 0.102 4.27 V. Power P VI 4.27 V 41.9 A 179 W. It is seen that as compared with Example 1 in Example 2 a much smaller voltage V and power P are necessary for electrifying the Cu core of the inventive cable . Generally speaking the present invention s heterogeneous combining an electrically conductive core material and a magnetostrictive annular material embodiments such as shown in and will require significantly less voltage and significantly less power than will the present invention s homogenous a uniformly magnetostrictive material embodiments such as shown in and .

Still with reference to and in this example the Cu wire and the FeGaannulus each have twice the diameter as in Example 2. In addition in this example a larger load of 100 lb 445 N is applied to the present invention s integral configuration which includes Cu core 3 mm in diameter and FeGaannulus 10 meters in length 6 mm in diameter . The cross sectional area a of the annular active material is calculated as a r r 2.12 10m. The resistance R of the Cu wire is calculated as R 0.0255 . The force F 445 N. The tensile stress T 21 MPa. Setting the magnetic and mechanical energies equal the following equation obtains M H T S. Magnetic field H the magnetic field needed in the FeGaring is calculated as follows H 21 10Pa 300 10 1.7 T 3710 A m 46.6 Oe. To achieve this magnetic field H the magnetic field at the surface of the copper wire core is assumed to be 1.5 H 5570 A m. The current needed is calculated as follows I H r 5570 A m 0.003 m 52.5 A. Voltage V IR 52.5 A 0.0255 1.33 V. Power P VI 1.33 V 52.5 A 69.8 W. Thus in this case of a 10 meter cable subjection of cable to a 100 lb tensile load and application of a voltage of 1.33 V to copper wire result in a 3 mm contraction of FeGaannulus . Here in this case of a 6 mm diameter 10 meter length cable cable will contract 3 mm under a tensile load of 100 lb. Note that in this example as compared with Example 2 which involves diameter half as large the force F is much larger and the power P requirement is much smaller. However here the amount of FeGamaterial is greater.

The present invention is not to be limited by the embodiments described or illustrated herein which are given by way of example and not of limitation. Other embodiments of the present invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from a consideration of this disclosure or from practice of the present invention disclosed herein. Various omissions modifications and changes to the principles disclosed herein may be made by one skilled in the art without departing from the true scope and spirit of the present invention which is indicated by the following claims.

