---

title: System for controlling and monitoring an array of point-of-load regulators by a host
abstract: A power control system comprises a plurality of POL regulators, at least one serial data bus operatively connecting the plurality of POL regulators, and a system controller connected to the serial data bus and adapted to send and receive digital data to and from the plurality of POL regulators. The serial data bus further comprises a first data bus carrying programming and control information between the system controller and the plurality of POL regulators. The serial data bus may also include a second data bus carrying fault management information between the system controller and the plurality of POL regulators. The power control may also include a front-end regulator providing an intermediate voltage to the plurality of POL regulators on an intermediate voltage bus.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07456617&OS=07456617&RS=07456617
owner: Power-One, Inc.
number: 07456617
owner_city: Camarillo
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050624
---
This application claims priority as a continuation in part pursuant to 35 U.S.C. 120 to patent application Ser. No. 10 326 222 filed Dec. 21 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 000 125 and patent application Ser. No. 10 293 001 filed Nov. 13 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 049 798.

The present invention relates to power control systems or more particularly to a method and system to control and monitor an array of point of load regulators.

With the increasing complexity of electronic systems it is common for an electronic system to require power provided at several different discrete voltage and current levels. For example electronic systems may include discrete circuits that require voltages such as 3v 5v 9v etc. Further many of these circuits require a relatively low voltage e.g. 1v but with relatively high current e.g. 100 A . It is undesirable to deliver relatively high current at low voltages over a relatively long distance through an electronic device for a number of reasons. First the relatively long physical run of low voltage high current lines consumes significant circuit board area and congests the routing of signal lines on the circuit board. Second the impedance of the lines carrying the high current tends to dissipate a lot of power and complicate load regulation. Third it is difficult to tailor the voltage current characteristics to accommodate changes in load requirements.

In order to satisfy these power requirements it is known to distribute an intermediate bus voltage throughout the electronic system and include an individual point of load POL regulator i.e. DC DC converter at the point of power consumption within the electronic system. Particularly a POL regulator would be included with each respective electronic circuit to convert the intermediate bus voltage to the level required by the electronic circuit. An electronic system may include multiple POL regulators to convert the intermediate bus voltage into each of the multiple voltage levels. Ideally the POL regulator would be physically located adjacent to the corresponding electronic circuit so as to minimize the length of the low voltage high current lines through the electronic system. The intermediate bus voltage can be delivered to the multiple POL regulators using low current lines that minimize loss.

With this distributed approach there is a need to coordinate the control and monitoring of the POL regulators of the power system. The POL regulators generally operate in conjunction with a power supply controller that activates programs and monitors the individual POL regulators. It is known in the art for the controller to use a multi connection parallel bus to activate and program each POL regulator. For example the parallel bus may communicate an enable disable bit for turning each POL regulator on and off and voltage identification VID code bits for programming the output voltage set point of the POL regulators. The controller may further use additional connections to monitor the voltage current that is delivered by each POL regulator so as to detect fault conditions of the POL regulators. A drawback with such a control system is that it adds complexity and size to the overall electronic system.

Thus it would be advantageous to have a system and method for controlling and monitoring POL regulators within a distributed power system.

The present invention provides a system and method for controlling and monitoring POL regulators within a distributed power system.

In an embodiment of the invention the power control system comprises a plurality of POL regulators at least one serial data bus operatively connecting the plurality of POL regulators and a system controller connected to the serial data bus and adapted to send and receive digital data to and from the plurality of POL regulators. The serial data bus further comprises a first data bus carrying programming control and monitoring information between the system controller and the plurality of POL regulators. The serial data bus may also include a second data bus carrying fault management information between the system controller and the plurality of POL regulators. The power control may also include a front end regulator providing an intermediate voltage to the plurality of POL regulators on an intermediate voltage bus.

The POL control system enables four different modes of operation. In the first operational mode the POL regulators function independently in the absence of a system controller and without interaction with other POL regulators. In the second operational mode the POL regulators interoperate for the purpose of current sharing or interleaving in the absence of a system controller. In the third operational mode the POL regulators operate as an array in which the behavior of each POL regulator and the array as a whole are coordinated by a system controller. Lastly the fourth operational mode includes both central control using the system controller and local control over certain functionality. This way the POL regulators operate as an array coordinated by a system controller and also interoperate with each other to perform functions such as current sharing.

A more complete understanding of the method and system for controlling and monitoring a plurality of POL regulators will be afforded to those skilled in the art as well as a realization of additional advantages and objects thereof by a consideration of the following detailed description of the preferred embodiment. Reference will be made to the appended sheets of drawings which will first be described briefly.

The present invention provides a system and method for controlling and monitoring POL regulators within a distributed power system. In the detailed description that follows like element numerals are used to describe like elements illustrated in one or more figures.

Referring first to a prior art distributed power delivery system is shown. The prior art distributed power deliver system includes an AC DC converter that converts the available AC power into a primary DC power source e.g. 48 volts. The primary DC power source is connected to a primary power bus that distributes DC power to plural electronic systems such as printed circuit board . The bus may be further coupled to a battery providing a back up power source for the electronic systems connected to the primary power bus. When the AC DC converter is delivering DC power into the primary power bus the battery is maintained in a fully charged state. In the event of loss of AC power or fault with the AC DC converter the battery will continue to deliver DC power to the primary power bus for a limited period of time defined by the capacity of the battery .

The printed circuit board may further include a DC DC converter that reduces the primary bus voltage to an intermediate voltage level such as 5 or 12 volts. The intermediate voltage is then distributed over an intermediate power bus provided to plural circuits on the printed circuit board . Each circuit has an associated point of load POL regulator located closely thereby such as POLs and . Each POL regulator converts the intermediate bus voltage to a low voltage high current level demanded by the electronic circuit such as 1.8 volts 2.5 volts and 3.3 volts provided by POLs and respectively. It should be appreciated that the voltage levels described herein are entirely exemplary and that other voltage levels could be selected to suit the particular needs of electronic circuits on the printed circuit board . By locating the POLs close to their corresponding electronic circuits the length of the low voltage high current lines on the printed circuit board are minimized. Moreover the intermediate power bus can be adapted to carry relatively low current thereby minimizing power loss due to the line impedance. But this distributed power delivery system does not provide a way to monitor and control the performance of the POLs .

In an exemplary operation the controller provides control parameters e.g. output voltage set point to the DC DC converter via the VID code portion of the six bit parallel bus. The controller then activates the DC DC converter via the enable disable portion of the six bit parallel bus. Once activated the DC DC converter converts the power bus voltage e.g. 48 volts into a selected output voltage. The controller then verifies that the output voltage is the desired voltage by measuring the voltage via the voltage monitoring line. If the output voltage is within an acceptable range it is provided to the load not shown by activating the switch via the switch enable line. The controller can then continuously monitor the output voltage and the output current produced by the DC DC converter by measuring the output voltage via the voltage monitoring line and measuring the voltage drop across the sensing resistor i.e. the voltage differential between the current monitoring line and the voltage monitoring line . If the controller detects a fault condition of the DC DC converter e.g. output voltage drops below a specific threshold the controller can disable and reset the DC DC converter. The controller communicates with the other DC DC converters and in the same manner.

A disadvantage with the control system of is that it adds complexity and size to the overall electronic system by using a six bit parallel bus to control each DC DC converter and a separate three line output connection to monitor the performance of each DC DC converter. In other words the controller utilizes thirty six separate connections in order to communicate with four DC DC converters and . As the complexity and power requirements of electronic systems increase the number of connections to the controller will also increase in a linear manner.

Referring now to a POL control system is shown in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. Specifically the POL control system includes a system controller a front end regulator and a plurality of POL regulators and arranged in an array. The POL regulators depicted herein include but are not limited to point of load regulators power on load regulators DC DC converters voltage regulators and all other programmable voltage or current regulating devices generally known to those skilled in the art. An intra device interface is provided between individual ones of the POL regulators to control specific interactions such as current share or paralleling e.g. current share interface CS provided between POL and POL and CS provided between POL and POLn . In the exemplary configuration shown in POL and POL operate in parallel mode to produce output voltage Vwith increased current capability POL produces output voltage V and POL and POLn operate in parallel mode to produce output voltage V though it should be appreciate that other combinations and other numbers of POL regulators could be advantageously utilized.

The front end regulator provides an intermediate voltage to the plurality of POL regulators over an intermediate voltage bus and may simply comprise another POL regulator. The system controller and front end regulator may be integrated together in a single unit or may be provided as separate devices. Alternatively the front end regulator may provide a plurality of intermediate voltages to the POL regulators over a plurality of intermediate voltage buses. The system controller may draw its power from the intermediate voltage bus.

The system controller communicates with the plurality of POL regulators by writing and or reading digital data either synchronously or asynchronous via a uni directional or bi directional serial bus illustrated in as the synch data bus. The synch data bus may comprise a two wire serial bus e.g. IC that allows data to be transmitted asynchronously or a single wire serial bus that allows data to be transmitted synchronously i.e. synchronized to a clock signal . In order to address any specific POL in the array each POL is identified with a unique address which may be hardwired into the POL or set by other methods. The system controller also communicates with the plurality of POL regulators for fault management over a second uni directional or bi directional serial bus illustrated in as the OK fault bus. By grouping plural POL regulators together by connecting them to a common OK fault bus allows the POL regulators have the same behavior in the case of a fault condition. Also the system controller communicates with a user system via a user interface bus for programming setting and monitoring of the POL control system . Lastly the system controller communicates with the front end regulator over a separate line to disable operation of the front end regulator.

An exemplary POL regulator of the POL control system is illustrated in greater detail in . The other POL regulators of have substantially identical configuration. The POL regulator includes a power conversion circuit a serial interface a POL controller default configuration memory and hardwired settings interface . The power conversion circuit transforms an input voltage V to the desired output voltage V according to settings received through the serial interface the hardwired settings or default settings. The power conversion circuit may also include monitoring sensors for output voltage current temperature and other parameters that are used for local control and also communicated back to the system controller through the serial interface . The power conversion circuit may also generate a Power Good PG output signal for stand alone applications in order to provide a simplified monitoring function. The serial interface receives and sends commands and messages to the system controller via the synch data and OK fault serial buses. The default configuration memory stores the default configuration for the POL regulator in cases where no programming signals are received through the serial interface or hardwired settings interface . The default configuration is selected such that the POL regulator will operate in a safe condition in the absence of programming signals.

The hardwired settings interface communicates with external connections to program the POL regulator without using the serial interface . The hardwired settings interface may include as inputs the address setting Addr of the POL to alter or set some of the settings as a function of the address i.e. the identifier or the POL e.g. phase displacement enable disable bit En trim and VID code bits. Further the address identifies the POL regulator during communication operations through the serial interface . The trim input allows the connection of one or more external resistors to define an output voltage level for the POL regulator. Similarly the VID code bits can be used to program the POL regulator for a desired output voltage current level. The enable disable bit allows the POL regulator to be turned on off by toggling a digital high low signal.

The POL controller receives and prioritizes the settings of the POL regulator. If no settings information is received via either the hardwired settings interface or the serial interface the POL controller accesses the parameters stored in the default configuration memory . Alternatively if settings information is received via the hardwired settings interface then the POL controller will apply those parameters. Thus the default settings apply to all of the parameters that cannot be or are not set through hard wiring. The settings received by the hardwired settings interface can be overwritten by information received via the serial interface . The POL regulator can therefore operate in a stand alone mode a fully programmable mode or a combination thereof. This programming flexibility enables a plurality of different power applications to be satisfied with a single generic POL regulator thereby reducing the cost and simplifying the manufacture of POL regulators.

An exemplary system controller of the POL control system is illustrated in . The system controller includes a user interface a POL interface a controller and a memory . The user interface sends and receives messages to from the user via the user interface bus. The user interface bus may be provided by a serial or parallel bi directional interface using standard interface protocols e.g. an IC interface. User information such as monitoring values or new system settings would be transmitted through the user interface . The POL interface transforms data to from the POL regulators via the synch data and OK fault serial buses. The POL interface communicates over the synch data serial bus to transmit setting data and receive monitoring data and communicates over the OK fault serial bus to receive interrupt signals indicating a fault condition in at least one of the connected POL regulators. The memory comprises a non volatile memory storage device used to store the system set up parameters e.g. output voltage current limitation set point timing data etc. for the POL regulators connected to the system controller . Optionally a secondary external memory may also be connected to the user interface to provide increased memory capacity for monitoring data or setting data.

The controller is operably connected to the user interface the POL interface and the memory . The controller has an external port for communication a disable signal FE DIS to the front end regulator . At start up of the POL control system the controller reads from the internal memory and or the external memory the system settings and programs the POL regulators accordingly via the POL interface . Each of the POL regulators is then set up and started in a prescribed manner based on the system programming. During normal operation the controller decodes and executes any command or message coming from the user or the POL regulators. The controller monitors the performance of the POL regulators and reports this information back to the user through the user interface . The POL regulators may also be programmed by the user through the controller to execute specific autonomous reactions to faults such as over current or over voltage conditions. Alternatively the POL regulators may be programmed to only report fault conditions to the system controller which will then determine the appropriate corrective action in accordance with predefined settings e.g. shut down the front end regulator via the FE DIS control line.

A monitoring block may optionally be provided to monitor the state of one or more voltage or current levels of other power systems not operably connected to the controller via the synch data or OK fault buses. The monitoring block may provide this information to the controller for reporting to the user through the user interface in the same manner as other information concerning the POL control system . This way the POL control system can provide some backward compatibility with power systems that are already present in an electronic system.

Returning to the system controller is adapted to provide initial configuration data to each POL regulator i.e. . It should be appreciated that the initial configuration data may include but is not limited to one or more of the following types of data output voltage set point data i.e. a desired output voltage output current set point data i.e. the highest desired output current low voltage limit data i.e. the lowest desired output voltage high voltage limit data i.e. the highest desired output voltage output voltage slew rate data i.e. the desired output slew rate enable disable data i.e. turning on off the POL regulator output timing data e.g. turn on delay turn off delay fault recovery time etc. and or all other types of POL programming data generally known to those skilled in the art. Once the initial configuration data is received the POL controller see is adapted to store at least a portion of the initial configuration data in memory. At least a portion of the stored initial configuration data is then used to produce a desired output. For example an output may be produced to include a particular voltage level a particular slew rate etc. depending on the type of initial configuration data received stored.

After the output has been produced the POL controller is adapted to receive fault monitoring data e.g. from an external device a sense circuit etc. . The fault monitoring data which contains information on the POL regulator or its output is then stored in the memory. The POL controller in response to a condition e.g. receiving a request exceeding a known parameter having a register s contents change etc. is then adapted to provide at least a portion of the fault monitoring data to the system controller . It should be appreciated that the fault monitoring data may include but is not limited to one or more of the following types of data output voltage data which may include actual output voltage data i.e. the measured output voltage or voltage comparison data e.g. whether the measured output voltage is above or below the highest desired output voltage whether the measured output voltage is above or below the lowest desired output voltage etc. output current data which may include actual output current data i.e. the measured output current or current comparison data e.g. whether the measured output current is above or below the highest desired output current temperature status data which may include actual temperature data i.e. the measured temperature of a POL regulator or more particularly its heat generating components or temperature comparison data e.g. whether the temperature of the POL regulator or its components is above or below a known value etc. and or all other types of POL fault monitoring data generally known to those skilled in the art. It should also be appreciated that fault monitoring data is not limited to data representing the existence of a faulty condition. For example fault monitoring data that indicates that the POL regulator is operating within acceptable parameters e.g. within an acceptable temperature range is considered to be within the spirit and scope of the present invention.

The fault monitoring data can be used by either the system controller or the POL controller to monitor and or control the POL regulator. In other words the POL controller can use the fault monitoring data to either provide POL status information i.e. data corresponding to a particular POL regulator or its output to the system controller or disable the POL regulator if a particular condition is met e.g. the status register changes the temperature limit has been exceeded etc. . Alternatively the system controller can use the fault monitoring data to either provide POL status information to an administrator disable a particular POL regulator or store the fault monitoring data for future use. For example in one embodiment of the present invention each POL regulator includes unique ID data e.g. serial number date of manufacture etc. stored in an ID register. This enables the system controller to provide POL status information and unique ID data to an administrator.

In another embodiment of the present invention each POL regulator further includes at least one sensor circuit. The sensor circuit is used to produce either the fault monitoring data or data that can be used e.g. together with information stored in the memory to produce the fault monitoring data. It should be appreciated that the sensor circuit as described herein will vary e.g. as to circuitry location inputs etc. depending upon the type of information that is being detected. For example a sensor circuit that detects current may include different circuitry have different inputs and be placed in a different location than a sensor circuit that detects temperature.

The first and second acknowledgement bits are used to acknowledge the reception of the command set and the data set respectively. It should be appreciated that the device responsible for the providing the first and second acknowledgement bits varies depending upon whether the information is being sent to or from the POL regulator i.e. whether the information is being written read or provided .

The command set data set and address set enable the system controller and the POL regulators to write read and provide data. Specifically i the command set is used to identify whether and what the controller is writing e.g. writing to the status register the controller is reading e.g. reading the status register or the POL regulator is providing e.g. providing status register information ii the address set is used to identify the POL regulator s that is being written to or read or the POL regulator that is providing information and iii the data set is used to identify the actual data that is being written read or provided.

The start sequence and address set are used in part to identify the sender of the information. For example the system controller may use a different start sequence than the individual POL regulators. Thus the system controller can determine by reading the start sequence of the communication cycle being transmitted whether a POL regulator is also attempting to send a communication cycle at the same time. Similarly each POL regulator may have a different address set . Thus a POL regulator can determine by reading the start sequence and address set of the communication cycle being transmitted whether another POL regulator or the controller is also attempting to send a communication cycle at the same time. If multiple devices are attempting to send a communication cycle sequencing data is used to allocate or arbitrate bus use. It should be appreciated that the sequence data can either be stored or hard wired as a default value or provided as initial configuration data and stored in the storage device e.g. a sequencing configuration register .

One method of providing utilizing initial communication data is illustrated in starting at step . Specifically at step the POL control unit begins by receiving initial configuration data e.g. output voltage set point output current set point etc. . The initial configuration data is then stored in memory at step . At step the POL control unit uses at least a portion of the initial configuration data to determine at least one output parameter e.g. voltage level slew rate etc. of the POL regulator. The POL control unit then generates an output including the output parameter s at step ending the process at step .

One method of providing utilizing fault monitoring data is illustrated in starting at step . Specifically at step the POL regulator or more particularly a sensor circuit either alone or together with information stored in the storage device detects fault monitoring data e.g. output voltage data output current data etc. . The fault monitoring data is then stored in memory at step . At step the system controller sends and the POL controller receives a request for at least a portion of the fault monitoring data. At step the POL controller provides the requested portion of the fault monitoring data to the system controller . The system controller at step uses the requested portion of the fault monitoring data to monitor at least one parameter of the POL regulator.

At step the system controller determines whether the monitored parameter violates a known parameter. For example if the monitored parameter is output voltage the output voltage could be compared to a maximum output voltage value. If a violation occurs e.g. the output voltage exceeds a maximum output voltage value then the POL regulator would be disabled at step . Alternatively if a violation does not occur the system controller continues monitoring the POL regulator by again requesting at least a portion of fault monitoring data at step . It should be appreciated that while it may be advantageous to disable a POL regulator in light of a violation the present invention is not limited to such a result. For example the system controller or a POL regulator may be programmed to perform a different action e.g. closely monitor the faulty POL regulator notify the administrator store fault monitoring data etc. if a particular parameter violation occurs.

In another embodiment of the invention the fault monitoring data itself indicates whether a monitored parameter violates a known parameter. For example if output current set point data i.e. the highest desired output current is received as initial configuration data and stored in the storage device the POL regulator or more particular the POL controller can provide the system controller with fault monitoring data that indicates whether the measured output current is over or under the stored maximum current value. In this instance if the received fault monitoring data indicates that the output current is below the maximum value the system controller can continue to monitor the POL regulator as previously described. Alternatively if the received fault monitoring data indicates that the output current is above the maximum value the system controller without making any additional calculations can disable the POL regulator.

The POL control system enables four different modes of operation. In the first operational mode the POL regulators function independently in the absence of a system controller and without interaction with other POL regulators. The POL regulators each include local feedback and control systems to regulate their own performance as well as control interfaces to enable local programming. The POL regulators further include default settings in which they can revert to in the absence of local programming or data from the system controller. In other words each of the POL regulators can operate as a standalone device without the need for a system controller or interactions with another POL regulator.

In the second operational mode the POL regulators interoperate for the purpose of current sharing or interleaving in the absence of a system controller. The POL regulators communicate with each other over the current share interface. The synch data line may be used to communicate synchronization information to permit phase interleaving of the POL regulators in which the phase is programmed locally by entering an address through hardwired connections. In either the first or second modes of operation there would generally be information communicated between the POL regulators except for synchronization there would be no need to communicate programming information.

In the third operational mode the POL regulators operate as an array in which the behavior of each POL regulator and the array as a whole are coordinated by a system controller. The system controller programs the operation of each of the POL regulators over the synch data serial bus and thereby overrides the predetermined settings of the POL regulators. The synch data serial bus is further used to communicate synchronization information to permit synchronization and interleaving of the POL regulators. This operational mode would not include interdevice communications over the current share interface.

Lastly the fourth operational mode includes both central control using the system controller and local control over certain functionality. This way the POL regulators operate as an array coordinated by a system controller and also interoperate with each other to perform functions such as current sharing.

It should be appreciated that the POL control system of the present invention provides a great deal of flexibility in the manner in which it implemented to regulate power for a host system. illustrates an exemplary embodiment of a POL control system implemented with a host system. The host system may be a specialized master that provides the main interface to the user system CPU. Alternatively the host system may be provided directly by the user system CPU or any other control system dedicated to manage the power management subsystems.

One such embodiment would include a host system a system controller and an array of POL regulators. An advantage of this embodiment is that the host is relieved of the overhead of continuous communication with the POL regulators. Instead the system controller provides the supervisory level communications with the POL regulators and the host may only be provided with high level interactions such as monitoring and status information. The system controller also provides memory for storage of POL array programming parameters thereby relieving the host of this responsibility. Another embodiment could include a system controller and array of POL regulators without a host system. The system controllers would independently manage the operation of the POL control systems without need for interaction with a host. Alternatively the host system could be adapted to provide the function of the system controller and thereby would communicate directly with the array of POL regulators. While this would place substantial overhead requirements on the host it may be desirable in certain applications.

Specifically the POL control system includes two separate POL control systems similar to that described above with respect to . The first POL control system i.e. System A includes a system controller coupled to a plurality of POL regulators . The second POL control system has a similar structure including a system controller and plurality of POL regulators. The POL control systems may each be associated with different aspects of a host system. For example System A may provide regulated power to a first rack of circuit boards and System B may provide regulated power to a second rack of circuit boards. Alternatively Systems A and B may each provide regulated power to different circuit boards within one rack. In either case by each having their own system controller the POL control systems can operate autonomously from each other and would therefore be best suited for large host systems. It should be appreciated that additional POL control systems could be coupled to the host system and that two POL control systems are illustrated merely for convenience and simplicity.

The system controllers from each the POL control systems would communicate with a host controller via the user interface serial bus. As described above the link with the host controller enables the communication of monitoring control and programming data. The host controller may additionally be coupled to a local area network LAN or wide area network WAN . A user would then have several options for accessing the POL control systems for purposes of monitoring controlling and or programming the POL control systems. In a first embodiment a user system i.e. computer equipped with a suitable application programming interface API may be coupled directly to the user interface bus for receiving communicating with the system controllers of the Systems A and B. The user system would likely include a user interface such as a graphical user interface GUI that enables the display of status information regarding the POL control systems. The GUI may also serve as a diagnostic tool to enable troubleshooting of fault conditions within the POL control system.

Alternatively in a second embodiment the user system may instead be coupled directly to the host controller . This might enable the same level of access to the POL control systems or the host controller may limit the extent of access e.g. monitoring only without ability to control or program . In yet another alternative the user system may be coupled to the host controller through a LAN WAN thereby enabling the user to access the POL control systems from a remote location. As in the preceding embodiment the host controller may limit the extent of access to the POL control systems.

In this exemplary embodiment the system controller would communicate with a host via the user interface serial bus. The communication with the host may be direct or via a local area network LAN or wide area network WAN . A user may access the POL control systems for purposes of monitoring controlling and or programming the POL control systems by coupling directly to the user interface bus. As above the user system would likely include a user interface such as a graphical user interface GUI that enables the display of status information regarding the POL control systems.

A POL control system may be designed for a particular application with certain parameters and values selected to achieve desired performance requirements. Once a set of desired parameters is achieved these parameters may be programmed into the system controller to enable mass production of the POL array for use in a production level application. shows an exemplary method of programming a POL array in accordance with an embodiment of the invention and illustrate a corresponding system implementing the exemplary method.

Specifically in a prototype POL control system includes a POL array and a system controller unprogrammed . A proxy host may also be provided to emulate interactions of the POL control system with an actual host. An operator communicates with the prototype POL control system using a suitable graphical user interface . As shown in step an initial arrangement of the POL array is defined by the operator using the GUI . For example the operator may designate the number of POL regulators of the array the output voltage parameters of the POL regulators the fault monitoring characteristics and other such parameters generally described above. In step the operator will optimize the system by adjusting parameter values until a desired configuration is achieved. For example the GUI may enable the operator to simulate various operational loads faults and other conditions unique to the particular host environment and can thereby select operational parameters that are best suited to achieve performance requirements of the host environment. When the operator is satisfied with the selected operational parameters the GUI would write these parameters to a suitable configuration file as shown in and in step .

Thereafter the configuration file would be used to program a final system controller as shown in and step . This step may be repeated many times to fabricate a production run of system controller devices to be used in a production level application. Then a production level POL control system is produced including a POL array and a programmed system controller for use with the actual host system as shown in . In step the pre programmed system controller devices are installed in an actual production system. Finally at step the POL control system including the POL array and system controller are implemented in the production system and the system controller operates as described above to mange the operation of the POL array.

It should be appreciated that the POL control system of the present invention provides certain advantages over prior art distributed power distribution systems. The present POL control system requires much less complexity or glue components e.g. mediating devices in order to provide communication and control of a plurality of POL regulators thereby reducing the amount of circuit board space for the POL control system and number of control lines needed for communication control and monitoring. The POL control system is easily scalable by adding POL regulators to the array in order to support additional power requirements without increasing the overhead requirements.

Having thus described a preferred embodiment of a method and system to control and monitor an array of DC DC power converters it should be apparent to those skilled in the art that certain advantages of the system have been achieved. It should also be appreciated that various modifications adaptations and alternative embodiments thereof may be made within the scope and spirit of the present invention. The invention is further defined by the following claims.

