---

title: Transportation planning with drop trailer arrangements
abstract: Systems, methodologies, media, and other embodiments associated with transportation planning in light of drop trailer arrangements are described. One exemplary computer-implemented method embodiment includes receiving orders that describe items to be delivered to facilities as controlled by order requirements. The method may also include accessing a transportation planning model that includes information concerning shipping modes and carriers by which an order can be delivered to a facility. The transportation planning model may also include data concerning drop trailer arrangements between facilities and the carriers. The method may also include selectively consolidating orders into shipments based on the transportation planning model and the availability of a drop trailer arrangement. The method may also include selectively assigning shipments to loads based on the transportation planning model and the availability of a drop trailer action. The method may output an actionable plan of loads stored, for example, on a computer-readable medium.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07672855&OS=07672855&RS=07672855
owner: Oracle International Corp.
number: 07672855
owner_city: Redwood Shores
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050225
---
This application Is related to the following U.S. patent applications which are all assigned to the present assignee 

 Transportation Planning With System Assisted Exception Resolutions Ser. No. 11 093 830 filed Mar. 30 2005 inventors Goassens et al. 

 Transportation Planning With Multi Level Firming Ser. No. 11 078 675 filed Mar. 11 2005 inventors Peterkofaky et al. 

 Transportation Planning With Parallel Optimization Ser. No. 11 097 435 filed Apr. 1 2005 inventors Sun et al. 

 Transportation Planning With Multi Level Pooling Model Ser. No. 11 113 514 filed Apr. 25 2005 inventors Sun et al. 

 Optimization of Carrier Selection For Transportation Planning System Ser. No. 11 113 906 filed Apr. 25 2005 inventors Yadappanavar et al.

Transportation planning systems and methods may attempt to minimize transportation costs through actions like load consolidation continuous moves selecting carriage mode selecting carrier and so on. Transportation planning systems and methods may also attempt to improve situations like on time delivery customer satisfaction compliance with routing guides usage of preferred carriers usage of volume based pricing and so on. At times these may produce conflicting and or competing goals. Thus transportation planning systems and methods may be configured to selectively make trade offs in order to maximize for example an overall utility.

Transportation planning generally concerns determining how and when to ship items from sources to destinations. As used herein transportation planning concerns determining how and when to ship items using vehicles e.g. trucks that may have a leave behind and or pickup capability e.g. drop trailer arrangement available at a location. While trucks are primarily described it is to be appreciated that vehicles like roll on roll off airplanes roll on roll off ships trains and the like may also have leave behind and or pickup capability.

A leave behind and or pickup capability like a drop trailer arrangement is contrasted with a live un load situation. In a live un load situation a driver stops and waits while his truck is un loaded. In a drop trailer arrangement a driver delivers a trailer unhooks it and may hook up and leave with another trailer. Thus the driver does not wait while the trailer is un loaded. Similarly in some cases a train may deliver a train car be uncoupled from it and coupled to another without waiting for the car to be un loaded. Likewise in some cases a plane may deliver a first container pick up a second container and take off with the second container rather than waiting around for the first container to be un loaded. Similarly a ship may deliver a container and receive another container without waiting for the container to be unloaded and reloaded.

To illustrate how a drop trailer arrangement may work consider a facility that has a drop trailer arrangement with a specific carrier for a specific type of equipment e.g. trailer . Due to the drop trailer arrangement the facility may develop a pool of vehicles e.g. trailers of the specific type belonging to the specific carrier. Trailers in the pool may be in different states like loaded unloaded awaiting pickup and so on.

With the pool of trailers available at the facility a certain flexibility may be applied to delivering un loaded trailers to the facility and or to picking up un loaded trailers from the facility. The flexibility may derive from only requiring the time space personnel to un hook a trailer s rather than requiring the time space personnel to dock and un load a trailer s .

Consider a multi stop load where a truck and trailer are loaded at a source location with a set of shipments. The truck and trailer may travel to a first location wait while a first shipment is unloaded may continue to a second location wait while a second shipment is unloaded and may then arrive at a third location where the carrier and the facility have a drop trailer arrangement for this type of trailer. Rather than wait while the third shipment is unloaded the trailer may be unhooked and left for later unloading. Additionally another trailer either empty or loaded may be available for the truck to hook up and drive away. When there is a pickup for each drop off the size of the pool of trailers may remain substantially constant and act as a buffer that may relieve time pressures associated with live un loading. Also having a pool of trailers may facilitate improving dock worker utilization at a facility by facilitating a steady workflow from the pool rather than a hit or miss workflow common in non buffered situations.

Note that in a multi stop load like that described above the load is typically arranged so that the facility with the drop trailer arrangement is visited last.

Unique elements of the North American regional transportation system lead to extensive truck utilization. The unique elements include long distances between major cities an extensive high quality government subsidized road network relatively low fuel costs a highly organized and competitive trucking industry comparatively poor rail service over a relatively limited rail network and a high level of economic activity over very dense traffic lanes. Thus systems and methods that participate in truck based transportation planning may facilitate mitigating some inefficiencies associated with truck utilization.

Example systems methods media and other embodiments described herein relate to transportation planning in light of drop trailer arrangements. In one example computer based systems and methods that may consolidate orders plan loads and or assign consolidated orders to loads may be configured to consider drop trailer arrangements when consolidating planning and or assigning. In another example computer based systems and methods that consolidate orders route loads and assign orders to loads may be reconfigured to re examine consolidation routing and or assigning decisions based on post calculation examination of drop trailer arrangements.

The following includes definitions of selected terms employed herein. The definitions include various examples and or forms of components that fall within the scope of a term and that may be used for implementation. The examples are not intended to be limiting. Both singular and plural forms of terms may be within the definitions.

In the context of transportation planning and this application load refers to a set of shipments assigned to a vehicle and assigned a schedule for delivery. A load may refer to a single stop load a multi stop load and the like.

As used in this application the term computer component refers to a computer related entity either hardware firmware software a combination thereof or software in execution. For example a computer component can be but is not limited to being a process running on a processor a processor an object an executable a thread of execution a program and a computer. By way of illustration both an application running on a server and the server can be computer components. One or more computer components can reside within a process and or thread of execution and a computer component can be localized on one computer and or distributed between two or more computers.

 Computer communication as used herein refers to a communication between two or more computing devices e.g. computer personal digital assistant cellular telephone and can be for example a network transfer a file transfer an applet transfer an email a hypertext transfer protocol HTTP transfer and so on. A computer communication can occur across for example a wireless system e.g. IEEE 802.11 an Ethernet system e.g. IEEE 802.3 a token ring system e.g. IEEE 802.5 a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN a point to point system a circuit switching system a packet switching system and so on.

 Computer readable medium as used herein refers to a medium that stores instructions and or data. A computer readable medium may take forms including but not limited to non volatile media and volatile media. Non volatile media may include for example optical or magnetic disks and so on. Volatile media may include for example semiconductor memories dynamic memory and the like. Common forms of a computer readable medium include but are not limited to a floppy disk a flexible disk a hard disk a magnetic tape other magnetic medium a CD ROM other optical medium a RAM random access memory a ROM read only memory an EPROM a FLASH EPROM or other memory chip or card a memory stick and other media from which a computer a processor or other electronic device can read.

 Data store as used herein refers to a physical and or logical entity that can store data. A data store may be for example a database a table a file a list a queue a heap a memory a register and so on. A data store may reside in one logical and or physical entity and or may be distributed between two or more logical and or physical entities.

 Logic as used herein includes but is not limited to hardware firmware software embodied as a computer readable medium having computer executable instructions stored thereon and or combinations of each to perform a function s or an action s and or to cause a function or action from another logic method and or system. For example based on a desired application or needs logic may include a software controlled microprocessor discrete logic like an application specific integrated circuit ASIC an analog circuit a digital circuit a programmed logic device a memory device containing instructions or the like. Logic may include one or more gates combinations of gates or other circuit components. Logic may also be fully embodied as software embodied as a computer readable medium having computer executable instructions stored thereon. Where multiple logical logics are described it may be possible to incorporate the multiple logical logics into one physical logic. Similarly where a single logical logic is described it may be possible to distribute that single logical logic between multiple physical logics.

An operable connection or a connection by which entities are operably connected is one in which signals physical communications and or logical communications may be sent and or received. Typically an operable connection includes a physical interface an electrical interface and or a data interface but it is to be noted that an operable connection may include differing combinations of these or other types of connections sufficient to allow operable control. For example two entities can be operably connected by being able to communicate signals to each other directly or through one or more intermediate entities like a processor operating system a logic software or other entity. Logical and or physical communication channels can be used to create an operable connection.

 Signal as used herein includes but is not limited to one or more electrical or optical signals analog or digital signals data one or more computer or processor instructions messages a bit or bit stream or other means that can be received transmitted and or detected.

 Software as used herein includes but is not limited to one or more computer or processor instructions that can be read interpreted compiled and or executed and that cause a computer processor or other electronic device to perform functions actions and or behave in a desired manner. The instructions may be embodied in various forms like routines algorithms modules methods threads and or programs including separate applications or code from dynamically linked libraries. Software may also be implemented in a variety of executable and or loadable forms including but not limited to a stand alone program a function call local and or remote a servelet an applet instructions stored in a memory part of an operating system or other types of executable instructions. It will be appreciated by one of ordinary skill in the art that the form of software may be dependent on for example requirements of a desired application the environment in which it runs and or the desires of a designer programmer or the like. It will also be appreciated that computer readable and or executable instructions can be located in one logic and or distributed between two or more communicating co operating and or parallel processing logics and thus can be loaded and or executed in serial parallel massively parallel and other manners.

Suitable software for implementing the various components of the example systems and methods described herein include programming languages and tools like Java Pascal C C C CGI PerI SQL APIs SDKs assembly firmware microcode and or other languages and tools. Software whether an entire system or a component of a system is embodied as an article of manufacture and maintained or provided as part of a computer readable medium as defined previously. Thus in one example the computer readable medium has a form of the software firmware as it is maintained on the web server. Other forms may also be used.

 User as used herein includes but is not limited to one or more persons software computers or other devices or combinations of these.

Some portions of the detailed descriptions that follow are presented in terms of algorithms and symbolic representations of operations on data bits within a memory. These algorithmic descriptions and representations are the means used by those skilled in the art to convey the substance of their work to others. An algorithm is here and generally conceived to be a sequence of operations that produce a result. The operations may include physical manipulations of physical quantities. Usually though not necessarily the physical quantities take the form of electrical or magnetic signals capable of being stored transferred combined compared and otherwise manipulated in a logic and the like.

It has proven convenient at times principally for reasons of common usage to refer to these signals as bits values elements symbols characters terms numbers or the like. It should be borne in mind however that these and similar terms are to be associated with the appropriate physical quantities and are merely convenient labels applied to these quantities. Unless specifically stated otherwise it is appreciated that throughout the description terms like processing computing calculating determining displaying or the like refer to actions and processes of a computer system logic processor or similar electronic device that manipulates and transforms data represented as physical electronic quantities.

Example methods may be better appreciated with reference to flow diagrams. While for purposes of simplicity of explanation the illustrated methodologies are shown and described as a series of blocks it is to be appreciated that the methodologies are not limited by the order of the blocks as some blocks can occur in different orders and or concurrently with other blocks from that shown and described. Moreover less than all the illustrated blocks may be required to implement an example methodology. Blocks may be combined or separated into multiple components. Furthermore additional and or alternative methodologies can employ additional not illustrated blocks.

Elements illustrated in the flow diagrams denote processing blocks that may be implemented in logic. In one example the processing blocks may represent executable instructions that cause a computer processor and or logic device to respond to perform an action s to change states and or to make decisions. Thus the described methodologies can be implemented as processor executable instructions and or operations provided by a computer readable medium. In another example the processing blocks may represent functions and or actions performed by functionally equivalent circuits such as an analog circuit a digital signal processor circuit an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other logic device.

The flow diagrams of are not intended to limit the implementation of the described examples. Rather the diagrams illustrate functional information one skilled in the art could use to design fabricate circuits generate software or use a combination of hardware and software to perform the illustrated processing. It will be appreciated that electronic and software applications may involve dynamic and flexible processes and thus blocks may be performed concurrently substantially in parallel and or at substantially different points in time.

Method may also include at accessing a transportation planning model. The transportation model may include for example information concerning modes by which an order may be shipped like a parcel mode a less than truckload mode a truckload mode and so on. The transportation model may also include information concerning carriers by which an order can be delivered to a facility. The carriers may include for example parcel carriers less than truckload carriers truckload carriers and so on. In some cases a facility and a carrier may have a drop trailer arrangement whereby a trailer may be left at a facility. Thus a driver may drop a first trailer at a facility and pick up a second trailer at the facility without waiting around for the first trailer to be un loaded. Therefore the transportation planning model may also include data concerning drop trailer arrangements between facilities carriers and so on. The transportation planning model may also include for example rates charged by the carriers to carry an item s according to the modes facilities from which items are carried facilities to which the items are carried consolidation points through which items pass cross docking locations across which items pass a transportation network e.g. roads upon which the carriers travel and so on.

Method may also include at selectively consolidating orders into shipments. Whether orders are consolidated into shipments may depend on factors like common origins common destinations requirements that sets of items remain together in transit requirements that sets of items be delivered together the existence of an under utilized truck moving along a path that satisfies the order and so on. In method the consolidation may also depend at least in part on the availability of a drop trailer arrangement as described in the transportation planning model.

Method may also include at selectively assigning a shipment s to a load. The load may be for example a multi stop load. Whether shipments are assigned to loads may depend on factors like common origins common destinations common pickup windows common delivery windows and so on. For multi stop loads whether shipments are assigned to loads may depend on factors like the proximity of origins the proximity of destinations compatibilities involving commodities equipment carriers facilities and so on. In method the assignment may also depend at least in part on the availability of a drop trailer action as described in the transportation planning model. Thus in method a load may include a drop trailer action. By way of illustration due to the allowed time windows for pickup and or delivery the compatibility of different shipments for inclusion on the same multi stop load may depend on whether a drop trailer arrangement can be utilized at the origin s and or destination s of a shipment s .

Method may also include at providing an actionable plan of loads for delivering shipments to facilities. The actionable plan may be provided for example on a computer readable medium like a disk a CD a DVD and so on. In one example the actionable plan and or portions thereof may be distributed to carriers by for example the Internet. In this case the computer readable medium may take the form of a carrier wave. The loads may be described by data including for example a start time a start location a sequenced set of stops a drop trailer instruction a pickup trailer instruction and a set of shipments involved in the load. It is to be appreciated that in some examples a load may include multiple stops that some items may be dropped off at a stop and that other items may be picked up at a stop. Furthermore it is to be appreciated that a load as provided by method may include a drop trailer action whereby a trailer is either dropped off and or picked up at a stop. Most often a trailer will be picked up or dropped off at the first or last stop.

In some examples the actionable plan provided by method improves on conventional actionable plans because it includes drop trailer arrangements and thus may include more efficient multi stop loads that may not have appeared feasible or that may have appeared less desirable if not for considering drop trailer arrangements. Thus in one example the actionable plan may facilitate improving a utility measurement associated with satisfying the set of orders as compared to an actionable plan that does not consider drop trailer actions. In another example the actionable plan may facilitate optimizing a utility measurement associated with satisfying the set of orders. The utility measurement may consider the relative and overall value of factors like reducing load cost reducing order cost improving order compliance with rules laws preferences e.g. shipper preference carrier preference receiver preference driver preference improving truck utilization percentages reducing spoilage reducing breakage improving on time delivery and so on. Reducing costs may include for example reducing the total number of miles traveled acquiring a lower unit cost for an order moving an order from a parcel mode to a truckload mode moving an order from a less than truckload mode to a truckload mode and so on.

In one example a decision concerning whether to consolidate an order s into a shipment s includes identifying consolidation opportunities. In different examples consolidation opportunities may include for example a simple consolidation opportunity a single tier pooling opportunity a multi tier pooling opportunity a cross docking opportunity and a multi stop load opportunity. Examples of these consolidation opportunities are described in association with .

As is known in the art there are a variety of algorithms and processes by which items can be selected to be included or not included in a group like a consolidated order and or multi stop load. However these algorithms conventionally may not have considered the possibility of drop trailer arrangements and their effect on the selection process. The algorithms may be implemented for example in processes including but not limited to linear programming consolidation processes simplex method consolidation processes dynamic programming consolidation processes greedy algorithm consolidation processes look ahead consolidation processes divide and conquer consolidation processes branch and bound processes savings based processes heuristic based processes and the like.

Dynamic programming is used to solve optimization problems that may require testing many possible solutions. When presented with a set of orders many possible solutions for consolidation routing load assignment and so on may be available. Conventionally dynamic programming techniques may not have factored in the availability of drop trailer arrangements when calculating acceptable and or optimal solutions in the transportation planning field. Thus example systems and methods described herein include in the solutions for transportation planning problems the possibility that a drop trailer arrangement may exist.

Dynamic programming involves breaking problems into dependent sub problems solving the sub problems and saving the solutions to reuse when applicable. Example systems and methods described herein may include in the sub problems considering the affect of a drop trailer arrangement on a consolidation routing and or assignment sub problem. For example one sub problem may include identifying routes that include exactly one drop trailer arrangement while another sub problem may involve identifying all orders destined for a location that has a drop trailer arrangement. In dynamic programming the single best solution is referred to as the optimal solution. In some examples neither the time nor the computing cycles may be available to compute an optimal solution. In other examples a sub optimal solution may be acceptable particularly if it can be computed within a desired time frame. Thus example systems and methods described herein may employ dynamic programming solutions that are configured to produce a good enough solution that may then be improved by considering available drop trailer arrangements. While dynamic programming is described it is to be appreciated that similar improvements may be made in other techniques like greedy algorithms divide and conquer and so on.

Greedy algorithms concern a general algorithm design paradigm that rests on the consideration of configurations and objective functions. A configuration describes different choices to make different collections to assemble different values to find and so on. An objective function describes a score that may be assigned to candidate configurations. Thus transportation planning may employ greedy algorithms whose objective functions concern cost and or utility and whose configurations describe orders consolidations routes assignments and so on. Greedy algorithms seek to maximize or minimize the objective function. A greedy algorithm builds a solution by keeping the best result for a smaller problem and adding that result to a current sub solution. One example smaller problem may be identifying loads that violate an hours of service rule and another smaller problem may be identifying trucks that are under utilized. A greedy algorithm tends to make the best choice at the moment in the hope that this will lead to an optimal and or acceptable solution in the long run. Example greedy algorithms include Dijkstra s shortest path algorithm Prim Kruskal s MST algorithm and so on. Greedy algorithms are typically employed to solve task scheduling and knapsack like problems. When considering drop trailer arrangements greedy algorithms may be adapted by reconfiguring the objective function to reward drop trailer arrangements to penalize missed drop trailer opportunities by adding parameters to the configurations that discourage certain immediate choices and so on.

In one example a greedy or other type of algorithm may be modified to either narrow or widen the choices available at any point in the process to reflect the impact of drop trailer arrangements and to reward decisions that put a drop trailer opportunity into the proper position e.g. first stop last stop within a load. Thus by considering drop trailer arrangements greedy and other algorithms may be able to identify opportunities for loads that are superior e.g. more cost effective higher utility than those possible in the absence of drop trailer arrangements.

A look ahead algorithm does not necessarily make the best choice at the moment but rather makes tentative decisions and determines the best result based on subsequent decisions. Look ahead algorithms are familiar to those involved in chess programming. Divide and conquer programming involves breaking problems into independent sub problems and solving the sub problems. Linear programming is used to solve problems that involve limited resources an overall objective and a choice of actions to be taken. The simplex method is a pre eminent tool in linear programming.

To accommodate drop trailer actions these and other conventional techniques may be updated to make selections based for example on the desirability of including only one location with a drop trailer arrangement per set of shipments to facilitate leaving other drop trailer arrangements for subsequent consolidations the desirability of including at least one location with a drop trailer arrangement in a set of shipments and so on. Additionally and or alternatively decisions may not be made solely on the desirability of including drop trailer arrangements in a plan but also for example on the desirability of plan decisions that become feasible in the presence of drop trailer arrangements. Similarly these techniques may be updated to make selections where at least one selection is pre selected as a last on selection based on the availability of a drop trailer arrangement at that pre selected location. While pre selecting and so on it is to be appreciated that these techniques may be altered in other manners to consider drop trailer arrangements. In one example the availability of drop trailer arrangements may be considered while initial consolidations are being made. In another example the availability of drop trailer arrangements may be considered after initial consolidations have been made.

In one example selectively assigning shipments to loads includes identifying a routing opportunity for a shipment s . A routing opportunity may include for example a single stop routing opportunity a multi stop routing opportunity a continuous move opportunity and so on. In method a routing opportunity may include a drop trailer action. A continuous move is a sequence of loads that a single vehicle can serve as one mission. A continuous move may have empty movements between loaded legs.

Once again routing algorithms known in the art may include but are not limited to linear programming routing processes simplex method routing processes dynamic programming routing processes greedy algorithm routing processes look ahead routing processes divide and conquer routing processes branch and bound processes savings based processes heuristic based processes and so on. These algorithms may be updated to consider drop trailer arrangements in routing like they were updated to consider drop trailer arrangements in consolidation. For example from a set of destinations a subset of destinations may be reserved as final destinations based on having drop trailer arrangements available. Similarly from a set of sources a subset of sources may be reserved as initial sources based on having drop trailer arrangements available. By way of illustration in a divide and conquer approach divisions may be made in a manner that facilitates partitioning the final destinations with drop trailer arrangements so that a maximum number of divisions remain drop trailer capable. By way of further illustration in a greedy algorithm approach an immediate decision value may be manipulated to receive a higher score if the immediate decision will complete a load and the immediate decision will add a drop trailer facility to the end of the load while an immediate decision value may be manipulated to receive a lower score if the immediate decision will not complete a load and the immediate decision will add a second drop trailer facility to a load that already includes a drop trailer facility. It is to be appreciated that the updates to the divide and conquer algorithms and the greedy algorithms are merely examples and that other updates may be employed.

Considering drop trailer arrangements in method facilitates taking actions that are not conventionally possible. For example method facilitates relaxing a constraint associated with facility operation time. By way of illustration conventionally a transportation planning method may include as a hard constraint the times at which a delivery may be made at a facility or the times at which an order may be picked up from a facility. If a drop trailer arrangement exists for the facility and a carrier these time constraints may in some cases be ignored. These constraints may only need to be applied to live un loading since it may only occur during hours when a facility is staffed open for operations and has available dock and worker capacity. Conversely with appropriate drop trailer arrangements a trailer may be dropped at other times for later un loading. This facilitates eliminating a constraint from the consolidation and or routing algorithms and thus facilitates reducing the overall complexity of such algorithms. Furthermore this facilitates making certain decisions feasible that otherwise would not be thus allowing a broader set of solutions and potentially allowing the chosen solution to achieve higher values for relevant utility functions. Additionally this facilitates making available at a lower cost and or higher utility other solutions that were feasible at a higher cost due for example to charges related to delaying a truck and driver until a facility is open staffed and has capacity if the charges may be avoided if the truck and driver do not have to wait.

While illustrates various actions occurring in serial it is to be appreciated that various actions illustrated in could occur substantially in parallel. By way of illustration a first process could receive orders a second process could access a transportation planning model a third process could consolidate orders to shipments a fourth process could assign shipments to loads and a fifth process could provide actionable load data. While five processes are described it is to be appreciated that a greater and or lesser number of processes could be employed and that lightweight processes regular processes threads and other approaches could be employed.

In one example methodologies are implemented as processor executable instructions and or operations stored on a computer readable medium. Thus in one example a computer readable medium may store processor executable instructions operable to perform a method that includes receiving a set of orders that describe items to be delivered to facilities as controlled at least in part by order requirements. The method may also include accessing a transportation planning model that includes information concerning modes and carriers by which an order can be delivered to a facility. The transportation planning model may also include drop trailer arrangement data concerning the facilities and the carriers. The method may also include selectively consolidating orders into shipments based at least in part on the transportation planning model and the availability of a drop trailer arrangement. The method may also include selectively assigning shipments to loads based at least in part on the transportation planning model and the availability of a drop trailer action. Finally the method may include providing an actionable plan of loads for delivering the shipments to the facilities. While the above method is described being stored on a computer readable medium it is to be appreciated that other example methods described herein can also be stored on a computer readable medium.

System also includes a model logic that is configured to access a shipping model. The shipping model may describe for example shipping modes carriers facilities a transportation network and drop trailer arrangements between the facilities and the carriers. Additionally the shipping model may include data concerning factors relevant to shipping an item from a source to a destination like a transportation network configuration the capacity of various types of equipment transit times across portions of the transportation network commodity to commodity compatibilities commodity to equipment compatibilities commodity to facility compatibilities commodity to carrier compatibilities facility to equipment compatibilities rules for carriers carrier limits laws concerning hours of service for drivers and or equipment days on which a facility may be open hours during which a facility may operate the availability of equipment e.g. tractors trailers the availability of drivers the capacity of a facility carrier pickup lead times ship sets e.g. groups of items that need to be shipped together and so on.

System may also include a consolidation logic that is configured to consolidate orders into shipments. The consolidation logic may be operably connected to data store and model logic . Whether and or how orders are consolidated into shipments may depend for example on the shipping model and the availability of drop trailer possibilities. In one example consolidation logic may be configured to identify a consolidation opportunity and then to make consolidations based on the identified opportunities. Opportunities may be identified using for example a linear programming selection process a simplex method selection process a dynamic programming selection process a greedy selection process a look ahead selection process a divide and conquer selection process a branch and bound process a savings based process a heuristic based process and so on. In one example consolidation logic may be configured to perform these processes in a manner that considers the availability and or affect of a drop trailer arrangement. Opportunities may include for example simple consolidation opportunities single tier pooling opportunities multi tier pooling opportunities cross docking opportunities multi stop pooling opportunities and so on.

System may also include a load logic that is configured to assign shipments to loads. Once again whether and or how shipments are assigned to loads may depend at least in part on the shipping model and the availability of drop trailer possibilities. System facilitates determining loads that may include a drop trailer action. In one example including a drop trailer arrangement in a load may facilitate violating a facility operation time constraint described in the shipping model.

In one example load logic may be configured to identify a routing opportunity using techniques like those described above e.g. linear programming simplex method dynamic programming greedy algorithms divide and conquer . The routing opportunities identified by the load logic may include for example single stop routes multi stop routes continuous moves and so on. Load logic may be configured to consider drop trailer arrangements as part of routing opportunities. Thus load logic may be configured to assign shipments to loads based at least in part on the routing opportunity and the availability of a drop trailer arrangement.

The following examples illustrate different results that may be achieved using example systems and methods described herein when compared to conventional systems. Consider the following two order OD1 may concern an item available at facility O that is to be delivered to facility orders. A first D1. OD1 may have a pickup window on Monday from 9 am to 11 am and a flexible delivery window. A second order OD2 may concern an item available at facility O that is to be delivered to facility D2. OD2 may have a pickup window on Monday from 9 am to 11 am the same as OD1 and a delivery time window of Tuesday from 8 am to 12 pm. Each order may take one hour to load and each order may take one hour to unload. All three of the facilities O D1 and D2 are open twenty four hours from Monday through Friday.

Now assume that a first carrier C1 provides a truckload TL service from O to D1 D2 with the loaded distance charge of 1 mile and has a layover setting for maximum on duty time in any twenty four hour period of fourteen hours with a weekday layover charge of 100. Also assume that carrier C1 has a drop trailer arrangement with facility D2.

Assume that D1 is 200 miles from O and it takes 3 hours to drive from O to D1. Assume that D2 is 170 miles from O and that it also takes 3 hours to drive from 0 to D2. Further assume that D1 is 60 miles from D2 and that it takes 1 hour to drive from D1 to D2 and from D2 to D1. Conventional systems that do not consider the drop trailer arrangement between carrier C1 and facility D2 would produce two sub optimal solutions. The first sub optimal solution is a load from O to D1 to D2. The scheduling of this truckload is as follows unit hour 

The second sub optimal solution is a load from O to D2 to D1. The scheduling of this truckload is as follows unit hour 

A layover charge may be assessed if the truck physically arrives at D2 with enough time to finish unloading during typically accepted regular business hours e.g. at 4 p.m. if regular hours last until 5 p.m. but is not actually unloaded until the next day. A weekday layover charge is typically incurred when a truck arrives with enough time to finish un loading within defined regular business hours but is delayed until the next business day due to other factors like in this case the allowed delivery window for the order.

A conventional system that does not consider the drop trailer arrangement will select the second load as the best choice even though it is sub optimal. Example systems and methods described herein however will consider the drop trailer arrangement between carrier C1 and facility D2. When considering the drop trailer arrangement two loads may be examined. A first load starts at O and proceeds in order to D1 and D2. Since carrier C1 has a drop trailer arrangement with facility D2 and D2 is the last stop in this load when the driver reaches D2 the driver can immediately drop the trailer and ignore the early delivery time associated with order OD2. Thus the layover charge at facility D2 is avoided.

A second load that will be considered starts at O and proceeds in order from D2 to D1. Since D2 is not the last stop the drop trailer arrangement between C1 and D2 can not be used and thus the scheduling and the total cost of this truckload will be the same as that in a conventional system where Total cost distance charge layover cost 1 170 60 100 330. Thus by considering the drop trailer arrangement a lower cost of 260 is found and a drop trailer arrangement will be used. In this example the consolidation routing and or assignment algorithms may have operated in a typical manner. However by simply adding the consideration of drop trailer arrangements a lower cost was found. In other examples the algorithms may have been reconfigured to operate differently. For example the algorithms may have reserved certain destinations as final destinations or may have identified certain destinations as preferred destinations based on the availability of a drop trailer arrangement.

A second example illustrates another way in which example systems and methods may provide improvements over conventional systems that do not consider drop trailer arrangements. Consider two orders both of which will take one hour to load five hours to drive and two hours to unload and each of which may utilize forty five percent of a truck s capacity. The first order originates at O and goes to destination D1. The second order originates at O and goes to destination D2. Each of these loads would take eight hours to complete in isolation. Now consider that it may take one hour to drive from D1 to D2 or from D2 to D1. Also consider that a drop trailer arrangement may exist at D2 that a driver may be restricted to 10.5 hours on duty e.g. driving un loading waiting in a day and that both the first order and the second order must be delivered on the same day that they are picked up.

A conventional system would likely schedule two trucks each of which would have forty five percent space utilization and each of which would use eight hours of the 10.5 available on duty hours. If the drop trailer arrangement is not considered two trucks would be required because a single driver could not complete both orders on the same day while staying at or below 10.5 hours of service. But example systems and methods would likely schedule a single truck that first goes to D1 and then to D2 and simply drops the trailer at D2. The single truck would have ninety percent utilization would use ten of the 10.5 available on duty hours and would likely have an overall lower cost while improving utility.

Generally describing an example configuration of computer processor can be a variety of various processors including dual microprocessor and other multi processor architectures. Memory can include volatile memory and or non volatile memory. Disk may be operably connected to computer via for example an input output interface e.g. card device and an input output port . Disk can include but is not limited to devices like a magnetic disk drive a solid state disk drive a floppy disk drive a tape drive a Zip drive a flash memory card and or a memory stick. Furthermore disk can include optical drives like a CD ROM a CD recordable drive CD R drive a CD rewriteable drive CD RW drive and or a digital video ROM drive DVD ROM . The memory can store processes and or data for example. Disk and or memory can store an operating system that controls and allocates resources of computer .

Bus can be a single internal bus interconnect architecture and or other bus or mesh architectures. While a single bus is illustrated it is to be appreciated that computer may communicate with various devices logics and peripherals using other busses that are not illustrated e.g. PCIE SATA Infiniband 1394 USB Ethernet .

Computer may interact with input output devices via i o interfaces and input output ports . Input output devices can include but are not limited to a keyboard a microphone a pointing and selection device cameras video cards displays disk network devices and the like. Input output ports can include but are not limited to serial ports parallel ports and USB ports.

Computer can operate in a network environment and thus may be connected to network devices via i o devices and or i o ports . Through network devices computer may interact with a network. Through the network computer may be logically connected to remote computers. The networks with which computer may interact include but are not limited to a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN and other networks. Network devices can connect to LAN technologies including but not limited to fiber distributed data interface FDDI copper distributed data interface CDDI Ethernet IEEE 802.3 token ring IEEE 802.5 wireless computer communication IEEE 802.11 Bluetooth IEEE 802.15.1 and the like. Similarly network devices can connect to WAN technologies including but not limited to point to point links circuit switching networks like integrated services digital networks ISDN packet switching networks and digital subscriber lines DSL .

Referring now to information can be transmitted between various computer components and or logics associated with transportation planning in light of drop trailer arrangements as described herein via a data packet . Data packet may be employed for example to communicate data associated with a load. The data packet includes a header field that includes information like the length and type of packet. A source identifier follows the header field and includes for example an address of the computer component and or logic from which the packet originated. Following the source identifier the packet includes a destination identifier that holds for example an address of the computer component and or logic to which the packet is ultimately destined. Source and destination identifiers can be for example a globally unique identifier GUID a uniform resource locator URLs a path name and the like. The data field in the packet includes various information intended for the receiving computer component and or logic. The data packet ends with an error detecting and or correcting field whereby a computer component and or logic can determine if it has property received the packet . While five fields are illustrated in a certain order it is to be appreciated that a greater and or lesser number of fields arranged in different orders can be present in example data packets.

Referring now to an application programming interface API is illustrated providing access to a system for transportation planning in light of drop trailer arrangements. API can be employed for example by a programmer and or a process to gain access to processing performed by system . For example a programmer can write a program to access system e.g. invoke its operation monitor its operation control its operation where writing the program is facilitated by the presence of API . Rather than programmer having to understand the internals of system programmer merely has to learn the interface to system . This facilitates encapsulating the functionality of system while exposing that functionality.

API can be employed to provide data values to system and or retrieve data values from system . For example a process that identifies consolidation opportunities can provide consolidation data to system via API by for example using a call provided in API . Thus in one example of API a set of application programming interfaces can be stored on a computer readable medium. The interfaces can include but are not limited to a first interface that communicates an order data including for example commodity data a pickup window a delivery window an origin a destination and so on. The interfaces may also include a second interface that communicates a shipment data including for example a set of orders a pickup window a delivery window an origin a destination and so on. The interfaces may also include a third interface that communicates a load data including for example a start time a sequence of stops and so on. The interfaces may also include a fourth interface for communicating a drop trailer arrangement data including for example while open instructions while closed instructions a drop off trailer identifier a pick up trailer identifier and so on.

While example systems methods and so on have been illustrated by describing examples and while the examples have been described in considerable detail it is not the intention of the applicants to restrict or in any way limit the scope of the appended claims to such detail. It is of course not possible to describe every conceivable combination of components or methodologies for purposes of describing the systems methods and so on described herein. Additional advantages and modifications will readily appear to those skilled in the art. Therefore the invention is not limited to the specific details the representative apparatus and illustrative examples shown and described. Thus this application is intended to embrace alterations modifications and variations that fall within the scope of the appended claims. Furthermore the preceding description is not meant to limit the scope of the invention. Rather the scope of the invention is to be determined by the appended claims and their equivalents.

To the extent that the term includes or including is employed in the detailed description or the claims it is intended to be inclusive in a manner similar to the term comprising as that term is interpreted when employed as a transitional word in a claim. Furthermore to the extent that the term or is employed in the detailed description or claims e.g. A or B it is intended to mean A or B or both . When the applicants intend to indicate only A or B but not both then the term only A or B but not both will be employed. Thus use of the term or herein is the inclusive and not the exclusive use. See Bryan A. Garner A Dictionary of Modern Legal Usage 624 2d. Ed. 1995 .

