---

title: Methods of fabricating oxide layers on silicon carbide layers utilizing atomic oxygen
abstract: Methods of forming oxide layers on silicon carbide layers are disclosed, including placing a silicon carbide layer in a chamber such as an oxidation furnace tube that is substantially free of metallic impurities, heating an atmosphere of the chamber to a temperature of about 500 ° C. to about 1300 ° C., introducing atomic oxygen in the chamber, and flowing the atomic oxygen over a surface of the silicon carbide layer to thereby form an oxide layer on the silicon carbide layer. In some embodiments, introducing atomic includes oxygen providing a source oxide in the chamber and flowing a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen gas over the source oxide. The source oxide may comprise aluminum oxide or another oxide such as manganese oxide. Some methods include forming an oxide layer on a silicon carbide layer and annealing the oxide layer in an atmosphere including atomic oxygen.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07572741&OS=07572741&RS=07572741
owner: Cree, Inc.
number: 07572741
owner_city: Durham
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050916
---
The present invention was made at least in part with support from United States Air Force contract number FA8650 04 2 2410. The Government may have certain rights in this invention.

The present invention relates to the fabrication of semiconductor devices and more particularly to the fabrication of oxide layers on silicon carbide SiC .

Silicon carbide SiC has a combination of electrical and physical properties that make it attractive for a semiconductor material for high temperature high voltage high frequency and high power electronic devices. These properties include a 3.0 eV bandgap a 4 MV cm electric field breakdown a 4.9 W cm K thermal conductivity and a 2.0 10cm s electron drift velocity.

Silicon carbide has the unique property among wide bandgap compound semiconductor materials that it forms a native oxide. Thus a thermal SiOlayer may be formed on a SiC layer. The ability to form a thermal oxide on SiC opens the door for the formation of metal oxide semiconductor MOS devices using silicon carbide including for example MOS field effect transistors MOSFETs MOS capacitors insulated gate bipolar transistors IGBT s MOS controlled thyristors MCTs lateral diffused MOSFETs LDMOSFETs and other related devices. Given the unique material properties of SiC described above such devices may have substantially better theoretical operating characteristics compared to devices formed using other semiconductor materials particularly for applications requiring high power high current capacity and or high frequency operation. Accordingly taking full advantage of SiC s electronic properties in MOS devices and resulting integrated circuits requires appropriate SiC oxidation technology.

The interface quality of SiOthermally grown on a silicon substrate may be excellent. However the quality of thermally grown SiC SiOinterfaces has not achieved the same levels as that of Si SiOinterfaces. Accordingly the quality of oxides on silicon carbide SiC has been a major obstacle to developing commercially viable silicon carbide MOS devices. Indeed with the recent improvements in SiC crystal quality oxide quality may perhaps be the largest barrier to the realization of commercially viable SiC MOS power devices and integrated circuits.

Oxides on SiC have been widely reported to have unacceptably high densities of interface states or traps and fixed oxide charges both of which may have an adverse effect on MOS device performance. As used herein the term state or trap refers to an available energy level position within the bandgap of a semiconductor or insulator material. An interface trap or state may be located at or near a semiconductor insulator interface. Interface states may occur due to the presence of dangling or unterminated atomic bonds within a material. Thus the density of electronic states at an interface may be an indication of the amount of crystallographic disorder at the interface.

Interface traps may capture electronic charge carriers i.e. electrons and or holes which may produce undesired operating characteristics in devices incorporating the interface. In particular electronic states present at the SiC SiOinterface may reduce surface electron mobility in the SiC layer. If the gate oxide of a MOS device has a high density of interface states the resulting device may have reduced inversion channel mobility increased threshold voltage increased on resistance and or other undesirable characteristics.

Recently annealing of a thermal oxide in a nitric oxide NO ambient has shown promise in a planar 4H SiC MOSFET structure not requiring a p well implant. See M. K. Das L. A. Lipkin J. W. Palmour G. Y. Chung J. R. Williams K. McDonald and L. C. Feldman High Mobility 4H SiC Inversion Mode MOSFETs Using Thermally Grown NO Annealed SiO IEEE Device Research Conference Denver Colo. Jun. 19 21 2000 and G. Y. Chung C. C. Tin J. R. Williams K. McDonald R. A. Weller S. T. Pantelides L. C. Feldman M. K. Das and J. W. Palmour Improved Inversion Channel Mobility for 4H SiC MOSFETs Following High Temperature Anneals in Nitric Oxide IEEE Electron Device Letters accepted for publication the disclosures of which are incorporated by reference as if set forth fully herein. This anneal is shown to significantly reduce the interface state density near the conduction band edge as described in G. Y. Chung C. C. Tin J. R. Williams K. McDonald M. Di Ventra S. T. Pantelides L. C. Feldman and R. A. Weller Effect of nitric oxide annealing on the interface trap densities near the band edges in the 4H polytype of silicon carbide Applied Physics Letters Vol. 76 No. 13 pp. 1713 1715 March 2000 the disclosure of which is incorporated herein as if set forth fully. High electron mobility 35 95 cm Vs is obtained in the surface inversion layer due to the improved MOS interface.

Unfortunately NO is a health hazard having a National Fire Protection Association NFPA health danger rating of 3 and the equipment in which post oxidation anneals are typically performed is open to the atmosphere of the cleanroom. They are often exhausted but the danger of exceeding a safe level of NO contamination in the room is not negligible.

Growing the oxide in NO is possible as described in J. P. Xu P. T. Lai C. L. Chan B. Li and Y. C. Cheng Improved Performance and Reliability of NO Grown Oxynitride on 6H SiC IEEE Electron Device Letters Vol. 21 No. 6 pp. 298 300 June 2000 the disclosure of which is incorporated by reference as if set forth fully herein. Xu et al. describe oxidizing SiC at 1100 C. for 360 minutes in a pure NO ambient and annealing in Nfor 1 hour at 1100 C.

Post growth nitridation of the oxide on 6H SiC in NO at a temperature of 1100 C. has also been investigated by P. T. Lai Supratic Chakraborty C. L. Chan and Y. C. Cheng Effects of nitridation and annealing on interface properties of thermally oxidized SiO SiC metal oxide semiconductor system Applied Physics Letters Vol. 76 No. 25 pp. 3744 3746 June 2000 hereinafter Lai et al. the disclosure of which is incorporated by reference as if set forth fully herein. However Lai et al. concluded that such treatment deteriorates the interface quality which may be improved with a subsequent wet or dry anneal in Owhich may repair the damage induced by nitridation in NO. Moreover even with a subsequent Oanneal Lai et al. did not see any significant reduction in interface state density as compared to the case without nitridation in NO.

In addition to NO and NO growth and annealing research has also been conducted on post growth anneals in other environments. For example Suzuki et al. investigated post oxidation annealing in hydrogen. Suzuki et al. Effect of Post oxidation annealing in Hydrogen on SiO 4H SiC Interface Material Science Forum Vols. 338 342 pp. 1073 1076 2000. These researchers reported that flat band voltage shift and interface state density could be improved by post oxidation annealing in both argon and hydrogen. In this research 4H SiC was oxidized in dry Oat 1200 C. Post oxidation annealing was then carried out in argon or hydrogen for 30 minutes at 400 700 800 and 1000 C. Other researchers however have reported that post oxidation anneals in hydrogen provide no increased benefit over post oxidation anneals in other gases as described in Mrinal Das Fundamental Studies of the Silicon Carbide MOS Structure Doctoral Thesis Purdue University submitted December 1999.

Embodiments of the present invention provide methods of forming oxide layers on silicon carbide layers including placing a silicon carbide layer in a chamber such as an oxidation furnace tube that is substantially free of metallic impurities heating an atmosphere of the chamber to a temperature of about 500 C. to about 1300 C. introducing atomic oxygen in the chamber and flowing the atomic oxygen over a surface of the silicon carbide layer to thereby form an oxide layer on the silicon carbide layer. In some embodiments introducing atomic oxygen includes providing a source oxide in the chamber and flowing a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen gas over the source oxide. The source oxide may include aluminum oxide or another oxide such as manganese oxide.

In some embodiments the source oxide is substantially free of metallic impurities. For example the source oxide may include a porous sapphire wafer. In such case some embodiments according to the invention include implanting a sapphire wafer with non metallic impurities to form a porous sapphire wafer and placing the porous sapphire wafer in the chamber.

In some embodiments introducing atomic oxygen includes generating atomic oxygen using a catalyst such as platinum. In some embodiments introducing atomic oxygen includes generating a flow of ozone and cracking the ozone to produce atomic oxygen. Ozone may be cracked using thermal and or electromagnetic energy.

In particular embodiments the atmosphere of the chamber may be heated to a temperature of about 1000 C. to 1100 C.

Methods of forming an oxide layer on a silicon carbide layer according to some embodiments of the invention include placing a silicon carbide layer in an oxidation chamber placing an alumina wafer in the chamber heating an atmosphere of the chamber to a temperature of about 500 C. to about 1300 C. flowing nitrogen gas over the alumina wafer to generate atomic oxygen in the chamber and flowing the atomic oxygen over a surface of the silicon carbide layer to thereby form an oxide layer on the silicon carbide layer. In particular embodiments the atmosphere of the chamber may be heated to a temperature of about 1000 C. to 1100 C. Further oxygen gas may be flowed over the alumina wafer. In such case methods according to embodiments of the invention may further include reacting the atomic oxygen with oxygen gas to produce ozone flowing the ozone over the alumina wafer and cracking the ozone to produce atomic oxygen in the vicinity of the silicon carbide layer.

Still further embodiments according to the invention include placing a silicon carbide layer in a chamber placing an alumina wafer in the chamber heating an atmosphere of the chamber to a temperature of about 500 C. to about 1300 C. nitriding the alumina wafer to liberate atomic oxygen and flowing the atomic oxygen over a surface of the silicon carbide layer to thereby form an oxide layer on the silicon carbide layer. In particular further embodiments the atmosphere of the chamber may be heated to a temperature of about 1000 C. to 1100 C. Further oxygen gas may be flowed over the alumina wafer. In such case methods according to embodiments of the invention may further include reacting the atomic oxygen with oxygen gas to produce ozone flowing the ozone over the alumina wafer and cracking the ozone to produce atomic oxygen in the vicinity of the silicon carbide layer.

In some embodiments since source oxide wafers may be oriented in a vertical direction parallel to the orientation of the silicon carbide layers such that a substantially uniform distance between the source oxide wafers and the SiC layers is provided which may result in improved oxide uniformity. Stated differently the silicon carbide layers and the source oxide wafers may be arranged such that the major surfaces of respective source oxide wafers are oriented parallel to the silicon carbide layers such that respective points on the surface of a silicon carbide layer are located equidistant from respective points on the major surface of an adjacent source oxide wafer.

Further embodiments of the invention include forming an oxide layer on a SiC layer according to conventional techniques and annealing the formed oxide layer in an ambient containing atomic oxygen. For example methods of forming an oxide layer on a silicon carbide layer according to some embodiments of the invention include forming an oxide layer on a silicon carbide layer placing the silicon carbide layer with the oxide layer formed thereon in a chamber substantially free of metallic impurities heating an atmosphere of the chamber to a temperature of about 500 C. to about 1300 C. introducing atomic oxygen in the chamber and flowing the atomic oxygen over a surface of the silicon carbide layer with the oxide layer formed thereon. The oxide layer may be formed by a thermal process and or a deposition process.

Introducing atomic oxygen may include providing a source oxide in the chamber and flowing a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen gas over the source oxide. The source oxide may include aluminum oxide or another oxide such as manganese oxide. In some embodiments the source oxide is substantially free of metallic impurities. For example the source oxide may include a porous sapphire wafer. In such case some embodiments according to the invention include implanting a sapphire wafer with non metallic impurities to form a porous sapphire wafer and placing the porous sapphire wafer in the chamber.

The present invention now will be described more fully hereinafter with reference to the accompanying drawings in which preferred embodiments of the invention are shown. This invention may however be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art. In the drawings the thickness of layers and regions are exaggerated for clarity. Like numbers refer to like elements throughout.

As used herein the term and or includes any and all combinations of one or more of the associated listed items. It will be understood that although the terms first second third etc. may be used herein to describe various elements components regions materials layers and or sections these elements components regions layers and or sections should not be limited by these terms. These terms are only used to distinguish one element component region layer material or section from another element component region layer material or section. Thus a first element component region layer material or section discussed below could be termed a second element component region layer material or section without departing from the teachings of the present invention.

The terminology used herein is for the purpose of describing particular embodiments only and is not intended to be limiting of the invention. As used herein the singular forms a an and the are intended to include the plural forms as well unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. It will be further understood that the terms includes including comprises and or comprising when used in this specification specify the presence of stated features integers steps operations elements and or components but do not preclude the presence or addition of one or more other features integers steps operations elements components and or groups thereof. As used herein the common abbreviation e.g. which derives from the Latin phrase exempli gratia may be used to introduce or specify a general example or examples of a previously mentioned item and is not intended to be limiting of such item. If used herein the common abbreviation i.e. which derives from the Latin phrase id est may be used to specify a particular item from a more general recitation.

Unless otherwise defined all terms including technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. It will be further understood that terms such as those defined in commonly used dictionaries should be interpreted as having a meaning that is consistent with their meaning in the context of this specification and the relevant art and will not be interpreted in an idealized or overly formal sense unless expressly so defined herein.

Embodiments of the present invention provide methods which may enable the formation of an oxide layer on a SiC layer having an improved interface. These methods may be especially advantageous in the fabrication of Metal Oxide Semiconductor MOS devices created on SiC layers. Using embodiments of the present invention interface states with energy levels near the conduction band of SiC may be dramatically reduced. Reduction of such defects may be advantageous because these defects may limit a MOS device s effective surface channel mobility. In addition the flatband voltage of MOS devices i.e. the voltage at which no band bending occurs in the device may be reduced using embodiments of the invention.

Thermal oxidation involves the growth of an SiOlayer on a silicon containing semiconductor layer. As with the thermal oxidation of Si in thermal oxidation of SiC a portion of the underlying semiconductor layer is consumed by the growing oxide layer. As the layer grows oxygen may diffuse through the growing oxide layer and react with Si at the SiC surface to form new SiOmolecules. Thus the growth interface advances into the SiC layer as the SiOlayer is grown.

Conventional oxidation of SiC with molecular oxygen either Oor HO to produce MOS quality Si SiOinterfaces has been hampered by slow oxidation rates i.e. the rate of growth of the oxide layer and poor interface quality. Both of these shortcomings may be attributed to sub oxide formation due to the transition from SiC to stoichiometric SiOat the SiC SiOinterface. The oxidation rate may be increased by performing the oxidation at a high temperature e.g. 1200 C. or greater . However high temperature oxidation may be expensive and may cause unwanted impurities to be introduced into the growing SiOlayer which may result in the presence of unwanted fixed oxide charges in the SiOlayer. Some of the interface disorder that may result from oxidation using molecular oxygen may be passivated by annealing the oxide in a nitrogen containing atmosphere NO NO and or NH as described above a so called nitridation anneal . However such annealing may not completely passivate the interface disorder.

Some embodiments of the invention provide methods for oxidizing a SiC layer using atomic oxygen. Atomic oxygen may exhibit both increased reactivity at the SiC surface as well as increased mobility within the growing SiOlayer. Thus the use of atomic oxygen to oxidize a SiC layer may result in an interface having reduced crystallographic disorder. In addition the oxidation rate may increase as compared to oxidation using molecular oxygen. Oxidation using atomic oxygen may moreover be accomplished at lower temperatures than oxidation using molecular oxygen which may result in the incorporation of fewer impurities in the oxide from the furnace ambient.

In addition oxidizing a SiC layer using atomic oxygen may reduce the resulting interface disorder at the SiC SiOinterface and therefore reduce the density of interface states at the SiC SiOinterface.

Embodiments of the present invention will now be described with reference to which are flow charts illustrating operations according to some embodiments of the present invention which utilize atomic oxygen to grow an oxide layer on a silicon carbide layer. Turning to a silicon carbide layer is placed in a chamber block . The chamber may be a quartz tube capable of withstanding temperatures in excess of 500 C. Accordingly the chamber may act as an oxidation furnace. The SiC layer may be a SiC substrate and or a SiC epitaxial layer formed on a homo or heteroepitaxial substrate. In particular embodiments the SiC layer is a single crystal bulk or epitaxial layer of 4H SiC and or 6H SiC. In some embodiments the chamber is configured to accommodate multiple SiC layers. For example the chamber may be configured to receive multiple SiC wafers and or multiple wafers on which SiC layers are formed. The chamber may be heated to a temperature of from about 500 C. to about 1300 C. block . In some embodiments the atmosphere within the chamber may be heated to a temperature of from about 500 C. to about 1300 C.

Next atomic oxygen is introduced into the chamber block . The atomic oxygen is then flowed over the SiC layer block resulting in the formation of a SiOlayer on the SiC layer.

As illustrated in introducing atomic oxygen in the chamber may include providing a source oxide such as aluminum oxide within or outside the chamber block and nitriding the aluminum oxide to liberate atomic oxygen block . The source oxide may be provided in a number of different forms. For example the source oxide may include a sapphire wafer or a sintered alumina wafer. In some embodiments the source oxide may include a porous sapphire wafer. Polished non porous sapphire wafers have been found not to produce a sufficient amount of atomic oxygen to support an oxidation process. While not fully understood it is presently believed that polished non porous sapphire wafers have comparatively little surface area that may be nitrided. Providing a porous sapphire wafer may provide an increased surface area of aluminum oxide to be nitrided which may result in the liberation of a larger quantity of oxygen than that which may be obtained using a non porous sapphire wafer.

Nitriding the aluminum oxide may be performed by flowing nitrogen gas N over the aluminum oxide at a temperature of from about 500 to about 1300 C. which may be sufficient to cause the nitrogen to react with the aluminum oxide thereby forming aluminum nitride and liberating a resulting quantity of atomic oxygen. The process may be self limiting since AlN formation at the surface of the aluminum oxide reduces the atomic oxygen generation process. However this concern may be mitigated by increasing the surface area of the aluminum oxide.

Other methods of introducing atomic oxygen may be employed. For example molecular oxygen may be dissociated within the chamber or upstream from the chamber to provide atomic oxygen. For example ozone O may be provided within the chamber or upstream from the chamber. The ozone may be dissociated within the chamber due to the elevated temperature within the chamber to provide atomic oxygen. Alternatively molecular oxygen may be dissociated upstream from the chamber and the resulting atomic oxygen introduced into the chamber. However it is presently believed that the mean free path of atomic oxygen is such that if produced outside the chamber at least some of the atomic oxygen would substantially react with other atomic oxygen before it could be used to grow an oxide layer. Thus in some embodiments the atomic oxygen may be generated within the chamber.

In some embodiments atomic oxygen may be generated e.g. by dissociating molecular oxygen or by nitriding aluminum oxide at a location either within or outside the chamber that is spaced away from the SiC layer to be oxidized. For example in some embodiments the atomic oxygen may be generated at a location that is farther from the silicon carbide layer than the mean free path of atomic oxygen in the chamber. Molecular oxygen gas O may be provided at a temperature of from about 500 C. to about 1300 C. such that the atomic oxygen may react with the molecular oxygen gas to produce ozone. The resulting ozone which may have a larger mean free path than atomic oxygen may be flowed across the SiC substrate at a temperature of from about 500 C. to about 1300 C. sufficient to cause the ozone to dissociate crack thereby producing atomic oxygen which may oxidize the SiC layer.

In some embodiments the SiC layers on the wafers may be oxidized using a predetermined temperature profile which includes an oxidation temperature of greater than about 500 C. in a chamber in which Nand Oare supplied at a flow rate profile within predetermined flow rate limits. Preferably the temperature of the oxidation is about 1000 C. The flow rate limits of Nand Omay be selected based on the particular equipment in which the process is used. However in particular embodiments the flow rate limits of Nand Omay be as low as about 2 Standard Liters per Minute SLM or as high as about 180 SLM or higher. In further embodiments flow rate limits of about 5 SLM may be preferred. The oxidation may be carried out for an amount of time dependent on the desired thickness of the oxide layer. For example oxidation times of from a few minutes to several hours or greater may be utilized. In general oxidation rates are higher for oxidation using atomic oxygen compared to oxidation using molecular oxygen.

As noted above in some embodiments atomic oxygen may be generated by nitriding a porous sapphire wafer. Single crystal sapphire wafers are commonly available as substrates for heteroepitaxial growth of compound semiconductor materials. A porous sapphire wafer may be formed by ion implantation for example by implanting inert species such as argon and or nitrogen into the wafer. It may be preferable to use a porous sapphire wafer instead of alumina as a source of atomic oxygen. As discussed below alumina may contain a number of undesirable metallic impurities that may become incorporated in the oxide. Such impurities may lead to the presence of fixed and or mobile oxide charges which can adversely affect the operation of MOS devices. An additional advantage of using porous sapphire wafers is that after an oxidation process the aluminum nitride layer formed on the wafer can be removed and the wafer re used possibly after re implanting the wafer as an atomic oxygen source in a subsequent oxidation process.

Other oxide materials may be used as a source of atomic oxygen in the manner described above. For example manganese oxide may be used instead of aluminum oxide.

In some embodiments a catalyst such as platinum may be used to assist and or encourage the generation of atomic oxygen. The catalyst may be employed to dissociate molecular oxygen to generate atomic oxygen and or ozone upstream from the SiC layer either within the chamber or upstream from the chamber. The catalyst is placed between the SiC layer and the gas source such that when the gas flows over the catalyst atomic oxygen is liberated from the gas.

Other methods of dissociating oxygen may be employed in connection with embodiments of the invention. For example atomic oxygen may be formed through the dissociation of molecular oxygen using optical or electrical energy e.g. exposure to UV light and or electrostatic discharge . In addition an oxygen plasma may be generated upstream from the chamber to form atomic oxygen and or ozone which may be subsequently supplied to the chamber.

For comparison illustrates C V measurements of MOS capacitor formed using conventional molecular oxidation. As illustrated in the C V curve of a conventional MOS capacitor as indicated by dots exhibits significant deviation from the ideal C V curve .

Likewise is a graph of normalized capacitance C C vs. voltage for a MOS capacitor formed as described above and a MOS capacitor formed using some conventional molecular oxidation techniques. For the data illustrated in the conventional MOS capacitor was additionally annealed in a NO environment for two hours at 1300 C. to improve the SiC SiOinterface quality. As illustrated in the measured capacitance values for the SiOlayers formed using atomic oxygen dots are almost coincident with the ideal curve line which may indicate that the amount of crystallographic disorder at the SiC SiOinterface is low. The measured capacitance for the NO annealed SiOlayers formed using molecular oxygen dots shows significant stretch out as compared to the ideal curve line indicating that interface traps are present. In particular the NO annealed oxide produced lateral MOSFETs with channel mobility of 50 cm V s which is limited by near conduction band states causing a stretch out in the C V curve in the flatband to accumulation range. The atomic oxygen C V data dots show almost no detectable stretch out in this region. Assuming negligible interface trapping the channel mobility is expected to increase up to 150 cm V s for lateral MOSFETs fabricated with gate oxides grown in the presence of atomic oxygen.

One problem with the use of alumina wafers as a source of atomic oxygen is the presence of impurities in the wafers. These impurities may become embedded in the oxide and may result in fixed or mobile charges being present in the oxide which may affect operation of MOS devices. For example fixed and or mobile oxide charge may cause a voltage shift in the C V characteristics of the device due to charges moving and or states trapping an de trapping. For example as shown in a hysteresis loop may be present in the C V curve as the applied voltage is cycled from high to low and back to high. The presence of such a hysteresis may indicate a voltage threshold instability in actual devices. In addition a MOS interface formed using alumina may have temperature stability concerns. As illustrated in after a biased heat treatment of 200 C. the measured interface trap density Dtends to shift upwards line indicating an increase in the concentration of interface traps from the measurements taken before heat treatment line . Finally the oxide thickness of oxide layers grown according to the embodiments illustrated in connection with may vary with location on the SiC wafer . For example oxide thicknesses of 450 were measured at locations on a wafer that were close to the alumina wafers within the chamber while oxide thicknesses of 300 270 and 200 were measured at locations on the wafer moving sequentially away from the alumina wafers.

Further embodiments of the invention include forming a SiOlayer on a SiC layer according to conventional techniques and annealing the formed SiOlayer in an ambient containing atomic oxygen. For example methods of forming an oxide layer on a silicon carbide layer according to some embodiments of the invention are illustrated in FIG. l. As shown therein methods according to some embodiments of the invention include forming an oxide layer on a silicon carbide layer block placing the silicon carbide layer with the oxide layer formed thereon in a chamber substantially free of metallic impurities block heating an atmosphere of the chamber to a temperature of about 500 C. to about 1300 C. block introducing atomic oxygen in the chamber block and flowing the atomic oxygen over a surface of the silicon carbide layer with the oxide layer formed thereon block . The oxide layer may be formed by a thermal process and or a deposition process.

Introducing atomic oxygen may include providing a source oxide in the chamber and flowing a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen gas over the source oxide. The source oxide may include aluminum oxide or another oxide such as manganese oxide. In some embodiments the source oxide is substantially free of metallic impurities. For example the source oxide may include a porous sapphire wafer. In such case some embodiments according to the invention include implanting a sapphire wafer with non metallic impurities to form a porous sapphire wafer and placing the porous sapphire wafer in the chamber.

In some embodiments introducing atomic oxygen includes generating atomic oxygen using a catalyst such as platinum. In some embodiments introducing atomic oxygen includes generating a flow of ozone and cracking the ozone to produce atomic oxygen. Ozone may be cracked using thermal and or electromagnetic energy.

In particular embodiments the atmosphere of the chamber may be heated to a temperature of about 1000 C. to 1100 C.

In the drawings and specification there have been disclosed typical preferred embodiments of the invention and although specific terms are employed they are used in a generic and descriptive sense only and not for purposes of limitation the scope of the invention being set forth in the following claims.

