---

title: Modifying restricted images
abstract: An apparatus, device, methods, computer program product, and system are described that determine a restricted image within a media asset, modify the restricted image to obtain a modified image that includes at least one shared image attribute of the restricted image, and produce a modified media asset that includes the modified image.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07860342&OS=07860342&RS=07860342
owner: The Invention Science Fund I, LLC
number: 07860342
owner_city: Bellevue
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050802
---
1. For purposes of the USPTO extra statutory requirements the present application constitutes a continuation in part of currently co pending United States patent application entitled TECHNIQES FOR IMAGE GENERATION naming Royce A. Levien Robert W. Lord Mark A. Malamud and John D. Rinaldo Jr. as inventors U.S. application Ser. No. 11 173 990 filed Jul. 1 2005.

2. For purposes of the USPTO extra statutory requirements the present application constitutes a continuation in part of currently co pending United States patent application entitled PROVIDING PROMOTIONAL CONTENT naming Royce A. Levien Robert W. Lord Mark A. Malamud and John D. Rinaldo Jr. as inventors U.S. application Ser. No. 11 174 432 filed Jul. 1 2005.

3. For purposes of the USPTO extra statutory requirements the present application constitutes a continuation in part of currently co pending United States patent application entitled RESTORING MODIFIED ASSETS naming Royce A. Levien Robert W. Lord Mark A. Malamud and John D. Rinaldo Jr. as inventors USAN 11 195 346 filed Aug. 2 2005.

The present application is related to claims the earliest available effective filing date s from e.g. claims earliest available priority dates for other than provisional patent applications claims benefits under 35 USC 119 e for provisional patent applications and incorporates by reference in its entirety all subject matter of the following listed application s the Related Applications to the extent such subject matter is not inconsistent herewith the present application also claims the earliest available effective filing date s from and also incorporates by reference in its entirety all subject matter of any and all parent grandparent great grandparent etc. applications of the Related Application s to the extent such subject matter is not inconsistent herewith. The United States Patent Office USPTO has published a notice to the effect that the USPTO s computer programs require that patent applicants reference both a serial number and indicate whether an application is a continuation or continuation in part. Kunin Benefit of Prior Filed Application USPTO Electronic Official Gazette Mar. 18 2003 at http www.uspto.gov web offices com sol og 2003 week11 patbene.htm. The present applicant entity has provided below a specific reference to the application s from which priority is being claimed as recited by statute. Applicant entity understands that the statute is unambiguous in its specific reference language and does not require either a serial number or any characterization such as continuation or continuation in part. Notwithstanding the foregoing applicant entity understands that the USPTO s computer programs have certain data entry requirements and hence applicant entity is designating the present application as a continuation in part of its parent applications but expressly points out that such designations are not to be construed in any way as any type of commentary and or admission as to whether or not the present application contains any new matter in addition to the matter of its parent application s .

An embodiment provides a method. In one implementation the method includes but is not limited to determining a restricted image within a media asset modifying the restricted image to obtain a modified image that includes at least one shared image attribute of the restricted image and producing a modified media asset that includes the modified image. In addition to the foregoing other method aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present disclosure.

An embodiment provides a computer program product. In one implementation the computer program product includes but is not limited to a signal bearing medium bearing at least one of one or more instructions for determining a restricted image within a media asset one or more instructions for modifying the restricted image to obtain a modified image that includes at least one shared image attribute of the restricted image and one or more instructions for producing a modified media asset that includes the modified image. In addition to the foregoing other computer program product aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present disclosure.

An embodiment provides a system. In one implementation the system includes but is not limited to a computing device and instructions. The instructions when executed on the computing device cause the computing device to determine a restricted image within a media asset modify the restricted image to obtain a modified image that includes at least one shared image attribute of the restricted image and produce a modified media asset that includes the modified image. In addition to the foregoing other system aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present disclosure.

An embodiment provides a device. In one implementation the device includes but is not limited to a processing system the processing system comprising recognition logic that is operable to determine a restricted image within a media asset and modification logic that is operable to modify the restricted image to obtain a modified image that includes at least one shared image attribute of the restricted image. In addition to the foregoing other device aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present disclosure.

An embodiment provides another method. In one implementation the method includes but is not limited to providing a media asset to a processing system for recognition of a restricted image contained therein and receiving a modified media asset in which the restricted image has been modified to include a modified image. In addition to the foregoing other method aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present disclosure.

An embodiment provides another method in one implementation the method includes but is not limited to determining an image and modifying the image to obtain an anonymized image. In addition to the foregoing other method aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present disclosure.

An embodiment provides a computer program product. In one implementation the computer program product includes but is not limited to a signal bearing medium bearing at least one of one or more instructions for determining an image and one or more instructions for modifying the image to obtain an anonymized image. In addition to the foregoing other computer program product aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present disclosure.

In one or more various aspects related systems include but are not limited to circuitry and or programming for effecting the herein referenced method aspects the circuitry and or programming can be virtually any combination of hardware software and or firmware configured to effect the herein referenced method aspects depending upon the design choices of the system designer.

In addition to the foregoing various other embodiments are set forth and described in the text e.g. claims and or detailed description and or drawings of the present description.

The foregoing is a summary and thus contains by necessity simplifications generalizations and omissions of detail consequently those skilled in the art will appreciate that the summary is illustrative only and is not intended to be in any way limiting. Other aspects features and advantages of the devices and or processes described herein as defined by the claims will become apparent in the detailed description set forth herein.

The processing system is further operable to modify the media asset and in particular to modify the restricted image and thereafter output the modified media asset having a modified image . In this way for example an identity or other information about the restricted image may be protected hidden or obscured while maintaining a general presentation context of the media asset . For example a person who is a subject of the restricted image may be made anonymous within the modified media asset while inclusion of the modified image which shares attributes of the restricted image or at least shares one common attribute of the restricted image may serve to limit or prevent an observer of the modified media asset from noticing that the modified media asset has in fact been modified.

The processing system includes recognition logic that is operable to recognize the restricted nature of the restricted image . The processing system also includes modification logic that is operable to modify the media asset including the restricted image to obtain the modified media asset and the modified image .

As described in more detail below the recognition logic may determine the restricted image within the media asset using image restriction criteria . As also described in more detail below the modification logic may obtain create the modified image by accessing a number of stored or accessible replacement images . Specific examples of operations involving these elements of the processing system are provided in the context of various operational flows.

Generally speaking however the recognition logic may operate to analyze various attributes of the media asset including attributes of the restricted image in order to determine a restricted nature of the restricted image . One example of attributes of the media asset that is illustrated in includes concurrent image s i.e. the recognition logic may make a determination that the restricted image is restricted based on a presence or absence of the concurrent image s or based on the presence or absence of certain attributes of the concurrent image s . Of course attributes of the media asset are not necessarily limited to image characteristics of the media asset and also may include for example metadata associated with the media asset an identity of a person place or thing within or in association with the restricted image or information related to a person and or device involved in capturing the media asset .

Further in a user accesses the processing system by way of a user interface . In this way the user may for example submit the media asset to the processing system or receive the modified media asset from the processing system or may become involved in operations of the processing system . The user interface also may be used for example to define or modify the image restriction criteria or to select the replacement images . The user interface also may be used to control a type and or extent of the recognition performed by the recognition logic or to control a type and or extent of the modifications performed by the modification logic .

Also in a device is shown in which the processing system may operate. As described in more detail with respect to and following figures the device may include in some examples an image capture device a print device a general purpose computing device or virtually any other device or combination of devices that may be used to store transmit display or render a media asset.

The processing system also may be operable to perform other processing of the media asset such as for example enhancing editing displaying or otherwise improving the media asset or in other example embodiments such additional processing may be performed by other external systems not shown if needed.

A symbol or text on the other hand generally represents information that is included within the media asset for normal viewing. For example a web page may include a news article that names a person who is pictured in the article. By using the name text the recognition logic may be able to determine identity or other information regarding the restricted image or the concurrent image s .

In it should be understood that any and or all of the illustrated elements and other elements not illustrated may be in communication with one another according to any known methods including but not limited to the various communication techniques discussed herein. As such it should be understood that the various elements need not be located or co located as illustrated in the example of . For example in some embodiments the recognition logic and or the image restriction criteria may be remote from the processing system . Similarly the user interface may be implemented at a local computing device of the user remote from the processing system or may be a part of the device that may house the processing system as well.

The display also should be understood to function in some example embodiments as the user interface . For example the display may include touch screen control for operating the printer and or the processing system or various buttons keys or other selection input devices not shown may be used. In additional or alternative embodiments an external computing device may be connected to the printer for control thereof including control of the processing system .

In the device is illustrated as a camera which similarly to the printer includes some or all of the processing system as well as a display . As with the printer the camera and or the processing system may be controlled by the user either using the display and possibly associated controls or using an external computing device.

In the processing system is illustrated as part of a processing service which may be remote from the user at a computing station and in communication therewith by way of a network . In such example embodiments the user may use the workstation to transmit and receive the media asset and or the modified media asset respectively in order to obtain the various advantages described herein. In one example discussed in more detail below the processing service may operate as a clearinghouse at which media assets of various types and captured by a number of users may be processed so that any restricted images therein may be modified appropriately.

In and in following figures that include various examples of operational flows discussion and explanation may be provided with respect to the above described examples of A B and C and or with respect to other examples and contexts. However it should be understood that the operational flows may be executed in a number of other environment and contexts and or in modified versions of A B and C. Also although the various operational flows are presented in the sequence s illustrated it should be understood that the various operations may be performed in other orders than those which are illustrated or may be performed concurrently.

At a modifying operation the restricted image is modified to obtain a modified image that includes at least one shared image attribute of the restricted image. For example as in the modification logic may operate to replace an image of a person or a part of a person with a new or separate image of another person. In this case the shared image attribute could include one or more of a body part shape a shared facial feature or skin tone a shared gender or race a shared hair color or body physique or numerous other examples. Of course the restricted image need not be of a person but also may include virtually any object that may be imaged including places objects or landmarks to name just a few. Further the restricted image need not be of a single one of these possibilities but could include multiple people places or things or combinations thereof. Other examples of restricted images and image attributes are provided below.

At an operation the modified media asset is produced that includes the modified image . For example the processing system which may be included in the print device the camera or the processing service may output the modified media asset for printing viewing storing or transmitting as the case may be for use or enjoyment by for example the user . The operational flow then moves to an end operation.

In some embodiments the user may include a person an entity and or a government. Although a user may be shown herein as a single illustrated figure and or be described in the singular those skilled in the art will appreciate that the term user may be representative of one or more human user s robotic user s e.g. computational entity and or substantially any combination thereof e.g. a user may be assisted by one or more robotic agents . Further the user as set forth herein even if shown as a single entity may in fact be composed of two or more entities. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that in general the same may be said of sender and or other entity oriented terms as such terms may be used herein.

In some embodiments the media asset may include a visual image a picture a website an audio recording a video stream and or an audio stream. In additional or alternative embodiments the media asset also may include text such as may be included in an article or other writing or in a website. The media asset may be embodied in various forms including but not limited to digital files or transmissions analog recordings or transmissions or may be embodied in physical form such as for example on paper plastic canvas wood or any other physical medium in which text image or other representations may be embodied.

The media asset may be received stored and or transmitted using typical elements of a computer environment. The media asset and the modified media asset may be transmitted over a network such as the network of which may represent for example a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN or a peer to peer P2P network or the media asset may be broadcast over the air.

The media asset and the modified media asset may be captured received displayed and or transmitted for example and without limitation using one or more of the following an electronic device an appliance a computing device such as a personal computer and a server a limited resource computing device a pervasive computing device a personal digital assistant PDA a cell phone a Blackberry appliance a vehicle such as a car boat and or aircraft an X Box a home gateway a set top box a television a radio a camera a printer a digital video disc DVD recorder or burner and a TiVo or other digital video recorder DVR .

At the operation identity information associated with the restricted image is determined. For example the recognition logic may determine identity information of a person within the restricted image information which may include for example a name an occupation an association e.g. as a spouse relative friend or employer employee a race a gender a body physique a height a hair color or hair style a style of dress or any other distinguishing information that identifies the person and in some examples that uniquely identifies the person.

Examples of techniques for performing the determining of identity information are described in more detail below. Also examples of how such identity information may be used by the modification logic to produce the modified image are described in more detail below although it may be mentioned here that by determining identity information as described above it follows that the modified image may include or be associated with different identity information. For example a person associated with the restricted image may wish to remain anonymous or otherwise should not be included in the media asset and in such cases the modified image may include an anonymized image in which the original identity information is hidden obscured replaced and or otherwise modified.

As a result persons such as for example movie stars politicians professional athletes or other public figures or persons with associations thereto such as spouses or relatives may have their images and identities restricted. Similar comments apply to persons with government high security or classified status or other persons having safety measures associated with promulgation of their image s . Additionally since the modified image maintains at least one and possibly many image attributes of the restricted image and a presentation context of the media asset may be maintained within the modified media asset observers users or recipients of the modified media asset may not be aware that such modification has in fact taken place.

Of course similar comments apply not just to persons within the restricted image but to virtually any object that may be imaged and associated with identity information. For example the restricted image may include a physical place such as a public or private landmark a building or a sports arena and the identity information associated therewith may be determined by the recognition logic . Similarly any particular object having identity information such as for example a car or type of car a work of art an animal a computer or computing device a piece of jewelry or clothing or any other object may have identity information associated therewith for determining that the associated image is restricted.

At the operation at least a portion of the media asset is associated with a user capture device used to capture the media asset such as for example the camera of . That is for example the recognition logic may determine that the media asset was captured by the camera that is restricted from capturing certain images. For example cameras in a high security facility or cameras at an event with a public figure s e.g. a movie star politician or professional athlete may be restricted from capturing images of certain people places or things.

At the operation at least a portion of the media asset is associated with a user known to have captured the media asset. For example the user of may be a newspaper or television reporter whose employer may have agreed to restrict image taking of certain public figures. In this case as described in more detail below the recognition logic may associate the media asset or a portion thereof with the user by recognizing the metadata associated with the media asset such as for example a marker on the media asset that was imposed by a camera of the user when or after the media asset was obtained. In other examples the user may be required to identify him or herself to the processing system before processing begins so that the recognition logic may react accordingly.

At the operation at least a portion of the media asset is associated with a setting content of the image. For example the concurrent image s of FIG. I may be considered to provide setting content within the media asset . In this way for example and as referenced above media assets obtained in a certain location as reflected within the content of the media asset may be recognized by the recognition logic as containing one or more restricted images. As with virtually all of the operational flows described herein such an association may be combined for enactment within the recognition logic . For example the recognition logic may determine that if a content setting of the media asset references a setting where certain public figures will be present and if identity information associated with a person s image within the media asset identifies that person as being a spouse of a public figure then the recognition logic may cue the modification logic to anonymize the spouse s image by for example replacing the spouse s image with that of a replacement image from the replacement images memory . Such replacements may be undertaken for example based on a wish of the in this case spouse to maintain anonymity.

As another example the recognition logic may analyze the media asset to determine that the setting content is such that all non recognized persons should be anonymized. For example the processing system may receive crime scene photos in which images of bystanders have been captured. If the recognition logic recognizes e.g. certain police officers in the media asset then all other bystanders in the background may be anonymized by producing the modified media asset to include replacement images as just described or by modifying certain features of the bystanders so as to anonymize the bystanders within the modified media asset.

At the operation an attribute of a concurrently imaged object within the media asset is determined. For example an attribute of the concurrent image s may be determined where the concurrent image s may include virtually any item that may be imaged within the media asset . As mentioned above the concurrently imaged object s also may be used to determine a setting content of the media asset although the attribute of a concurrently imaged object reference in operation may refer to any particular imaged item or attribute thereof which may or may not be a part of a setting content of the media asset .

At the operation image recognition analysis is performed on a portion of the media asset. For example the recognition logic may perform image recognition analysis on the restricted image to determine that the restricted image includes an image of a person or portion thereof or any other object that may be visually imaged. The image recognition analysis may include for example color analysis pattern matching pattern recognition or any other technique for recognizing a particular image or type of image. In particular in an example additional operation that may be performed in addition to or in association with operation indecent or obscene material may be detected. For example the recognition logic may recognize nudity or other restricted imagery within the restricted image . In this case as described in more detail below later modification of the restricted image may include addition of clothes or other modification of the restricted image where again and as opposed to simple blurring or blocking of the restricted image a presentation context of the restricted image may be maintained so that an observer of the modified media asset may not notice that such a modification has taken place. As is apparent moreover such image recognition analyses may be performed on any part of the media asset including for example the concurrent image s as part of the determining operation .

At the operation facial recognition analysis is performed on a portion of the media asset. For example the recognition logic may perform a facial recognition analysis on a person within the restricted image or on any other portion of the media asset.

At the operation metadata associated with the restricted image is analyzed. For example the recognition logic may analyze the media asset to determine and consider any associated metadata . For example where the media asset includes a web page the recognition logic may analyze portions of the web page including source code associated with the web page that may provide information about for example any of the factors mentioned herein or other factors e.g. identity information a capturing user or device a setting content a concurrently imaged object or any other information about the media asset that may be useful to the recognition logic in determining the restricted image . In a further example of the operation at the operation a closed captioning stream that is associated with the media asset is analyzed. For example the media asset may represent a television show or movie that has an associated closed captioning stream which may be analyzed by the recognition logic to assist in making a determination regarding the restricted image .

At the operation an attribute of the restricted image is evaluated against image restriction criteria. For example the recognition logic may communicate with the image restriction criteria in order to assist in performing recognition processes. In this case the attribute of the restricted image may include any image attribute mentioned herein or other attributes including a size shape color identity race gender physique an associated capture device or capturing user or any other attribute. The image restriction criteria may involve for example any of the various criteria described herein such as identity information setting content image or facial recognition analysis metadata and so on as well as criteria not explicitly mentioned here. Moreover the image restriction criteria and recognition logic may interoperate to determine the restricted image based on any combination of these criteria as may be determined and configured by the user by way of the user interface .

At the operation a symbol is determined within a portion of the media asset . For example the symbol or text may be determined by way of text recognition software and thereby used to determine identity or other information related to the restricted image .

At the operation a user preference associated with the restricted image is determined. For example the user may express a preference as to whether the restricted image should be restricted and this preference may be coded into the image restriction criteria e.g. again using the interface . The user may represent someone either capturing transmitting or reviewing the media asset examples of which are described in more detail below.

At the operation a preference of a human subject of the restricted image is determined. For example a public or private figure may express a desire not to be included in the media asset . Therefore if such a person is in fact included in the media asset then the recognition logic may recognize the person and perhaps based on the preference of the person as stored in the image restriction criteria may anonymize the image of the person by for example replacing the image with one selected from the replacement images or otherwise by modifying the image.

At the operation a preference of a user who captured the media asset may be determined. For example the user may be a consumer who has captured several family photographs and wishes to distribute them to friends and relatives but wishes to anonymize certain subjects of the photographs perhaps dependent on who is to receive a particular one of the photographs. In this case and analogous cases the user may provide a preference s to the recognition logic defining a level and or type of anonymization to be provided with respect to individual image subjects and or with respect to recipients of the modified media asset or with respect to one or more other image restriction criteria various examples of which are provided herein.

At the operation a preference of a producer of the media asset may be determined. For example the user may represent an editor of a newspaper who is reviewing a number of photographs taken by staff photographers among which the media asset may be included. In this case although the editor may not have captured the media asset he or she may be responsible for producing the modified media asset using the processing system . As such preferences of such a user defining a level and or type of anonymization to be provided with respect to the one or more criteria described herein may be implemented by the recognition logic in determining the restricted image within the media asset .

At the operation a restricted image is determined within a still picture. For example if the media asset includes a still picture taken by a still camera such as for example an embodiment of the camera of then the restricted image may be determined to be any image within the still picture.

At the operation a restricted image is determined within a video stream. For example if the media asset includes any type of video including Motion Pictures Experts Group MPEG video or other format video recorded or transmitted for display on any television computer or other display then the restricted image may be determined as essentially any discernable element within the video. As just one example the restricted image may be determined as an image within one or more frames of the video image s .

At the operation the media asset is received at an image capture device. For example the media asset may be received at the image capture device of . As is apparent from the preceding discussion the image capture device may be any type of for example camera digital camera web camera webcam or video camera where any of these and others may be disposed within or in association with one or more other devices such as for example a cell phone or personal digital assistant PDA .

At the operation the media asset may be received at a print device. For example the media asset may be received at the print device of such as when the media asset is downloaded thereto by way of an external computer and or by way of a memory card inserted into or otherwise connected to the print device . In this way for example the print device as with the camera may be prevented from producing and or capturing the restricted image .

At the operation the media asset is received at a central collection facility for collecting media assets. For example as referenced above the processing service of may serve as a clearinghouse for a number of users who may be employees of a single employer. In another example the processing service may be a commercial enterprise that received media assets from any number of disparate consumers.

At the operation the restricted image is replaced with the modified image selected from a database of replacement images that are known to include the at least one shared attribute. For example the modified image may be selected from the replacement images memory to overlay the restricted image with appropriate scaling warping rotating color matching or any other operation required by the modification logic to insert the replacement image .

At the operation the restricted image may be modified without modifying the at least one shared image attribute. For example and somewhat contrary to the example just given the restricted image may be altered without a full replacement of the image . For example if the replacement image includes a public figure having brown hair a certain style of dress or some other distinguishing characteristic then such a characteristic may be maintained within the modified image . Thus a person or other object in the restricted image may be anonymized with a minimum disruption to the media asset as a whole.

At the operation a presentation context of the media asset is maintained within the modified media asset. For example not only may the concurrent image s be maintained within the modified media asset but the modified image itself may be inserted with minimal or no disruption to a continuity of color lighting shading clarity or other aspects of presentation of the modified media asset.

At the operation the modified image is determined to be associated with modified identity information that is different from identity information associated with the restricted image. For example as referred to above it may be the case that the processing system is operable to anonymize a figure or object e.g. a person within the restricted image . In this way privacy or security concerns of the anonymized figure or of any other entity e.g. the operator or manager of a venue may be addressed. By ensuring that the identity information e.g. name facial features occupation or any other identity information associated with the modified image is different from identity information associated with the restricted image at least one aspect of the anonymization of the figure is provided.

At the operation an identity of a human subject of the restricted image is obscured by replacing the human subject with a replacement human subject having a different identity. For example and similarly to some of the examples already given a human subject in the restricted image of may be replaced perhaps using an image from the replacement images database where the modification logic is operable to determine the identity of the human subject perhaps in conjunction with the image restriction criteria and or the recognition logic .

At the operation the restricted image is modified to obtain the modified image that includes as the at least one shared image attribute one or more image attributes from a group including a shape a size a contour an outline a color a pattern an anatomy a figure a frame a form a glyph a symbol a word a feature a facial feature a gender or a race. For example the recognition logic may access the image restriction criteria to determine one or more of these criteria or other criteria to determine the restricted image as referenced above and then the modification logic may perhaps in association with the replacement images determine the modified image in which at least one of the above attributes shared between the modified image and the restricted image .

At the operation the restricted image is modified to include clothing or other covering when the restricted image is determined to include indecent or obscene material. For example if the media asset includes a website that includes a restricted image that includes nudity then the recognition logic may so recognize and the modification logic may add clothing or other covering to the restricted image . In this way a general appearance of the website may be maintained.

At the operation the restricted image may be modified based on preference information. For example a number of types of preference information are described above including preferences of the user who captured or created the media asset or preferences of a human subject of the media asset or preferences of a user who is in charge of producing storing transmitting or delivering the media asset . Although such preference information was described above in terms of determining the restricted image the operation and examples provided herein also illustrate that such preferences and other preferences also may be used to determine a type or extent of modification that is performed by for example the modification logic .

At the operation it is determined whether payment has been received for the modifying of the restricted image. For example the user may access the processing service as part of a paid service in which the user obtains modification of the media asset in exchange for payment.

In this context payment may refer generally to any type of monetary compensation and or non monetary compensation and or economic value exchange. Such payment may for example occur between any pair of entities and or other group of entities. By way of example and not limitation a payment may include a non monetary payment such as a credit or coupon that may be exchanged for goods or services a reduced or eliminated cost to a user or users for related or non related goods or services. In another example a payment may include granting a party certain rights or permissions as payment such as information related permissions. This may involve granting a party rights to certain information the party ordinarily would not have the right to access or the right to use certain information in a particular manner. For example one type of payment may include a party allowing another party to keep a user s personal information in a database for marketing or research purposes. In another example as compensation or payment a user or users may grant another party the right to monitor computer usage or preferences or buying habits of the user in certain contexts or the right to monitor a physical location or activity of the user. The user also may accept cash or cash equivalents as payment from the provider for providing such entitlements rights or permissions. Thus by providing and or receiving monetary or non monetary value in an amount that may be designated as part of an agreement between the relevant parties the parties may gain advantages and benefits that are mutually acceptable to both.

At the operation the restricted image is modified at an image capture device. For example the restricted image is modified at the processing system within the camera of . Further at the operation the restricted image is modified at a print device. For example the restricted image may be modified at the processing system by the print device of . Further at the operation the restricted image may be modified at a remote processing service. For example the restricted image may be modified at a processing system of the processing service of .

At the operation information regarding the restricted image may be encrypted. For example the modification logic may be operable to encrypt the media asset and or the restricted image prior to or in conjunction with producing the modified media asset . For example the encrypted restricted image may be aggregated with the modified media asset for output or the encrypted restricted image may be stored remotely from the modified media asset .

At the operation the restricted image is prevented from being rendered. For example the modification logic may corrupt information regarding the restricted image such that the information is not or can not be stored for later access. In this way for example the anonymity of a person in the restricted image may be maintained in full confidence.

At the operation a presentation of a human face is maintained within the modified image when the restricted image includes a restricted human face. For example if the restricted image includes a human face of a public figure or some other individual who has requested some level of anonymity then that face may be replaced or otherwise modified perhaps using the replacement images by the modification logic .

At the operation the modified media asset is produced as a digital modified media asset. For example the modification logic may be operable to output the modified media asset as a digital media asset.

At the operation the modified media asset is output. For example the modified media asset may be output to the user who as is apparent from the above discussion may represent someone who has captured the media asset someone who is reviewing the media asset someone who is receiving the media asset or anyone else who may have cause to receive the media asset.

The computing device includes an operability to receive the media asset . The computing device also includes computer executable instructions that when executed on the computing device causes the computing device to determine a restricted image within a media asset modify the restricted image to obtain a modified image that includes at least one shared image attribute of the restricted image and produce a modified media asset that includes the modified image.

As referenced above and as shown in in some examples the computing device may optionally be contained in whole or in part within the user device and may include the image capture device camera or the printer . For example the user device may include a cell phone and the computing device may be included as part of a digital camera included within the cell phone. In another example embodiment the computing device is operable to communicate with the user device associated with the user to receive the media asset from the user and to provide the modified media asset to the user .

The operation may include one or more additional operations. For example the operation may include an operation in which recognition parameters by which the restricted image may be recognized are specified by way of a user interface. For example the user may set parameters of the recognition logic .

Also the operation may include an operation in which modification parameters by which the restricted image may be modified are specified by way of a user interface. For example the user may specify parameters of the modification logic by way of the user interface .

The operation may include one or more operations. For example the operation may include an operation in which the modified media asset is received from one or more of an image capture device a print device or a remote processing service. For example the user may receive the modified media asset by way of the print device the camera or the remote processing system .

Of course the user may receive the modified media asset in other ways. For example the modified media asset may be received as stored on a memory device. For example the user may capture an audio and or visual file using an image capture device or by way of downloading from a website or other location. The user may store the resulting digital file on a memory card memory stick CD DVD or other storage media.

The operational flow may include additional operations. For example the operational flow may include operations and .

At the operations and respectively and as an alternative embodiment of the determining operation an attribute of the image is determined and the attribute is evaluated against image restriction criteria. For example the recognition logic may determine an attribute s of the media asset or of the image itself including any of the numerous attributes discussed herein or others not specifically discussed. Then the recognition logic may evaluate the attribute against the image restriction criteria .

At the operation an attribute of an identity of a subject of the image is determined. For example a subject of the image may be a public figure or someone else who has specified or about whom it has been specified that any or certain images of him or herself should be anonymized. The recognition logic may thus determine an attribute of an identity of this person including those mentioned herein such as name occupation physical trait or others.

The modifying operation may include alternative embodiments as well. For example at the operation a presentation context of the image in the anonymized image is preserved. For example the modified image may be presented with a same or similar clarity resolution contrast color or balance as the image as opposed to e.g. simply blocking out or blurring the image and or the concurrent image s may be maintained.

At the operation the image may be replaced with a non specific image to obtain the anonymized image. For example a non specific image e.g. an image that is not specific to the media asset and or to a subject of the image may be selected from the replacement images .

At the operation the image may be replaced with a modified identity image to obtain the anonymized image. For example the modified image may be associated with a subject having an identity different from that of an identity of the image .

At the operation an identity associated with a subject of the image may be obscured to obtain the anonymized image. For example an identity of the subject of the image may be obscured as opposed to the image itself being obscured in the sense of being blocked out covered or blurred.

At the operation at least one shared attribute of the image may be maintained within the anonymized image. Also at the operation at least one or more of a shape a size a contour an outline a color a pattern an anatomy a figure a frame a form a glyph a symbol a word a feature a facial feature a gender or a race of the image may be maintained within the anonymized image. For example any of the above attributes or combinations thereof or other attributes may be maintained within the anonymized image with respect to the image .

Those having skill in the art will recognize that the state of the art has progressed to the point where there is little distinction left between hardware and software implementations of aspects of systems the use of hardware or software is generally but not always in that in certain contexts the choice between hardware and software can become significant a design choice representing cost vs. efficiency tradeoffs. Those having skill in the art will appreciate that there are various vehicles by which processes and or systems and or other technologies described herein can be effected e.g. hardware software and or firmware and that the preferred vehicle will vary with the context in which the processes and or systems and or other technologies are deployed. For example if an implementer determines that speed and accuracy are paramount the implementer may opt for a mainly hardware and or firmware vehicle alternatively if flexibility is paramount the implementer may opt for a mainly software implementation or yet again alternatively the implementer may opt for some combination of hardware software and or firmware. Hence there are several possible vehicles by which the processes and or devices and or other technologies described herein may be effected none of which is inherently superior to the other in that any vehicle to be utilized is a choice dependent upon the context in which the vehicle will be deployed and the specific concerns e.g. speed flexibility or predictability of the implementer any of which may vary. Those skilled in the art will recognize that optical aspects of implementations will typically employ optically oriented hardware software and or firmware.

The foregoing detailed description has set forth various embodiments of the devices and or processes via the use of block diagrams flowcharts and or examples. Insofar as such block diagrams flowcharts and or examples contain one or more functions and or operations it will be understood by those within the art that each function and or operation within such block diagrams flowcharts or examples can be implemented individually and or collectively by a wide range of hardware software firmware or virtually any combination thereof. In one embodiment several portions of the subject matter described herein may be implemented via Application Specific Integrated Circuits ASICs Field Programmable Gate Arrays FPGAs digital signal processors DSPs or other integrated formats. However those skilled in the art will recognize that some aspects of the embodiments disclosed herein in whole or in part can be equivalently implemented in integrated circuits as one or more computer programs running on one or more computers e.g. as one or more programs running on one or more computer systems as one or more programs running on one or more processors e.g. as one or more programs running on one or more microprocessors as firmware or as virtually any combination thereof and that designing the circuitry and or writing the code for the software and or firmware would be well within the skill of one of skill in the art in light of this disclosure. In addition those skilled in the art will appreciate that the mechanisms of the subject matter described herein are capable of being distributed as a program product in a variety of forms and that an illustrative embodiment of the subject matter described herein applies regardless of the particular type of signal bearing medium used to actually carry out the distribution. Examples of a signal bearing medium include but are not limited to the following a recordable type medium such as a floppy disk a hard disk drive a Compact Disc CD a Digital Video Disk DVD a digital tape a computer memory etc. and a transmission type medium such as a digital and or an analog communication medium e.g. a fiber optic cable a waveguide a wired communications link a wireless communication link etc. .

While particular aspects of the present subject matter described herein have been shown and described it will be apparent to those skilled in the art that based upon the teachings herein changes and modifications may be made without departing from this subject matter described herein and its broader aspects and therefore the appended claims are to encompass within their scope all such changes and modifications as are within the true spirit and scope of this subject matter described herein. Furthermore it is to be understood that the invention is solely defined by the appended claims. It will be understood by those within the art that in general terms used herein and especially in the appended claims e.g. bodies of the appended claims are generally intended as open terms e.g. the term including should be interpreted as including but not limited to the term having should be interpreted as having at least the term includes should be interpreted as includes but is not limited to etc. . It will be further understood by those within the art that if a specific number of an introduced claim recitation is intended such an intent will be explicitly recited in the claim and in the absence of such recitation no such intent is present. For example as an aid to understanding the following appended claims may contain usage of the introductory phrases at least one and one or more to introduce claim recitations. However the use of such phrases should not be construed to imply that the introduction of a claim recitation by the indefinite articles a or an limits any particular claim containing such introduced claim recitation to inventions containing only one such recitation even when the same claim includes the introductory phrases one or more or at least one and indefinite articles such as a or an e.g. a and or an should typically be interpreted to mean at least one or one or more the same holds true for the use of definite articles used to introduce claim recitations. In addition even if a specific number of an introduced claim recitation is explicitly recited those skilled in the art will recognize that such recitation should typically be interpreted to mean at least the recited number e.g. the bare recitation of two recitations without other modifiers typically means at least two recitations or two or more recitations . Furthermore in those instances where a convention analogous to at least one of A B and C etc. is used in general such a construction is intended in the sense one having skill in the art would understand the convention e.g. a system having at least one of A B and C would include but not be limited to systems that have A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and or A B and C together etc. . In those instances where a convention analogous to at least one of A B or C etc. is used in general such a construction is intended in the sense one having skill in the art would understand the convention e.g. a system having at least one of A B or C would include but not be limited to systems that have A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and or A B and C together etc. . It will be further understood by those within the art that any disjunctive word and or phrase presenting two or more alternative terms whether in the description claims or drawings should be understood to contemplate the possibilities of including one of the terms either of the terms or both terms. For example the phrase A or B will be understood to include the possibilities of A or B or A and B. 

The herein described aspects depict different components contained within or connected with different other components. It is to be understood that such depicted architectures are merely exemplary and that in fact many other architectures can be implemented which achieve the same functionality. In a conceptual sense any arrangement of components to achieve the same functionality is effectively associated such that the desired functionality is achieved. Hence any two components herein combined to achieve a particular functionality can be seen as associated with each other such that the desired functionality is achieved irrespective of architectures or intermedial components. Likewise any two components so associated can also be viewed as being operably connected or operably coupled to each other to achieve the desired functionality. Any two components capable of being so associated can also be viewed as being operably couplable to each other to achieve the desired functionality. Specific examples of operably couplable include but are not limited to physically mateable and or physically interacting components and or wirelessly interactable and or wirelessly interacting components and or logically interactable and or logically interacting components.

While certain features of the described implementations have been illustrated as disclosed herein many modifications substitutions changes and equivalents will now occur to those skilled in the art. It is therefore to be understood that the appended claims are intended to cover all such modifications and changes as fall within the true spirit of the embodiments of the invention.

