---

title: Copolymers of fluorinated polydienes and sulfonated polystyrene
abstract: Copolymers of fluorinated polydienes and sulfonated polystyrene and their use in fuel cell membranes, batteries, breathable chemical-biological protective materials, and templates for sol-gel polymerization.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07619036&OS=07619036&RS=07619036
owner: University of Tennessee Research Foundation
number: 07619036
owner_city: Knoxville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050321
---
This application is based on and claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 554 461 filed Mar. 19 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy EERE Program through Oak Ridge National Laboratory and by the U.S. Army Research Office. The U.S. government has certain rights in the invention.

Copolymers of fluorinated polydienes and sulfonated polystyrene and their use in electrochemical cell membranes for example in fuel cells as polyelectrolytes in electrochemical cells such as batteries fabrics for example for use in breathable chemical biological protective materials and templates for sol gel polymerization as representative applications.

Robust highly conductive and inexpensive proton exchange membranes PEMS are needed for practical and reliable electrochemical cell e.g. fuel cell operation at elevated temperatures. Current fuel cell membranes typically are based on polymeric materials such as those available under the registered trademark NAFION from E. I. duPont de Nemours and Co. Wilmington Del. United States of America. A NAFION polymer is a perfluorinated polymer comprising low levels of ionic groups which aggregate to form ionic hydrophilic clusters. These hydrophilic clusters allow transport of water and ions across membranes formed from NAFION polymer making it a useful material for fuel cell membranes catalysis and templating.

PEMs based on NAFION polymers have long been considered benchmarks in terms of performance characteristics. See Heitner Wirquin C. 120 1 33 1996 . Fuel cell membranes based on NAFION polymer suffer several disadvantages however. For example NAFION polymer is expensive and typically cannot be used in applications requiring temperatures in excess of 100 C. Also the structure of NAFION polymer is complex and not fully understood.

Further the current class of PEM fuel cells which typically operate at about 90 C. is hampered by sensitivities to carbon monoxide CO and peroxide formation that limit performance and require the use of high purity fuels. To overcome such sensitivities to CO complex systems are required to remove CO from the fuel. Further platinum catalysts typically are required on the anode to minimize the effect of CO on membrane polarization. A polymeric membrane capable of operating at elevated temperatures e.g. temperatures above about 150 C. would largely eliminate such concerns because CO adsorption is no longer kinetically favorable at those temperatures.

Given the importance of practical operations of fuel cells with high performance low cost and extended lifetimes various approaches to the synthesis and characterization of PEM materials have been reported. Doyle et al. 147 34 37 2001 have reviewed a number of alternative PEM systems including polymer systems doped with acids or ionic liquids. Inorganic dopants and hybridization procedures also have been used in an effort to improve mechanical thermal and water sorption properties of NAFION based PEMs. See Deng. Q. et al. 68 747 763 1998 Antonucci P. L. et al. 125 431 437 1999 .

There exists however a need in the art for improved materials for PEMs in particular PEMs for sustained operation in fuel cells at elevated temperatures e.g. temperatures above about 150 C. .

Further there exists a need in the art for improved fabrics for example for use in breathable chemical and biological protective clothing for military personnel emergency response teams industrial and or agricultural workers and other applications and healthcare professionals. Standard protective clothing is made largely from butyl rubber BR a material whose impermeability provides an excellent level of protection but also traps heat and moisture inside the garments. BR garments also are bulky and limit dexterity. For example a particular problem with gloves made from BR materials is that they constrain hand movement. In a desert combat environment these problems could result in more than simple discomfort and inconvenience.

Thus there is a need in the art for improved materials for use as fuel cell membranes and as a fabric for example for use in breathable chemical biological protective clothing.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for forming a copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene the method comprising 

In some embodiments the copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene comprises an architecture selected from the group consisting of a diblock copolymer a triblock copolymer a statistical copolymer a graft copolymer and a miktoarm star copolymer.

In some embodiments the polydiene component is selected from the group consisting of 1 4 polybutadiene poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene and polyisoprene. In some embodiments the fluorinating agent comprises difluorocarbene. In some embodiments the polystyrene is selected from the group consisting of polystyrene and poly methylstyrene . In some embodiments the sulfonating agent is selected from the group consisting of acetyl sulfate and sulfur trioxide.

In some embodiments the copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene comprises an AB block copolymer wherein the A block comprises a polystyrene and the B block comprises a polydiene. In some embodiments the copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene comprises an ABA triblock copolymer wherein the A block of the triblock copolymer comprises a polydiene and the B block of the triblock copolymer comprises a polystyrene. In some embodiments the copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene comprises a statistical copolymer comprising 1 3 cyclohexadiene and methylstyrene. In some embodiments the copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene comprises a graft copolymer. In some embodiments the graft copolymer comprises an architecture selected from the group consisting of a trifunctional comb architecture a tetrafunctional centipede architecture a hexafunctional barbwire architecture and a miktoarm star architecture.

In some embodiments the fluorinated polydiene is present in a greater stoichiometric amount than the sulfonated polystyrene. In some embodiments the method comprises optimizing an amount of the fluorinated polydiene an amount of the sulfonated polystyrene or an amount of both the fluorinated polydiene and the sulfonated polystyrene to provide a copolymer having a predetermined characteristic. In some embodiments the predetermined characteristic is selected from the group consisting of hydrophilicity permeability to water thermal stability above about 100 C. high glass transition temperature high tensile strength elasticity and chemical stability.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a proton exchange membrane comprising a copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene. In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides an electrochemical cell comprising such a proton exchange membrane. In some embodiments the electrochemical cell comprises a fuel cell.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a fabric comprising a copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene. In some embodiments the fabric comprises an article of chemical biological protective clothing. In some embodiments the fabric comprises an article of material used to cover an agricultural product.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a template for sol gel polymerization comprising a copolymer comprising a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for preparing a sulfonated crosslinked poly cyclohexadiene polyelectrolyte the method comprising 

In some embodiments the crosslinking comprises a polydiene vulcanization process. In some embodiments the aromatizing comprises a dehydrogenation process. In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a proton exchange membrane comprising a cross linked poly cyclohexadiene polymer. In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a polyelectrolyte comprising a cross linked poly cyclohexadiene polymer. In some embodiments the cross linked poly cyclohexadiene polymer is aromatized. In some embodiments the cross linked poly cyclohexadiene polymer is sulfonated. In some embodiments the cross linked poly cyclohexadiene polymer comprises poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene .

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides block graft copolymers with fluorinated blocks as well as charged blocks for example sulfonated blocks. If the content of sulfonated polystyrene in the copolymer is relatively low a structure having a hydrophobic semicrystalline continuous phase comprising dispersed nanoscale ionic clusters will be generated via self assembly. By regulating the composition molecular weight and architecture the structure and thus the properties can be optimized for a range of applications.

The presently disclosed fluorinated and sulfonated block copolymers provide basic understanding in the synthesis structure and properties of new classes of materials useful in a range of applications including portable power supplies such as fuel cells and or improved batteries and protection against chemical and biological threats. The chemical properties of the materials provide an economical alternative for fuel cell membranes while additionally allowing tailoring of relevant mechanical and transport properties through control of molecular architecture and chemical functionality.

Accordingly it is an object of the presently disclosed subject matter to provide a new class of materials for use as a proton exchange membrane. Further it is an object of the presently disclosed subject matter to provide a new class of fabrics such as materials that provide protection against chemical and biological threats. These and other objects are achieved in whole or in part by the presently disclosed subject matter.

Objects and aspects of the presently disclosed subject matter having been stated hereinabove other objects and aspects will become evident as the description proceeds when taken in connection with the accompanying Drawings and Examples as best described herein below.

The presently disclosed subject matter will now be described more fully hereinafter with reference to the accompanying Examples and Drawings in which representative embodiments are shown. The presently disclosed subject matter can however be embodied in different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein. Rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the embodiments to those skilled in the art.

Unless otherwise defined all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this presently described subject matter belongs. All publications patent applications patents and other references mentioned herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety.

Throughout the specification and claims a given chemical formula or name shall encompass all optical and stereoisomers as well as racemic mixtures where such isomers and mixtures exist.

The presently disclosed subject matter provides in some embodiments 1 synthesis of new fluorinated and charged block copolymers 2 morphological characterization of these materials both in the bulk form and in the presence of water and salts and 3 investigation of application relevant material properties such as mechanical properties charge transport and water transport.

As provided herein below in some embodiments anionic polymerization coupled with appropriate postpolymerization chemistry is used to create a wide range of charge neutral copolymers of various compositions and morphologies.

As used herein the term anionic polymerization refers to an ionic polymerization in which the kinetic chain carriers are anions. Accordingly an anionic polymerization reaction is a chain reaction in which the growth of the polymer chain proceeds by reaction s between a monomer s and a reactive site s on the polymer chain with regeneration of the reactive site s at the end of each growth step. Anionic polymerization typically takes place with monomers comprising electron withdrawing groups such as nitrile carboxyl phenyl and vinyl or with monomers that can stabilize the anions through resonance. These polymerizations are initiated by nucleophilic addition to the double bond of the monomer wherein the initiator comprises an anion such as hydroxide alkoxides cyanide or a carbanion. In some embodiments the carbanion is generated from an organometallic species such as an alkyl lithium e.g. butyl lithium or a Grignard reagent. Anionic polymerization typically is used to produce macromolecules from monomers that contain a carbon carbon double bond such as styrene and or butadiene. Such reactions are referred to as anionic vinyl polymerization.

As used herein a monomer refers to a molecule that can undergo polymerization thereby contributing constitutional units i.e. an atom or group of atoms to the essential structure of a macromolecule.

As used herein a macromolecule refers to a molecule of high relative molecular mass the structure of which comprises the multiple repetition of units derived from molecules of low relative molecular mass e.g. monomers and or oligomers.

An oligomer refers to a molecule of intermediate relative molecular mass the structure of which comprises a small plurality of units derived from molecules of lower relative molecular mass.

As used herein a block macromolecule refers to a macromolecule that comprises blocks in a linear sequence. A block refers to a portion of a macromolecule that has at least one feature that is not present in the adjacent portions of the macromolecule. A block copolymer refers to a copolymer in which adjacent blocks are constitutionally different i.e. each of these blocks comprises constitutional units derived from different characteristic species of monomer or with different composition or sequence distribution of constitutional units.

For example a diblock copolymer of polybutadiene and polystyrene is referred to as polybutadiene block polystyrene. Such a copolymer is referred to generically as an AB block copolymer. Likewise a triblock copolymer can be represented as ABA. Other types of block polymers exist such as multiblock copolymers of the AB type ABC block polymers comprising three different blocks and star block polymers which have a central point with three or more arms each of which is in the form of a block copolymer usually of the AB type.

As used herein a graft macromolecule refers to a macromolecule comprising one or more species of block connected to the main chain as side chains wherein the side chains comprise constitutional or configurational features that differ from those in the main chain.

A branch point refers to a point on a chain at which a branch is attached. A branch also referred to as a side chain or pendant chain is an oligomeric or polymeric offshoot from a macromolecule chain. An oligomeric branch can be termed a short chain branch whereas a polymeric branch can be termed a long chain branch. 

A chain refers to the whole or part of a macromolecule an oligomer or a block comprising a linear or branched sequence of constitutional units between two boundary constitutional units wherein the two boundary constitutional units can comprise an end group a branch point or combinations thereof.

A branched chain refers to a chain with at least one branch point intermediate between the boundary units.

A main chain or backbone refers to a linear chain from which all other chains are regarded as being pendant.

An end group refers to a constitutional unit that comprises the extremity of a macromolecule or oligomer and by definition is attached to only one constitutional unit of a macromolecule or oligomer.

A comb macromolecule refers to a macromolecule comprising a main chain with multiple trifunctional branch points from each of which a linear side chain emanates.

A statistical copolymer refers to a copolymer comprising macromolecules in which the sequential distribution of the monomeric units obeys known statistical laws including but not limited to Markovian statistics.

A polyelectrolyte molecule refers to a macromolecule in which a substantial portion of the constitutional units has ionizable or ionic groups or both.

An ionomer molecule refers to a macromolecule in which a small but significant proportion of the constitutional units have ionizable or ionic groups or both.

A star polymer refers to a polymer comprising a macromolecule comprising a single branch point from which a plurality of linear chains or arms emanate. A star polymer or macromolecule with n linear chains emanating from the branch point is referred to as an n star polymer. If the linear chains of a star polymer are identical with respect to constitution and degree of polymerization the macromolecule is referred to as a regular star macromolecule. If different arms of a star polymer comprise different monomeric units the macromolecule is referred to as a variegated star polymer. 

A miktoarm star polymer refers to a star polymer comprising chemically different i.e. mixed arms thereby producing a star polymer having the characteristic of chemical asymmetry.

As used herein the term chemical biological refers to chemical and or biological agents including hazardous and or toxic chemicals and microorganisms such as but not limited to chemical biological warfare agents viruses bacteria blood borne pathogens air borne pathogens industrial chemicals and agricultural chemicals in liquid vapor and aerosol forms.

As used herein the term breathable fabric breathable material or an article for example an article of clothing comprising breathable fabric and or breathable material refers to a fabric and or a material that allows perspiration products to escape from for example a body while preventing the penetration and or transport of undesired hazardous materials such as but not limited to chemical biological warfare agents viruses bacteria blood borne pathogens air borne pathogens industrial chemicals and agricultural chemicals in liquid vapor and aerosol forms through the fabric and or material.

As used herein the term alkyl refers to Cinclusive linear i.e. straight chain branched or cyclic saturated or at least partially and in some cases fully unsaturated i.e. alkenyl and alkynyl hydrocarbon chains including for example methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl butyl isobutyl tert butyl pentyl hexyl octyl ethenyl propenyl butenyl pentenyl hexenyl octenyl butadienyl propynyl butynyl pentynyl hexynyl heptynyl and allenyl groups. Branched refers to an alkyl group in which a lower alkyl group such as methyl ethyl or propyl is attached to a linear alkyl chain. Lower alkyl refers to an alkyl group having 1 to about 8 carbon atoms i.e. a Calkyl e.g. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 or 8 carbon atoms. Higher alkyl refers to an alkyl group having about 10 to about 20 carbon atoms e.g. 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 or 20 carbon atoms. In certain embodiments alkyl refers in particular to Cstraight chain alkyls. In other embodiments alkyl refers in particular to Cbranched chain alkyls.

Alkyl groups can optionally be substituted with one or more alkyl group substituents which can be the same or different. The term alkyl group substituent includes but is not limited to alkyl halo arylamino acyl hydroxyl aryloxyl alkoxyl alkylthio arylthio aralkyloxyl aralkylthio carboxyl alkoxycarbonyl oxo and cycloalkyl. There can be optionally inserted along the alkyl chain one or more oxygen sulfur or substituted or unsubstituted nitrogen atoms wherein the nitrogen substituent is hydrogen lower alkyl also referred to herein as alkylaminoalkyl or aryl.

As used herein the terms substituted alkyl substituted cycloalkyl substituted alkylene substituted aryl and substituted arylene include alkyl alkylene and aryl groups as defined herein in which one or more of the hydrogen atoms of the alkyl alkylene aryl or arylene group are replaced with another atom or functional group including for example halogen aryl alkyl alkoxyl hydroxyl nitro amino alkylamino dialkylamino sulfate and mercapto.

 Alkoxyl or alkoxyalkyl refer to an alkyl O group wherein alkyl is as previously described. The term alkoxyl as used herein can refer to Cinclusive linear branched or cyclic saturated or unsaturated oxo hydrocarbon chains including for example methoxyl ethoxyl propoxyl isopropoxyl butoxyl t butoxyl and pentoxyl.

The presently disclosed subject matter provides the synthesis properties and morphology of a range of polymers comprising partially fluorinated polydienes such as 1 4 polybutadiene isoprene and cyclohexadiene and partially or fully sulfonated polystyrene.

Fluorination of polydienes by generation of difluorocarbene has been reported by Cais R. B. et al. 19 595 1986 using PhHgCFas the fluorine source and by Thomson M. W. 22 481 1989 via irradiation of chlorofluorocarbons. Further Ren Y. et al. 120 6830 1998 have reported a facile method for fluorination of polydienes based upon difluorocarbene addition. This reaction employs the relatively inexpensive hexafluoropropylene oxide as a reagent and does not lead to substantial chain scission or crosslinking.

For example when polybutadiene with a high 1 4 microstructure is treated with hexafluoropropylene oxide the conversion is quantitative and the resulting semicrystalline polymer has a Tof 89 C. a Tof 150 C. and exhibits good thermal stability. A sample of similarly fluorinated polyisoprene retained 99.7 of its weight when heated at 200 C. under nitrogen for one hour. See Ren Y. et al. 120 6830 1998 . Analogous chemistries carried out on 1 4 polyisoprene as well as polycyclohexadiene yield an amorphous product which also is of interest.

Copolymers of butadiene and styrene can be produced with a range of architectures encompassing diblock triblock statistical and graft copolymers. Triblock copolymers of styrene and butadiene make up a commercially important class of thermoplastic elastomers. When anionic polymerization is employed in the synthesis well defined structures having controlled molecular weights compositions and narrow polydispersities can be synthesized.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter the synthesis of block and graft copolymers of fluorinated polydienes e.g. butadiene isoprene and cyclohexadiene and polystyrene sulfonate occurs in three steps 1 synthesis of the polystyrene PS polydiene block copolymer comprising the desired architecture and composition 2 fluorination of the polydiene blocks and 3 sulfonation of the PS blocks to yield the final product. The first two steps can yield two other block copolymer materials a conventional PS polydiene as well as a fluorinated polydiene PS material.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter the polybutadiene block of such materials can be partially fluorinated by reaction with difluorocarbene or perfluoroalkyl iodides see Scheme 1 below followed by sulfonation of the polystyrene blocks. After fluorination of the polybutadiene component the polystyrene segments can be sulfonated using reagents such as acetyl sulfate or sulfur trioxide to form poly styrene sulfonic acid PSS .

Poly styrene sulfonic acid PSS is an effective proton conductor. In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter if the composition of the copolymer is chosen so that the fluorinated polybutadiene FPB volume fraction is considerably larger than the PSS volume fraction i.e. the content of sulfonated polystyrene in the copolymer is relatively low then a structure having a hydrophobic semi crystalline continuous phase containing dispersed nanoscale ionic channels is obtained via self assembly. By tuning the composition molecular weight and architecture readily done using anionic polymerization the morphology structure and properties is manipulated.

Less pronounced hydrophobic hydrophilic phase separation which would be present in an FPB PSS copolymer as compared to NAFION material can lead to advantages in methanol fuel cells due to their difference in permeability. While these native FPB PSS copolymer materials might lack adequate thermal stability for use in methanol fuel cells well above 100 C. they can be provided at low cost. Also subsequent modification to form inorganic hybrid materials can be used to improve their high temperature capability.

Within the context of fuel cells less distinct phase separated morphologies are beneficial in the sense of less tortuous proton hopping pathways. The process of fluorination as described herein below increases chemical stability. With regard to thermal and morphological stability insertion of inorganic oxide nanostructures into the hard block regions lock in the phase separated morphology at temperatures around or exceeding 100 C. in the case of membranes expected to operate at high temperatures. Further by tailoring gradients of intimately incorporated inorganic oxide nanostructures water activity gradients are generated for the purpose of water management optimization.

Triblock copolymers of styrene and butadiene make up a commercially important class of thermoplastic elastomers. The polybutadiene PBD block of such materials can be partially fluorinated by reaction with difluorocarbene followed by sulfonation of the polystyrene blocks.

A series of ABA triblock copolymers are synthesized in which the outer A blocks are polydiene e.g. isoprene IS polybutadiene PBD and cyclohexadiene CHD and the inner B block is polystyrene PS . This arrangement is the opposite block arrangement to the normal thermoplastic elastomer KRATON like materials KRATON Polymers U.S. LLC Houston Tex. United States of America in which the PS blocks are in the A position on the ends of the molecule to provide mechanical reinforcement. In some embodiments the PS blocks are sulfonated. In some embodiments the PS blocks are hydrated. In embodiments wherein the PS blocks are hydrated the PS blocks can be plasticized in the end use application.

Once fluorinated the polydiene blocks become strongly hydrophobic and mechanically stiffened. The fluorinated PBD is semicrystalline with a melting temperature of about 150 C. and the fluorinated polycyclohexadiene PCHD is an amorphous material with a high T. Hydrogenated PCHD is known have a Tbetween about 200 C. and about 250 C. depending on microstructure. Thus in some embodiments the polydienes of the presently disclosed subject matter fulfill a mechanically toughening role.

Linear triblock copolymers of an ABA architecture wherein A is polybutadiene PBD or polyisoprene PI and B is polystyrene PS can be prepared. The logic of starting with a simple linear architecture is the ease of synthesis of these materials and the well known good mechanical properties of the ABA architecture. In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter these materials are made using anionic polymerization and all glass reactors with breakseals. In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter a double diphenylethylene lithium based initiator see below is used in benzene with addition of lithium butoxide at room temperature in the synthesis of the middle block.

A sample of the PS is then taken for characterization and the diene i.e. either PBD or PI is added to the reactor to grow the triblock. An advantage of this method is in allowing the synthesis of high 1 4 polydiene addition of lithium butoxide has minimal effect on microstructure . This synthetic approach also facilitates rigorous characterization of the products.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter cyclohexane solutions of the styrene diene copolymers are subjected to hexafluoropropylene oxide HFPO at 180 C. using a high pressure reactor as reported by Ren Y. et al. 120 6830 1998 in the presence of butylated hydroxy toluene BHT . At this temperature HFPO generates difluorocarbene which selectively adds to dienic unsaturation. The fluorinated products are then isolated characterized and subjected to sulfonation. Higher fluorine levels can be incorporated through addition of perfluoroalkyl iodides to the diene double bonds as reported by Ren. Y. et al. 34 4780 2001 in which optimized reaction conditions for modification of a styrene butadiene diblock copolymer can lead to consumption of 95 of the double bonds in the diene block while preserving the narrow molecular weight distribution.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter the PS segments are sulfonated using a SO triethylphosphate complex or with acetylsulfate. The former system is most useful for carrying out exhaustive sulfonation of the PS segments whereas the latter system is effective for carrying out partial sulfonation. In some embodiments the sulfonations are carried out in a chloroalkane such as dichloroethane at ambient or lower temperatures. For polymers containing fluorinated 1 4 PBD segments however sulfonations are conducted on solutions at higher temperatures or on thin films of polymer due to the more limited solubilities of these materials.

In some embodiments materials with initial PS volume fractions of about 0.18 are provided to form PS cylinders in a polydiene matrix. This composition is formulated toward the lower end of the PS cylinder volume fraction range to accommodate some PS volume fraction increase upon sulfonation without pushing the samples out of the cylindrical morphology. Holding the PS volume fraction as constant as possible the molecular weight of the overall material is varied from a low of about 20 000 g mol to a high value depending upon whether 1 the polydiene block is PBD high of 200 000 g mol or 2 PCHD high of 30 000 g mol . The overall molecular weight of the PCHD containing materials is limited by synthetic difficulties in achieving PCHD block molecular weights greater than about 30 000 g mol. See Hong. K. and Mays J. W. 34 3540 2001 Hong K. and Mays J. W. 34 782 2001 and Hong. K. et al. 34 2482 2001 .

The full molecular weight range is spanned by 4 to 5 samples for each of these two embodiments. For instance for PS PBD the molecular weight ranges from 20 000 50 000 100 000 150 000 and 200 000 g mol total molecular weight with PS volume fraction about 0.18 in all samples. The molecular weight ranges from about 10 000 g mol to about 50 000 g mol for PS PCHD.

Samples from these series are obtained as original PS polydiene materials as fluorinated materials and as fluorinated and sulfonated materials for morphology and properties evaluation.

A series of ABA triblock copolymers are provided in which the outer A blocks comprise polydiene and the inner B block comprises polystyrene PS or poly methylstyrene P MS . Materials with initial PS volume fractions of around 0.45 are prepared to form alternating PS polydiene lamellae. This composition is formulated toward the lower end of the PS volume fraction range for lamellae to accommodate some PS volume fraction increase upon sulfonation without pushing the samples out of the lamellar morphology. Holding the PS volume fraction as constant as possible the molecular weight of the overall material from a low of about 20 000 g mol to a high value depending upon whether the polydiene block is 1 PBD high of 200 000 g mol or 2 PCHD high of 110 000 g mol . The full molecular weight range is spanned by 4 to 5 samples for each of these two embodiments. For instance for PS PBD the molecular weight ranges from 20 000 50 000 100 000 150 000 and 200 000 g mol total molecular weight with a PS volume fraction of 0.45 in all samples. Samples from these series are obtained as original PS polydiene materials as fluorinated materials and as fluorinated and sulfonated materials for morphology and properties evaluation. Molecular weight ranges similar to those observed for PS PBD are obtained for P MS PBD whereas a lower molecular weight ranging from about 10 000 g mol to about 50 000 g mol is obtained for PS PCHD and P MS PCHD.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter the aim to produce a self reinforcing rigid matrix of the fluorinated PBD semicrystalline or PCHD high T surrounding sulfonated PS cylinders is addressed by starting with the following architectures of polydiene backbones and PS grafts grafted PS blocks at trifunctional comb tetrafunctional centipede or hexafunctional barbwire branch points as provided in . Thus the synthesis of the initial molecular architectures uses the chemical strategies as provided immediately herein below for constructing well defined branched and grated molecular architectures in PBD PS materials as a route to achieving these architectures in the fluorinated and sulfonated materials.

Accordingly provided herein below is an overview of the strategies employed to make a single branch point mixed arm star architectures and b multigraft copolymers with regularly spaced branched points of controlled functionality.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter polymer backbone segments for example PBD or PI are made using the dilithium initiator 

Accordingly architecturally precise multigraft block copolymers with trifunctional tetrafunctional or hexafunctional branch points are produced using the general macromonomer end linking reaction scheme shown below DLi BD LiPBDLi.

Polymer branches for example PS are made using a monofunctional anionic initiator e.g. sec BuLi sec BuLi S PSLi.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter multigraft polymers comprising a comb architecture are synthesized via the following reaction scheme PSLi MeSiCl large excess PS Me SiCl MeSiCl PS Me SiCl LiPBDLi small excess PBD Si PS Me PBD.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter multigraft polymers comprising a centipede architecture are synthesized via the following reaction scheme PSLi SiCl vacuum titration PS SiCl PS SiCl LiPBDLi PBD Si PS PBD.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter chlorosilane coupling agents are used to link together living PS and PBD chains which have been synthesized anionically. The final structure is precisely controlled with regard to the molecular weights of the PS graft blocks and the molecular weights of the PBD connectors between each grafting point. The end linking chemistry however is similar kinetically to a condensation polymerization step growth and thus produces a distribution of total molecular weights i.e. there is a distribution in the total PBD backbone length and the number of PS grafts. Previous work has demonstrated that near monodisperse samples of graft copolymer with a precise number of grafts can be obtained from the overall reaction product by solvent nonsolvent fractionation. See Beyer et al. 33 2039 2000 .

In cases where degradation of chlorosilane linked polymers at the branch point s occurs more robust multigraft structures can be synthesized by metallating anionically produced polybutadiene or polyisoprene with BuLi tetramethylethylene diamine followed by polymerization of styrene from the anions created along the polymer backbone. See Hadjichristidis N. and Roovers J. E. L. 16 851 1978 . This method yields well defined materials comprising a comb like architecture where branches are randomly placed along the polymer backbone. Kennedy J. P. and Delvaux J. M. 38 141 1981 previously reported superior mechanical properties for poly isobutylene g styrene s of this architecture. Further morphological work by Xenidou. et al. 31 7659 1998 has shown that the constituting block copolymer principle relating graft molecular architecture to morphology can be extended in an average sense to these more architecturally varied materials.

Fluorination and sulfonation procedures of the branched and grafted copolymers disclosed immediately hereinabove are carried out as described hereinabove for the triblock case with modification as needed.

Using the chlorosilane coupling approach to multigrafts samples with PS cylindrical domains in a PBD matrix with trifunctional comb tetrafunctional centipede and hexafunctional barbwire junction point architecture can be produced. Due to the effect of branch point functionality on morphology the volume fraction range of PS in which cylinders is produced varies as the junction point functionality varies. To produce cylinders the trifunctional comb sample has a PS volume fraction of about 0.40 the tetrafunctional centipede has a PS volume fraction of about 0.20 and the hexafunctional barbwire has a PS volume fraction of about 0.10. Thus these embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter provide an effect on the relative size of the cylindrical domains with respect to the matrix for desired properties.

Further the polycondensation reaction of macromonomers by which the regular multigraft structures are produced yields a distribution polydispersity index PDI of about 2 of molecular weight in which all species have the same structure per junction point but vary in the number of junction points linked along the backbone. Also fractionation can be used to isolate different fractions with identical structure per junction point but different low middle and high average numbers of junction point per molecule. See Beyer F. L. et al. 33 2039 2000 Uhrig D. and Mays J. W. 35 7182 2002 latrou. H. et al. 31 6697 1998 and Nakamura Y. et al. 33 8323 2000 .

Although these low middle and high molecular weight fractions tend to form the same general morphology cylinders for instance they differ greatly in the degree of long range order that can be achieved in the microstructure. The larger the number of junction points per molecule molecular weight the poorer the long range order produced. By examining low middle and high molecular weight fractions of the overall structure produced by the polycondensation of macromonomers the influence of microstructural order on mechanical and transport properties can be compared and modified as desired. For example samples with a high number of junction points per molecule which although microphase separated did not display long range order have been found to exhibit excellent tensile mechanical properties. See Weidisch R. et al. 34 6333 2001 .

The following combinations of architecture molecular weight fluorination and sulfonation provided in Table 1 are provided by the presently disclosed subject matter.

Additional details of these synthetic strategies including the synthesis by analogous strategies of the hexafunctional barbwire graft architecture see Uhrig. D. and Mays J. W. 35 7182 2002 are provided in Beyer et al. 33 2039 2000 latrou H. et al. 31 6697 1998 and Chang. M. Y. et al. 35 4437 2002 each of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

Statistical copolymers of 1 3 cyclohexadiene and methylstyrene aMS provide another embodiment of the presently disclosed subject matter which in some embodiments can be used at higher temperatures. The basic strategy shown in Scheme 2 is similar to that disclosed hereinabove. As shown in Scheme 2 the polycyclohexadiene PCHD units in the copolymer are fluorinated using difluorocarbene followed by sulfonation of P MS. Based on the known characteristics of PCHD Tof about 150 C. semicrystalline ring structure this material is expected to form a semicrystalline matrix of good thermal stability and high T. The P MS segments are sulfonated P MSS to facilitate proton transport.

The choice of MS and a statistical rather than block copolymer is based in part on two reasons. First the substitution of the tertiary hydrogen in polystyrene which is susceptible to oxidative attack by Oor HO with a methyl group provides a more stable material in membrane applications. Second the tendency of P MS chains when they do degrade to do so by unzipping to monomer is prevented. The more weakly phase separated morphologies formed by these systems can as discussed hereinabove offer permeability characteristics favorable for use in methanol fuel cells coupled with improved thermal stability. These materials also are potentially low cost because commercial production of the cyclohexadiene monomer is being considered.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter the unusual chemical nature of poly cyclohexadiene PCHD provides a unique membrane based entirely on this polymer following several postpolymerization modifications as shown in Scheme 3.

Films of the desired thickness are cast from PCHD solutions ease of processing . The polymer is then covalently crosslinked polydiene vulcanization e.g. with peroxides thus stabilizing the size and shape of the membrane. A chemical dehydrogenation step to aromatize the polymer i.e. converting it into poly phenylene using p chloranil 2 3 dichloro 5 6 dicyano 1 4 benzoquinone DDQ or related reagents is then carried out see Williamson D. T. et al. 43 2 1201 2002 followed by sulfonation. For example the sulfonation of low molecular weight aromatized PCHD results in a water soluble product.

Thus the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method of forming a proton exchange membrane the method comprising 

The resulting material is covalently and ionically crosslinked and has a highly aromatic structure which imparts excellent thermo oxidative chemical and dimensional stability to the membrane. Note that even if complete aromatization of the diene is not carried out any residual double bonds will be eliminated during sulfonation alkene sulfonation . Combined covalent and ionic crosslinking of aromatic structures leads to membranes of improved dimensional stability with the potential for reduced methanol permeation. Thus membranes comprising the currently disclosed materials exhibit outstanding potential for use in methanol fuel cells at temperatures well above 100 C. A photograph of a presently disclosed cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene PHCD membrane is shown in .

Self Assembling Barrier Elastomer SABrE materials typically comprise block or graft copolymers of sulfonated polystyrene and polyisobutylene which have elastomeric mechanical properties. The sulfonated polystyrene self assembles to form nanometer size hydrophilic domains with cylindrical geometries that provide pathways for water transport and thus breathability across the hydrophobic butyl rubber polyisobutylene matrix. Due to their extremely small size and to their chemical functionality these hydrophilic channels are not accessible to chemical and biological threats. Thus SABrE materials exhibit the characteristic of selective transport. Further when the SABrE material is based on a graft copolymer comprising many tetrafunctional graft points per molecule then the material has exceptional mechanical properties.

Such materials can be used as a fabric which in some embodiments can be a barrier fabric for example for use as breathable chemical biological protective barrier clothing for military personnel emergency response teams industrial and or agricultural workers and or other applications and healthcare professionals. Indeed any article or item that is desired to be covered can be covered such as but not limited to plants indeed any form of vegetation or other agricultural applications in an environment where coverage would be of interest for at least a period of time and industrial equipment that is maintained in an environment where coverage would be desirable for at least a period of time. Standard protective clothing is made largely from butyl rubber BR a material whose impermeability provides an excellent level of protection but also traps heat and moisture inside the garments. BR garments also are bulky and limit dexterity. For example a particular problem with gloves made from BR materials is that they constrain hand movement. In a desert combat environment these problems could result in more than simple discomfort and inconvenience.

The fluorinated and sulfonated materials of the presently disclosed subject matter are directly applicable to SABrE materials. Microphase separated block copolymers have the potential to economically produce protective fabrics which in some embodiments act as barrier materials with improved breathability comfort and wear resistance. A strategy for doing this is to exploit the excellent barrier properties of an impermeable polymer matrix while at the same time blending in block copolymers which microphase separate to form membrane spanning channels. Such block copolymers include materials comprising sulfonated PS blocks 

Variations in the molecular architecture of graft copolymers can be manipulated to control the nano scale structure morphology and the ability to form long range order during self assembly. Synthetic techniques have been developed to produce the precisely controlled molecular architectures some of which are provided in . Further such well defined molecular architecture is related to morphology and properties. As a result morphology and long range order of microphase separated structures can be controlled through molecular design.

The presently disclosed subject matter utilizes this control of morphology to tailor properties of fluorinated ionomer materials which share some of the block and grafted architectural features of previously reported non fluorinated materials.

To optimize performance the size shape and symmetry and overall volume fraction of different types of domains are controlled independently. This independent control however is not possible with conventional linear AB diblock copolymers and ABA triblock copolymers for which the nanophase separated morphology which forms e.g. spheres cylinders cubic bicontinuous gyroid or lamella is tied directly to the relative volume fractions of the two block materials. For example if an application such as SABrE demands a material with microphase separated nanometer length scale cylinders in which the component comprising the conductive cylindrical domain makes up over 50 volume percent of the material linear block copolymers would not be preferred.

One way to uncouple block copolymer morphology from its rigid dependence on component volume fractions is to vary molecule architecture. By way of example for mixed arm star architectures such as the AB shown in the asymmetry factor is n n wherein n n is the ratio of arm numbers of the two block types and represents the asymmetry due to the architecture and the conformational asymmetry between the two block materials is expressed by the ratio wherein is the ratio of segmental volume to the square of statistical segment length for the block material i.

Methods to determine the architectural asymmetry part of a generalized asymmetry parameter for any of the various graft copolymer architectures encountered have been developed. Further these methods have been tested with extensive morphological studies of model star and graft shaped block copolymers. Also complex graft copolymer architectures with multiple grafting points e.g. can be understood morphologically by analogy to fundamental building blocks defined as the average structure per junction.

This fundamental component of a larger graft molecular architecture is referred to as the constituting block copolymer. For a graft copolymer with a backbone of A and blocks of B joined to the backbone at trifunctional branch points see e.g. the constituting block copolymer is an AB single graft copolymer see .

Previous characterization data on complex graft copolymer architectures with multiple grafting points has been fit into the framework of a theoretical morphology diagram see calculated by Milner. S. T. 27 2333 1994 whose analysis predicts morphology as a function of composition and molecular asymmetry architecture for materials with a single junction point. For example at 1 the Milner diagram models linear conformationally symmetric AB diblock behavior with symmetric morphology windows around 0.5. As the number of arms of one species increase relative to the other however the morphological behavior can become strongly asymmetric with respect to volume fraction. This behavior allows the sought after uncoupling of morphology from volume fraction to be achieved. Thus the morphology can be varied independently of volume fraction by adjusting the molecular architecture. Milner s theory is not strictly applicable to more complex multiple graft copolymer materials however. The use of the building block principle of the constituting block copolymer to understand the morphological behavior of multiple graft materials by mapping them back to the more well understood behavior of single graft materials has been required. These ideas have been used to develop a rational framework for predicting the morphologies of all the types of molecular architecture shown in .

As disclosed hereinabove shows experimental data from previous work on a range of different branched molecular architectures plotted on the morphology diagram. This morphology diagram now provides the background necessary to move forward on materials with similar architectures but dramatically different fluorinated and charged block materials for different applications such as fuel cells.

In some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter phase separated ionomers such as those described herein can act as templates for sol gel polymerizations of metal alkoxides to generate nanostructured membranes. Previous studies involving NAFION material have shown that HO molecules hydrogen bond to SiOH groups on inserted silicate nanostructures and H hopping is possible along percolated hydration nanostructures. NAFION silicate membranes have greater internal polarity and hydrative capacity than NAFION H membranes due to SiOH functionalities. See Deng. Q. et al. 7 2259 1995 Deng Q. et al. . 7 177 1996 Deng Q. et al. 34 1917 1923 1996 and Deng. Q. et al. 9 36 1997 .

Also sulfonated poly styrene isobutylene styrene block copolymers and commercial KRATON triblock copolymers can induce domain targeted sol gel polymerizations in styrenic regions during film formation resulting in self assembled organic inorganic nanostructured membranes. The water affinity of these block copolymers increases with sulfonation but dramatically increases after silicate nanophase incorporation. There are cases where sulfonation can induce morphological transformations which is another variable available for structural tailoring for membrane optimization.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed copolymers of fluorinated polydienes and sulfonated polystyrene and in some embodiments the presently disclosed cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene PCHD polymers can be used in the following representative applications including but not limited to a proton exchange membrane for a fuel cell a polyelectrolyte for a battery and a fabric for example for use as breathable chemical biological protective clothing.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed copolymers of fluorinated polydienes and sulfonated polystyrene and the presently disclosed cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene PCHD polymers can be used as a proton exchange membrane in an electrochemical cell for example a fuel cell.

Referring now to fuel cell comprises proton exchange membrane which in some embodiments comprises a presently disclosed copolymer of a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene and in some embodiments comprises a presently disclosed cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene polymer.

Referring again to proton exchange membrane is operationally positioned between and contacted with first catalyst layer e.g. an anodic catalyst layer and second catalyst layer e.g. a cathodic catalyst layer which are contacted with first electrode e.g. an anodic electrode and second electrode e.g. a cathodic electrode respectively. The body of fuel cell is formed by layers or plates and which comprise channels and that are used to transport fuel and or waste products to and from first electrode and second electrode . First electrode and second electrode are in conductive communication with electrical output connection E.

Polyelectrolytes can form a multitude of structures at various length scales in solution and can display a variety of properties not found in neutral polymers. The properties of these structures are controlled by many parameters such as the inherent characteristics of the macromolecular backbone charge types and locations temperature ionic strength pH and the like.

The presently disclosed copolymers of a fluorinated polydiene and a sulfonated polystyrene and the presently disclosed sulfonated cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene polymer provide a polyelectrolyte for use in for example a battery. More particularly the presently disclosed sulfonated cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene polymer provides a well defined polyelectrolyte with a lower flexibility than synthetic polyelectrolytes known in the art due to the incorporation of the poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene ring into the polymer backbone.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a fabric which in some embodiments comprises a barrier fabric comprising the presently disclosed copolymers of fluorinated polydienes and sulfonated polystyrene and in some embodiments the presently disclosed cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene PCHD polymers.

Such materials can be used as a barrier fabric for example for use as breathable chemical biological protective barrier clothing to protect military personnel emergency response teams industrial and or agricultural workers and healthcare professionals from chemical and or biological agents including hazardous and or toxic chemicals and microorganisms such as but not limited to chemical biological warfare agents viruses bacteria blood borne pathogens air borne pathogens industrial chemicals and agricultural chemicals in liquid vapor and aerosol forms. Further such materials allow perspiration products to escape from for example a body while preventing the penetration and or transport of the aforementioned hazardous and or toxic materials.

Further in some embodiments such barrier fabric can be used to protect agricultural products including living and cultivated vegetative products from for example exposure to natural pathogens such as fungi chemical and or biological pathogens and frost. In some embodiments such barrier fabric can be used as a weed barrier which for example impedes the growth of undesired vegetative species while retaining moisture in the soil.

Sol gel syntheses can be used to produce a variety of inorganic networks from silicon or metal alkoxide monomer precursors. In a typical sol gel synthesis a soluble precursor molecule e.g. a metal alkoxide is hydrolyzed to form a dispersion of colloidal particles the sol . Further reaction causes bonds to form between the sol particles resulting in an infinite network of particles in a continuous liquid phase the gel . The gel typically is then heated to yield the desired materials. The precursors for synthesizing these colloids typically comprise a metal or metalloid element surrounded by a reactive ligand. Metal alkoxides are particularly useful in sol gel syntheses because they readily react with water. The most commonly used alkoxides are the alkoxysilanes such as tetramethoxy silane and tetraethoxysilane. Other alkoxides such as aluminates titanates and borates also are commonly used in sol gel processes.

Membranes such as porous alumina membranes and etched polymeric membranes can be used as templates for sol gel syntheses of for example micro and nanostructures. As provided hereinabove in section IX in some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter phase separated ionomers such as those described herein can act as templates for sol gel polymerizations of metal alkoxides to generate nanostructured membranes.

The following Examples have been included to provide guidance to one of ordinary skill in the art for practicing representative embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter. In light of the present disclosure and the general level of skill in the art those of skill can appreciate that the following Examples are intended to be exemplary only and that numerous changes modifications and alterations can be employed without departing. from the scope of the presently disclosed subject matter.

Unless otherwise noted polymers were synthesized under an inert atmosphere. High vacuum techniques were sometimes employed and all solvents and monomers were purified according to anionic polymerization standards as described in the literature. See Hadjichristidis N. et al. 38 3211 2000 . A difunctional initiator DLI was synthesized by the 2 fold addition of sec butyllithium to 1 3 bis 1 phenylethenyl benzene as reported previously Uhrig D. and Mays J. 35 7182 2002 and Tung L. H. and Lo T. Y. S. 27 2219 1994 and stored as a 0.1 M solution in benzene. Prior to use styrene monomer was distilled from calcium hydride under vacuum and stored at 20 C. under pressurized argon. Isoprene monomer was distilled from calcium hydride and then distilled from 1.0 M dibutylmagnesium solution just before use. 1 3 Cyclohexadiene 1 3 CHD Aldrich 97 was cleaned by treatment over CaH sodium mirror three times and finally n BuLi or MgBu.

A 250 mL round bottom flask with a magnetic stir bar was dried in a 150 C. oven over 24 hours then sealed with a septum and purged cooled with argon. Cyclohexane 150 mL was cannulated into the flask followed by 2.2 mL 0.22 mmol DLi difunctional initiator and 1.2 mL 14.8 mmol THF. The resulting mixture was stirred for 30 minutes. Styrene monomer 2.0 mL 17.4 mmol was charged into the flask and polymerized at room temperature for 2 hours. Then isoprene monomer 10.0 mL 76.9 mmol was charged into the flask and the flask was warmed to 50 C. The resulting mixture was stirred at room temperature overnight. The polymerization was terminated with degassed methanol and the ISI triblock copolymer was collected by precipitation in methanol containing 0.2 BHT. Solvent nonsolvent toluene methanol fractionation was used to remove the diblock contaminants.

PS PCHD diblocks are prepared by either polymerizing 1 3 CHD first followed by addition of styrene or by polymerizing styrene first followed by addition of 1 3 CHD. In a typical experiment about 85 mL purified benzene was distilled into an evacuated reactor with attached ampoules containing all the necessary purified reagents. The reactor was removed from the vacuum line by heat sealing after degassing. A 5.5 mL aliquot of sec BuLi 9.7 10mmol mL in hexanes was added followed by 2.3 g 0.022 mol styrene. The polymerization started right away as evidenced by a deep red color and was allowed to continue for 6 hours before taking an aliquot approximately 1 mL for characterization. SEC and MALDI TOF MS results indicated a molecular weight of 4.52 kg mol with a polydispersity of 1.08. About 2.5 mL of DABCO 3.2 10mol mL in benzene was introduced into the reactor through a break seal. After stirring about 5 minutes at room temperature 6.4 g 0.08 mol of 1 3 CHD was added from another ampoule. The solution turned golden yellow and was allowed to continue to polymerize for another 6 hours before the reaction was terminated with degassed methanol. The final product had a weight average molecular weight Mw of 18.6 kg mol as indicated by MALLS a number average molecular weight Mn of 15.4 kg mol from MALDI TOF analysis a polydispersity Mw Mn of 1.03 and a composition of PCHD with 66.0 wt as determined by NMR .

Comb Synthesis. An all glass linking reactor was charged with approximately 2 mL of MeSiClin a small quantity of benzene. An approximately 5 w v solution of PSLi in benzene was added to the silane so that the concentration of silane versus the concentration of carbon lithium bonds silane CLi 100 while the reactor contents were stirred briskly in a 0 C. bath. The solution was allowed to warm to room temperature following the addition.

The contents of the reactor were distilled until the solution was too viscous to stir. Fresh benzene was added to make an approximately 10 w v solution and the contents were well mixed. This sequence was repeated twice more. The reactor was then left open to a high vacuum at room temperature for one week. Finally benzene was added to make an approximately 3 w v solution.

LiPILi was prepared as an approximately 3 w v sqlution in benzene initiated from DLI in the presence of sec BuOLi COLi CLi 7 . The LiPILi solution and the PS MeSiClfrom the linking reactor were adjusted to a stoichiometric ratio of CLi SiCl 1.2 and the solutions were mixed. After 1 day several milliliters of THF were added approximately 0.5 v v of the finally resulting solution THF Li 100 .

Centipede Synthesis. An all glass linking reactor was charged with 0.200 mmol of SiClin a small quantity of hexane and benzene. An approximately 3 w v solution of PSLi was incrementally added to the silane. The first addition was made such that approximately 0.27 mmol of PSLi was added quickly to the chilled reactor 0 C. bath colder than the flask of PSLi at 20 C. with brisk stirring. After the first addition was made the reactor was allowed to warm slowly to 20 C. isothermic with the flask of PSLi and further dropwise additions of PSLi were made. The progress of the linking reaction was monitored by removing small aliquots from the reactor and analyzing them with SEC. After approximately 2 equivalents of PSLi approximately 0.40 mmol had been added to the reactor and more importantly the end point was judged by SEC the titration was stopped.

An approximately 3 w v solution of LiPILi in benzene and the PS SiClin the linking reactor were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio of CLi SiCl 1.2. After 1 day THF was added approximately 0.5 v v of the finally resulting solution THF Li 100 .

Barbwire Synthesis. An all glass linking reactor was charged with 0.200 mmol of 1 6 bis trichlorosilyl hexane hexachlorosilane in a small quantity of hexane and benzene. An approximately 3 w v solution of PSLi was incrementally added to the silane. The first addition was made such that approximately 2 equivalents approximately 0.40 mmol was added to the reactor. After the first addition approximately 0.5 mL of THF was slowly distilled into the reactor less than 0.5 v v of the resultant linking solution THF Li 30 . Further additions were made slowly to a calculated stoichiometry of reagents and concentration of PSLi stopping point of approximately 4.3 equivalents of PSLi approximately 0.87 mmol . The progress of the linking reaction was monitored by removing small aliquots from the reactor and analyzing them via SEC. It was noticed that after addition of beyond approximately 3.7 equivalents of PSLi the color in the linking reactor steadily grew more intensely golden.

An approximately 3 w v solution of LiPILi in benzene and the contents of the linking reactor were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio of CLi SiCl 1.2. After 1 day THF was added approximately 0.5 v v of the finally resulting solution THF Li 100 .

Workup and Fractionation. The linking solutions were permitted to react for 3 weeks before quenching. The raw final polymers were stabilized with BHT and precipitated with a large excess of methanol. Fractionation was performed using toluene methanol as the solvent nonsolvent pair.

Additional details for the synthesis of the presently disclosed poly isoprene graft styrene copolymers are provided in Uhrig D. and Mays J. W. 35 7182 2002 the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The general procedure for the synthesis of statistical copolymers of 1 3 cyclohexadiene and methylstyrene aMS is provided hereinabove in Scheme 2. Also as shown in Scheme 3 the polycyclohexadiene PCHD units in the copolymer are fluorinated using difluorocarbene followed by sulfonation of P MS.

Fluorination of polydienes by generation of difluorocarbene has been reported by Cais R. B. et al. 19 595 1986 using PhHgCFas the fluorine source and by Thomson M. W. 22 481 1989 via irradiation of chlorofluorocarbons. Further Ren Y. et al. 120 6830 1998 have reported a facile method for fluorination of polydienes based upon difluorocarbene addition. This reaction employs the relatively inexpensive hexafluoropropylene oxide as a reagent and does not lead to chain scission or crosslinking.

An example of the post polymerization fluorination of polybutadiene PBD and sulfonation of polystyrene PS in a PS PBD block copolymer is provided hereinabove in Scheme 1. After fluorination of the polydiene e.g. polybutadiene component the polystyrene segments can be sulfonated using reagents such as acetyl sulfate or sulfur trioxide to form poly styrene sulfonic acid PSS .

The ISI triblock copolymer 3.0 g 35 mmol double bond content and 0.4 g BHT was dissolved in 120 mL pretreated cyclohexane and charged into a Parr reactor. The Parr reactor was purged with argon and cooled with liquid nitrogen. Hexafluoropropylene oxide HFPO 98 g 590 mmol was transferred into the Parr reactor from a tank using a regulator and tubing. The Parr reactor was warmed to 50 C. and stirred for 30 min. The Parr reactor was heated to 180 C. and slowly stirred for an additional 20 hours. The pressure was released slowly through a sodium hydroxide solution after the reactor was cooled to room temperature. The solid material in the Parr reactor was dissolved in chloroform un dissolved material was removed by filtration and the filtered solution was precipitated with methanol. The obtained precipitate was dried under vacuum at room temperature.

Proton NMR indicated the quantitative fluorination of the polyisoprene block. GPC characterization revealed that the average molecular weight of the triblock copolymer had changed from 43 900 g mol before fluorination to 22 600 g mol after fluorination and the polydispersity index PDI went from 1.23 to 1.55.

Fluorinated ISI triblock copolymer 1.8 g was dissolved in 20 mL dichloroethane DCE . Sulfuric acid 2.5 mL and acetic anhydride 3.7 mL were mixed in a flask which was then cooled in an ice bath. The sulfuric acid acetic anhydride mixture was added drop wise through an addition funnel into the polymer solution at room temperature. The resulting solution was stirred at room temperature for 20 hours. DCE was removed by rotary evaporation. The remaining residue was dissolved in 50 mL distilled water and then titrated to a pH of about 7 with 10 sodium hydroxide solution. The neutralized solution was purified by dialysis in distilled water several times MW cutoff of the dialysis tube 1 000 g mol . The water was removed by rotary evaporation. The remaining dark brown material was dried under vacuum at room temperature.

Samples of all polymer segments are taken during the reactions whenever possible to allow for the independent characterization of the precursor segments and the final block copolymers by absolute molecular weight methods such as osmometry matrix assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometry MALDI TOF MS and light scattering as well as by gel permeation chromatography GPC nuclear magnetic resonance NMR spectrometry and infrared IR spectrometry.

After the fluorination reactions the polymer is isolated and characterized by H and F NMR and GPC to check for complete reaction of the diene and to assure that degradation has not occurred. GPC at temperatures up to 220 C. is carried out with light scattering detection even for specimens exhibiting crystallinity at lower temperatures. After sulfonation the products are characterized for extent of sulfonation by elemental analysis. The sulfonation conditions chosen have been shown to yield little if any degradation of precursor polymers. Thus in some embodiments the molecular architectures and degrees of polymerization should not be altered from their precursor states.

Light scattering and viscometry experiments are used to estimate persistence lengths of the individual polymer segments to calculate conformational asymmetry. Bulk densities are measured for fluorinated polydienes and for sulfonated polystyrenes using standard ASTM methods.

Poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene PCHD was synthesized under inert gas atmosphere. The materials used in the synthesis of PCHD were prepared as follows. 1 3 cyclohexadiene monomer was purified by stirring with fine grounded calcium hydride over 24 hours then distilled under argon. 1 4 Diazabicyclo 2 2 2 ocatane DABCO was sublimed under vacuum then diluted in benzene. Cyclohexane was stirred with sulfuric acid for 24 hours and then separated into a cyclohexane fraction. The cyclohexane was washed with water 10 sodium hydroxide solution water again dried with calcium chloride then distilled from sodium metal and stored under argon. Benzene was purified via the same procedure as cyclohexane. Sec Butyl lithium sec BuLi Aldrich 1.4 M was used as received.

A typical procedure for synthesizing PCHD is as follows. A 250 mL round bottom flask with a magnetic stir bar was dried in an oven heated to 150 C. for 24 hours then sealed with a septum and purged cooled with argon flow. 100 mL of pretreated benzene or cyclohexane was charged through a double tipped needle. 1 3 Cyclohexdiene monomer 10 mL 0.105 mmol was charged into the flask. DABCO in benzene approximately 1.7 M 1.5 mL 2.55 mmol was charged into the flask by using a syringe. The mixture was titrated with several drops of sec BuLi to a very pale color and then the desired amount of sec BuLi 0.6 mL 0.84 mmol was immediately injected. The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 3 4 hours then terminated with several drops of degassed methanol. The polymer was collected by precipitating in methanol containing 0.2 BHT. The obtained polymer was dried under vacuum at room temperature and then stored at 20 C.

A typical procedure for the synthesis of a cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene PCHD membrane is as follows. In a 100 mL round bottom flask with a magnetic stir bar 3 g of PCHD 37.5 mmol double bond units was dissolved in 20 mL of toluene and then the desired amount of sulfur monochloride 0.15 mL 1.87 mmol was added. The ratio of PCHD repeat units to sulfur monochloride was controlled around 20 1 mol mol. The mixture was stirred until the viscosity of the mixture increased. The mixture was pulled out onto a Teflon disc 10 cm in diameter before forming a gel. Most of the solvent was evaporated under nitrogen flow to form the cross linked membrane. After the membrane was tough enough to handle but was not totally dry the membrane was peeled off carefully.

A typical procedure for the synthesis of an aromatized cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene PCHD membrane is as follows. The cross linked PCHD membrane was cut into a 2.5 2.5 square sheet and placed into a three necked 1 000 mL reaction vessel diameter 10 cm containing a magnetic stir bar and a customized porous ceramic supporter. The membrane was placed flat on the supporter. Xylene was added into the reaction vessel to submerge the PCHD membrane. The desired amount of p chloranil was dissolved into the xylene then the temperature was raised to 130 C. The reaction was performed 24 hours under nitrogen protection. The obtained membrane was washed with different solvents isopropanol THF etc to remove the p chloranil. The membrane was carefully dried for further use.

A typical procedure for the sulfonation of an aromatized non aromatized cross linked poly 1 3 cyclohexadiene PCHD membrane is reported as follows. The PCHD membrane aromatized or non aromatized was placed flat on a ceramic supporter in a three necked 1 000 ml reaction vessel diameter 10 cm containing a magnetic stir bar. Dichloroethane was added into the vessel to submerge the membrane. Sulfuric acid and acetic anhydride mixture in a 1 1.5 v v ratio was added drop wise into the vessel. The reactions were kept going up to 24 hours and the temperature varied for different sulfonation reactions from room temperature to 100 C. to vary the degree of sulfonation. The obtained membrane was washed carefully with distilled water then stored in a plastic bag containing a small amount of moisture.

The molecular weights and polydispersities of the linear PCHD precursors for cross linking were characterized via gel permeation chromatography GPC . The molecular weights of all the linear samples are about 10 000 g mol with a polydispersity of about 1.1 1.2.

The thermal stability of the presently disclosed cross linked PCHD membrane aromatized PCHD membrane and sulfonated PCHD membrane with or without aromatization were studied via DSC and TGA. An example of the thermal analysis of a presently disclosed cross linked PCHD membrane is provided in .

Fourier transform infrared FTIR spectrometry was used to investigate the chemical change on the surface of the presently disclosed cross linked PCHD membranes before and after aromatization and sulfonation. shows a representative FTIR spectrum of a presently disclosed cross linked PCHD membrane and shows a representative FTIR spectrum of a presently disclosed sulfonated aromatized cross linked PCHD membrane.

Scanning electron microscopy SEM was used to study the surface defects cracks of the cross linked PCHD membranes before and after aromatization and sulfonation. shows an SEM micrograph of a cross linked PCHD membrane before sulfonation and shows an SEM micrograph of a cross linked PCHD membrane after sulfonation.

The degree of sulfonation of all sulfonated samples was characterized based on the elemental analysis that focused on carbon and sulfur contents to all membrane samples before and after sulfonation.

The water uptake of sulfonated membranes was characterized by the weight difference between a thoroughly dried membrane and a thoroughly moisturized membrane.

Morphological characterization is a key step in any effort to relate nanoscale structure to properties. In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter seeks to determine how fluorination and subsequent sulfonation affect the morphological self assembly of the materials. To address this question the morphology of the initial PS PBD material is compared to the fluorinated PS FPBD material and finally to the fluorinated and sulfonated PSS FPBD. Morphological characterization of these materials utilizes real space transmission electron microscope TEM imaging and reciprocal space small angle scattering SAXS and or SANS techniques. Morphological study of the PS PBD materials utilizes established techniques and protocols.

The following procedure is a representative method by which the morphology of a block or graft copolymer is evaluated. This procedure is the same general approach that has been employed in previous block copolymer research on PS polydiene materials to produce a sample representative of the equilibrium morphology and to evaluate that morphology. See Gido. S. P. et al. 29 7022 1996 Gido. S. P. et al. 30 6771 1997 Pochan. D. J. et al. 29 5091 1996 Pochan. D. J. et al. 35 2629 1997 Lee C. et al. 107 6460 1997 Lee C. et al. 30 3732 1997 Lee C. et al. 19 4631 1998 Xenidou. M. et al. 31 7659 1998 Beyer F. L. et al. 30 2373 1997 Beyer. F. L. et al. 32 6604 1999 Beyer. F. L. et al. 37 3392 1999 Beyer. F. L. et al. 33 2039 2000 Burgaz. E. et al. 33 8739 8745 2000 Alward D. B. et al. 19 215 1986 Thomas B. L. et al. 20 2934 1987 Thomas B. L. 19 2197 1986 Gido S. P. et al. 26 4506 1993 and Winey K. I. et al. 95 9367 1991 .

Solid films of the block or graft copolymer material approximately 1 to 3 mm thick are cast from solution. Toluene is the standard non preferential solvent for polystyrene PS and polyisoprene PI . Casting from other solvents that are selective for either PS or PI can result in shifts in morphology away from that which the molecule itself would prefer. The degree of long range order in the samples can then be increased by thermal annealing at about 120 C. These casting and annealing conditions have been found to promote self assembly of well ordered nanostructured morphologies in previous studies of graft copolymers.

After annealing ultrathin sections approximately 30 80 nm thick are prepared for TEM observation by cryoultramicrotoming. The sections of PS PBD materials are stained in OsOvapors for about four hours to react with the PBD block double bonds rendering these blocks dark in TEM imaging via mass thickness contrast. See Kato K. 8 38 1967 and Kato K. 4 35 1966 .

In the fluorinated PS FPBD materials the fluorine atoms attached to the PBD blocks use up the unsaturated sites thus preventing staining of this block with OsO. The fluorine itself is not a heavy enough element to enhance contrast in TEM. The PS block of the fluorinated samples can be stained with RuO. Thus stained fluorinated samples will have opposite contrast to the original PS PBD i.e. dark stained PS blocks and light FPBD blocks. In the sulfonated and fluorinated PSS FPBD materials staining of the PSS block with RuOis possible for a number of reasons. In most cases the PSS block will not be fully sulfonated and thus unmodified PS monomers will be present to react with the stain. Additionally the sulfonated PSS monomers might still retain their reactivity with RuO. Finally the TEM imaging contrast in the PSS FPBD materials can be enhanced by exchanging the counter ion of the sulfonate group normally Na for a heavier cation such as Cs. See Belloni. L. et al. 119 7560 2003 .

Small angle scattering experiments can be performed on all samples to accurately determine the lattice symmetries and spacings of the morphologies. Small angle X ray scattering SAXS and small angle neutron scattering SANS can be used to study model graft copolymers. SAXS can be performed for example by using a rotating anode source and a two dimensional area detector. The use of a heavy counterion for the PSS blocks enhances contrast in SANS experiments but is not necessary to obtain good SANS results.

Further many of the materials synthesized have deuterated PS blocks. This deuteration produced by the use of fully deuterated d PS monomer in the initial anion polymerization is retained through post polymerization fluorination and sulfonation treatments. Deuteration allows SANS to be used to compare the morphologies of the PS PBD PS FPBD and PSS FPBD without interference from chemical treatments or staining procedures.

The investigation of the permeability of the materials to water vapor and methanol as well as the efficiency of proton transport is important for applications of the presently disclosed materials in fuel cells and in breathable barrier materials for chemical biological protection. High water vapor permeability enhances the utility of the materials for breathable barrier applications and the ability to hydrate the material also is necessary for the fuel cell membrane application. For fuel cell applications it also is important that the materials limit methanol transport.

Accordingly the presently disclosed the fluorinated and sulfonated block copolymers can be characterized by using the same sorption balance device and the same morphological analysis of connectivity and transport path tortuosity to investigate their water vapor and methanol transport properties. In the presently disclosed subject matter it is the PSS domain connectivity that controls the properties. Of course these transport properties also will be influenced by non morphological chemical factors such as degree of PS sulfonation. By developing data of the type shown in for inert gases for water vapor and methanol allows one to choose materials and morphologies to optimize materials for the desired applications.

A major factor controlling vapor or charge transport in the materials is the morphological connectivity of conductive sulfonated PS domains within the nonconductive fluorinated diene matrix. The effect of morphological connectivity on transport properties on model block and graft copolymers of PS and polydiene has been previously reported. See Laverdure K. S. In University of Massachusetts Amherst Mass. 2001.

In this previous work the permeability of non interacting gases such as N Ar O and COin PS polydiene materials was studied. In these materials at room temperature the rubbery polydiene microdomains are as much as 100 times more permeable to these gases than the glassy PS domains. Therefore in morphologies such as polydiene cylinders in a PS matrix or lamellar structures the sample spanning connectivity or percolation paths in the polydiene domains control the transport behavior. See Csernica. J. et al. 20 2468 1987 Csernica J. et al. 22 1493 1989 Rein. D. H. et al. 23 4456 1990 Kinning. D. J. et al. 20 1129 1987 Saxs. J. and Ottino. J. M. 23 165 1983 and Mohanty. K. K. et al. 37 905 1982 .

Transport studies were carried out using a sorption balance device following the basic design described previously. See Kinning. D. J. et al. 20 1129 1987 and Saxs. J. and Ottino. J. M. 23 165 1983 . By measuring mass uptake with time diffusion coefficients solubilities and thus permeabilities can be obtained.

Clearly the tortuosity of transport paths is potentially larger in samples with large grains oriented in a direction perpendicular to the direction of transport. Transport data from studies on the influence of morphology type as well as on grain size and degree of long range order can all be unified through the following result from percolation theory for the effective permeability P of a composite of a conducting material and nonconducting obstacles P T P wherein and Pare the volume fraction and permeability of the conductive microphase respectively. The effective permeability is inversely proportional to the tortuosity T of transport paths in the conductive domains.

Accordingly the presently disclosed fluorinated and sulfonated block copolymers can be characterized by using the same sorption balance device and the same morphological analysis of connectivity and transport path tortuosity to investigate their water vapor and methanol transport properties. In the presently disclosed subject matter it is the PSS domain connectivity that controls the properties. Of course these transport properties also are influenced by non morphological chemical factors such as degree of PS sulfonation.

Previous work has related the molecular architecture morphology and mechanical properties of well defined multigraft copolymers with the architectures shown in trifunctional combs tetrafunctional centipedes and hexafunctional barbwire. The general results of these studies are that other things being equal PS volume fraction and average number of grafts per molecule increasing junction point functionality increases material strength and elasticity. And for a fixed PS volume fraction and junction point functionality increasing the number of junction points per molecule increases the strength strain at break and elasticity. The best materials from these previous studies equaled the strength and exceeded the elasticity and strain at break performance of commercial thermoplastic elastomers such as KRATON and STYROFLEX materials BASF Florham Park N.J. United States of America . In the currently disclosed subject matter the block and graft copolymer materials are mechanically evaluated after they have been fluorinated and sulfonated. Applications of the fluorinated and sulfonated materials as barrier materials for chemical biological protection or as fuel cell membranes require good mechanical strength and toughness and in the case of fuel cells good mechanical properties at elevated temperatures of between about 100 C. and 150 C.

In the mechanical properties evaluation of the presently disclosed graft copolymer cylinders the strength and toughness of a range of materials Table 1 with different graft functionalities and different numbers of branch points per molecule are compared. In addition to tensile tests at room temperature tensile performance at elevated temperatures as in an operating fuel cell is evaluated. Also dynamical mechanical creep and fatigue performance of these materials at room and elevated temperatures is evaluated. Also thermogravimetric analysis TGA is used to investigate the chemical stability of the fluorinated and sulfonated materials at the elevated temperatures up to 150 C. envisioned for fuel cell applications. Other TGA studies investigate the stability of these materials up to higher temperatures where degradation will likely occur. In all cases TGA thermal stability analysis of the presently disclosed PSS FPBD materials are compared to control experiments run on NAFION material.

It will be understood that various details of the presently disclosed subject matter can be changed without departing from the scope of the presently disclosed subject matter. Furthermore the foregoing description is for the purpose of illustration only and not for the purpose of limitation.

