---

title: Semantic business model management
abstract: A computer-implemented solution for managing a semantic business model is provided. In particular, one or more business area models for a business entity are obtained and transformed into intermediate model(s). Each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta-modeling language. Subsequently, the semantic business model is generated by merging the set of intermediate models. In this manner, the semantic business model can be generated in a manner that reduces the overall burden on a user. The semantic business model can be provided for display to the user and/or use in performing qualitative analysis on various aspects of the business entity.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07761478&OS=07761478&RS=07761478
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 07761478
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051123
---
The current application is related to co owned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 200 847 filed on Aug. 10 2005 and entitled Business Solution Evaluation which is hereby incorporated herein by reference.

The invention relates generally to semantic business models and more particularly to a solution for generating and or managing semantic business models.

Component business modeling CBM is a technique for modeling a business and its corresponding business activities based on business components . Each business component comprises a relatively independent collection of business activities. CBM provides a simple business view for strategic level business analysis. CBM differs from traditional business process based models which provide a transactional view of the business. In addition CBM facilitates qualitative analysis techniques such as dependency analysis to identify one or more components associated with a business pain point heat map analysis also to identify one or more components associated with a business pain point and overlay analysis to identify a shortfall such as an information technology IT shortfall of the identified component s .

A semantic business model helps automate the qualitative analyses facilitated by CBM. The semantic business model comprises a representation of the CBM in a semantic markup language such as the world wide web consortium s WC s resource description framework RDF or WC s OWL web ontology language. The semantic business model captures relationships between various business concepts such as one or more business components business processes business activities operational metrics performance indicators value drivers IT applications IT capabilities systems services solutions . . . and resources including human resources. As a result the semantic business model can be used to discover implicit facts in the analyses using the inference capabilities of an ontology.

To date semantic business models are manually generated by one or more experts in a particular ontology. For example the identification of relationships between the various business concepts is done manually. This process is both tedious and error prone. Further an individual such as a business consultant requires expertise and knowledge in a particular domain e.g. an industry sector such as the retail industry the distribution industry the petroleum industry etc. . Still further an individual generating a semantic business model may inadvertently exclude one or more models that may exist for a particular business entity and or may retype one or more models thereby introducing an additional opportunity for errors.

In view of the foregoing there exists a need in the art to overcome one or more of the deficiencies indicated herein.

The invention provides a computer implemented solution for managing a semantic business model. In particular one or more business area models for a business entity are obtained and transformed into intermediate model s . Each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language. Subsequently the semantic business model is generated by merging the set of intermediate models. In this manner the semantic business model can be generated in a manner that reduces the overall burden e.g. expertise knowledge decision making time and or the like on a user such as a business consultant. Further the semantic business model can be more detailed and or comprise a larger scale than those currently generated manually. The semantic business model can be provided for display to a user and or use in performing qualitative analysis on various aspects of the business entity.

A first aspect of the invention provides a computer implemented method of generating a semantic business model the method comprising obtaining a set of business area models for a business entity transforming each of the set of business area models into an intermediate model wherein each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language and merging the set of intermediate models into the semantic business model by mapping at least one object in a first intermediate model to at least one object in a second intermediate model adding a mapping object for the mapping to the semantic business model and adding relationship information for the mapping object to the semantic business model based on the first intermediate model and the second intermediate model.

A second aspect of the invention provides a computerized system for generating a semantic business model the system comprising a system for obtaining a set of business area models for a business entity a system for transforming each of the set of business area models into an intermediate model wherein each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language and a system for merging the set of intermediate models into the semantic business model wherein the system for merging includes a system for mapping at least one object in a first intermediate model to at least one object in a second intermediate model a system for adding a mapping object for the mapping to the semantic business model and a system for adding relationship information for the mapping object to the semantic business model based on the first intermediate model and the second intermediate model.

A third aspect of the invention provides a program product stored on a computer readable medium which when executed enables a computer infrastructure to generate a semantic business model the program product comprising computer program code for enabling the computer infrastructure to obtain a set of business area models for a business entity transform each of the set of business area models into an intermediate model wherein each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language and merge the set of intermediate models into the semantic business model by mapping at least one object in a first intermediate model to at least one object in a second intermediate model adding a mapping object for the mapping to the semantic business model and adding relationship information for the mapping object to the semantic business model based on the first intermediate model and the second intermediate model.

A fourth aspect of the invention provides a computer implemented method of managing a semantic business model the method comprising obtaining a set of business area models for a business entity transforming each of the set of business area models into an intermediate model wherein each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language and generating the semantic business model by merging the set of intermediate models.

A fifth aspect of the invention provides a computerized system for managing a semantic business model the system comprising a system for obtaining a set of business area models for a business entity a system for transforming each of the set of business area models into an intermediate model wherein each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language and a system for generating the semantic business model by merging the set of intermediate models.

A sixth aspect of the invention provides a program product stored on a computer readable medium which when executed enables a computer infrastructure to manage a semantic business model the program product comprising computer program code for enabling the computer infrastructure to obtain a set of business area models for a business entity transform each of the set of business area models into an intermediate model wherein each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language and generate the semantic business model by merging the set of intermediate models.

A seventh aspect of the invention provides a method of generating a system for managing a semantic business model the method comprising providing a computer infrastructure operable to obtain a set of business area models for a business entity transform each of the set of business area models into an intermediate model wherein each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language and generate the semantic business model by merging the set of intermediate models.

An eighth aspect of the invention provides a business method for generating and or managing a semantic business model the business method comprising managing a computer infrastructure that performs the process described herein and receiving payment based on the managing.

The illustrative aspects of the present invention are designed to solve the problems herein described and other problems not discussed.

It is noted that the drawings of the invention are not to scale. The drawings are intended to depict only typical aspects of the invention and therefore should not be considered as limiting the scope of the invention. In the drawings like numbering represents like elements between the drawings.

As indicated above the invention provides a computer implemented solution for managing a semantic business model. In particular one or more business area models for a business entity are obtained and transformed into intermediate model s . Each intermediate model is represented using a substantially similar meta modeling language. Subsequently the semantic business model is generated by merging the set of intermediate models. In this manner the semantic business model can be generated in a manner that reduces the overall burden e.g. expertise knowledge decision making time and or the like on a user such as a business consultant. Further the semantic business model can be more detailed and or comprise a larger scale than those currently generated manually. The semantic business model can be provided for display to a user and or use in performing qualitative analysis on various aspects of the business entity.

Turning to the drawings shows an illustrative environment for managing a set one or more of semantic business models such as semantic business model . To this extent environment includes a computer infrastructure that can perform the process described herein for managing semantic business model . In particular computer infrastructure is shown including a computing device that comprises a semantic modeling system which makes computing device operable to manage semantic business model by performing the process described herein.

Computing device is shown including a processor a memory A an input output I O interface and a bus . Further computing device is shown in communication with an external I O device resource and a storage system B. As is known in the art in general processor executes computer program code such as semantic modeling system that is stored in memory A and or storage system B. While executing computer program code processor can read and or write data such as one or more business area models to from memory A storage system B and or I O interface . Bus provides a communications link between each of the components in computing device . I O device can comprise any device that enables a user to interact with computing device or any device that enables computing device to communicate with one or more other computing devices such as analysis system .

In any event computing device can comprise any general purpose computing article of manufacture capable of executing computer program code installed thereon e.g. a personal computer server handheld device etc. . However it is understood that computing device and semantic modeling system are only representative of various possible equivalent computing devices that may perform the process described herein. To this extent in other embodiments the functionality provided by computing device and semantic modeling system can be implemented by a computing article of manufacture that includes any combination of general and or specific purpose hardware and or computer program code. In each case the program code and hardware can be created using standard programming and engineering techniques respectively.

Similarly computer infrastructure is only illustrative of various types of computer infrastructures for implementing the invention. For example in one embodiment computer infrastructure comprises two or more computing devices e.g. a server cluster that communicate over any type of wired and or wireless communications link such as a network a shared memory or the like to perform the process described herein. When the communications link comprises a network the network can comprise any combination of one or more types of networks e.g. the Internet a wide area network a local area network a virtual private network etc. . Regardless communications between the computing devices may utilize any combination of various types of transmission techniques.

As discussed further herein semantic modeling system enables computing infrastructure to manage a set of semantic business models . To this extent semantic modeling system is shown including an import system a transform system a merge system a conflict resolution system and an interface system . Operation of each of these systems is discussed herein. However it is understood that some of the various systems shown in can be implemented independently combined and or stored in memory for one or more separate computing devices that are included in computer infrastructure . Further it is understood that some of the systems and or functionality may not be implemented and or additional systems and or functionality may be included as part of computing infrastructure .

Regardless the invention provides a solution for managing semantic business model s . For example semantic modeling system can generate a new semantic business model based on one or more business area models and or another semantic business model . To this extent import system can obtain a set one or more of business area models and or a previous semantic business model for a business entity. As used herein the term business entity means any organization that performs some business function e.g. a corporation an educational institution a not for profit organization etc. . Further each business area model can comprise a business model for a particular area e.g. department of the business entity. For example business area model could comprise an organization chart for a human resources department a business activity model a model of information technology IT solutions capabilities a structure of key performance indicators KPIs etc. A previous semantic business model can comprise a partially completed semantic business model for the business entity and or a generic default semantic business model that is selected based on a type of business entity a domain e.g. field of business for the business entity and or the like.

In general semantic business model includes various classes such as business components business activities KPIs business processes value drivers and the like as well as the relationships between the classes. shows an illustrative metamodel for semantic business model according to an embodiment of the invention. Metamodel includes a business process activities class that has various other classes related thereto. In particular metamodel includes a business component class A a resource e.g. human facility and the like class B a KPI metrics value driver class C an information class D an IT solution class E etc. Each of the related classes A E can further include one or more related metrics and or attributes. For example business component class A can include a related business competency metric A and an accountability e.g. a level such as executive management staff member etc. metric B resource class B can include a related evaluation expertise metric C and IT solution class E can include a related IT metrics capabilities metric D. It is understood that metamodel is only illustrative and other embodiments of metamodel can include various alternative class metric and or relationship configurations as will be recognized by one in the art.

Returning to import system can obtain business area model s and or semantic business model s using any known solution. For example import system can generate an interface that enables a user to selectively provide business area model s to import system . Alternatively another system not shown can communicate business area model s and or semantic business model s to import system using an application programming interface API or the like. Still further import system can enable user to create and or edit business area model s and or semantic business model in a known manner.

In any event transform system can transform each business area model and or semantic business model into one or more intermediate models each of which is represented using a substantially similar and or identical meta modeling language. In particular business area models may be defined using various file storage formats e.g. spreadsheet word processor database etc. and or modeling languages such as unified modeling language UML extensible markup language XML an entity relationship ER model resource description framework RDF OWL web ontology language etc. To this extent transform system can transform the data for each business area model and or semantic business model into an intermediate model that stores the data using a substantially similar and or identical representation as all other intermediate model s .

In one embodiment the transformation of each business area model into an intermediate model is done in two phases. In particular transform system extracts one or more business area sub models from each business area model which merge system merges into one or more intermediate models . For example shows an illustrative data flow diagram for generating semantic business model according to an embodiment of the invention. Referring to transform system can generate one or more business area sub models A H based on a plurality of business area models A D. In one embodiment the types of business area sub models A H can be limited to particular types of information conveyed by business area models A D. For example transform system and or a user using transform system can identify and or isolate business component information business activity information business metric information and or business solution information from each business area model A D. The corresponding information can then be stored in a business area sub model A H. Subsequently merge system can merge business area sub models A H of the same type into intermediate models A D using the mapping solution s discussed herein. Merge system can then use intermediate models A D to generate semantic business model .

Transform system can transform each business area model A D and or business area sub model A H into any desired meta modeling language. In one embodiment transform system uses a meta modeling language such as the meta object facility MOF object model as defined by the Object Management Group OMG . In another embodiment the meta modeling language comprises the Eclipse Modeling Framework EMF . In the latter case each business area sub model A H and or intermediate model A D can be represented using EMF objects in the Java programming language. Subsequently merge system merges each intermediate model A D into semantic business model . Semantic business model can be represented using any desired language framework. In one embodiment semantic business model is represented using a semantic markup language such as the OWL web ontology language. In this case semantic business model facilitates inferences query execution and the like for use in performing a qualitative analysis of semantic business model .

Frequently two or more intermediate models A B will each include one or more objects A B that can be correlated. To this extent merge system can map a first object A in a first intermediate model A to a similar identical second object B in a second intermediate model B. In particular merge system can generate and add a mapping object to semantic business model that represents both the first and second objects A B. Subsequently merge system can add the relationship information for the mapping object to semantic business model based on the relationship information for each object A B in the corresponding first and second intermediate models A B.

To map two or more objects A B to a single object merge system can determine all objects A B that are identified the same e.g. router as mapping to one another. However it is desirable that merge system also be able to map objects A B that represent the same component functionality but are not identically identified. To this extent merge system also can use one or more matching solutions to map objects A B in different intermediate models A B to one another.

Initially a parsing component A can parse multi term attributes of each object A B into tokens and perform part of speech tagging and stop word filtering on each token. In order to translate attributes into tokens parsing component A can exploit commonly used naming conventions. For example word boundaries in a multi term attribute can be detected by a change in font e.g. capitalized letter to convert CustomerPurchase into Customer and Purchase the presence of a delimiter e.g. underscore space alphabetical to numeric transition etc. and or the like. Additionally parsing component A can apply grammar rules perform stop word filtering using for example a pre supplied list of common stop words e.g. and or the etc. .

Further parsing component A can expand any abbreviations included in the tokens. In this case parsing component A can use a domain specific and or a domain independent vocabulary to determine an appropriate expansion of an abbreviation. Should a word include multiple possible expansions e.g. Cust could expand to Customer or Customary parsing component A can maintain both expansions for subsequent processing. Still further parsing component A can include context information for each token in an object A B. For example a token generated from an operation name can include operation context information a token generated from a message can include message context information etc.

After parsing a category component B can categorically match two or more objects A B using a lexical database . Lexical database comprises a taxonomy of words and can comprise an existing taxonomy such as Princeton University s WordNet taxonomy. To this extent lexical database can comprise a hierarchical structure that organizes words into synonym sets each of which represents an underlying lexical concept. In one embodiment category component B can find any synonym s for the various tokens in each object A B using lexical database . Each synonym can be assigned a similarity score based on a sense index and an order of the synonym in the matching synonym s in lexical database . In this manner category component B can match two or more objects A B based on a distance that their corresponding identifiers are from one another in lexical database . For example when two or more objects A B are identified by words tokens that are sufficiently close e.g. one is sub category of the other both in same sub category or the like to one another in lexical database category component B can generate a single mapping object for all of the objects A B.

Merge system also can include a semantic component C for semantically matching two or more objects A B using a domain ontology . Domain ontology can comprise an ontology e.g. a hierarchical classification of knowledge for a domain in which a business entity performs business activities. For example domain ontology can comprise an ontology for the petroleum industry when the business entity performs petroleum related business activities. In any event domain ontology can define various types of relationships between business entities. In one embodiment domain ontology defines four types of relationships e.g. subClassOf A B superClassOf A B type A B and equivalenceClass A B can be defined in which A and B are two concepts within the particular domain. It is understood that these relationships are only illustrative and numerous types and or combinations of relationships can be defined for a particular ontology.

Regardless when two or more objects A B are categorized sufficiently close in domain ontology semantic component C can generate a single mapping object for all of the objects A B. To categorize each object A B semantic component C can query domain ontology for each attribute token for each object A B. The matches returned will comprise a set of related concepts along with distance scores that represent a distance between two concepts. Semantic component C can use a scoring scheme to compute the distance between related concepts in domain ontology . For example a query performed for DueDate could return an ontologically matching concept such as DeliveryDate while a query for UPC may return related concepts such as EAC code and Part Number using inferences in domain ontology .

Further merge system can include a heuristic component D for heuristically mapping objects A B using at least one other mapping of related objects A B. For example heuristic component D can perform a position based heuristic mapping. In this case heuristic component D can use a mapping of an object A to object B to also map a neighboring object of object A to object B. It is understood that position based heuristic mapping is only illustrative and other types of heuristic mappings can be used under the invention.

When merge system uses two or more matching solutions for mapping objects A B a conflict may occur when multiple mappings are identified for an object A B by different matching solutions. For example category component B could map object A to object B while semantic component C could map object A to another object in intermediate model B. Returning to to address this situation semantic modeling system can comprise a conflict resolution system . Conflict resolution system can resolve conflicts between two or more mappings in semantic business model . In one embodiment conflict resolution system can rank the mappings based on at least one attribute of each object A B and or the matching solution that generated each mapping. For example based on a type of the object and or text of the object e.g. such as text mining information retrieval or the like commonly used in Internet search engine technology one matching solution may be more accurate than another matching solution. In this case conflict resolution system can rank the mapping generated by the more accurate matching solution higher and use it over the other mapping s .

Further conflict resolution system can provide the conflict for analysis by user . For example conflict resolution system can generate a display that enables user to select which if any mapping is correct. Subsequently conflict resolution system can use the selected mapping. In this case conflict resolution system can use a machine learning technique or the like to adjust the operation of merge system and or conflict resolution system for the generation of subsequent semantic business model s . For example conflict resolution system can adjust its ranking of the matching solutions adjust one or more mapping rules used in merge system and or the like. It is understood that the adjustments can be made in a domain specific and or domain neutral manner.

Once semantic business model has been generated semantic modeling system can store it and manage various operations performed on semantic business model . For example interface system can generate a user interface that enables user to view and or modify semantic business model . Additionally interface system can provide semantic business model for use by an analysis system . In this case interface system can enable analysis system to access and or copy semantic business model interface system can provide semantic business model to analysis system in response to a request and or the like. In any event analysis system can perform qualitative analysis on semantic business model . For example analysis system can comprise a value modeling system as described in the previously incorporated co owned and co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 200 847.

As discussed herein the invention provides a method of generating and or managing semantic business model . To this extent shows an illustrative process for generating a semantic business model according to an embodiment of the invention. Referring to in step S import system obtains one or more business area models and or semantic business models for a business entity. In step S transform system transforms business area model s into one or more intermediate model s . In step S merge system merges the intermediate models into semantic business model . In step S conflict resolution system resolves any conflicts between mappings generated by merge system . In step S conflict resolution system can further obtain feedback from user e.g. selection of one of multiple possible mappings correction of mappings etc. In step S semantic modeling system can store semantic business model for future access and or use by user and or an analysis system . It is understood that the process shown in is only illustrative and various alterations are possible. To this extent additional steps can be included the steps can be repeated combined performed in a different order and or the like as will be recognized by one in the art.

The invention described herein is now further discussed with reference to an illustrative usage scenario. In particular commonly a business consultant would like to answer questions such as What part s of my client s business will be impacted by implementing an Internet Protocol based Voice over IP VOIP solution Which business driver s in my client s business will be impacted by implementing an integrated production and supply solution Which existing solution should be recommended to the client given that the client would like to improve its response times in customer problem resolutions and or the like. To date the business consultant is required to painstakingly interview the client to gather information about how the company is organized what metrics are important to the particular business problem at hand what drives those metrics etc. to propose a solution to improve the client s business. If the solution is implemented in computer software and or hardware the business consultant also needs knowledge about the ever changing landscape of hardware and or software solutions and the corresponding business metrics these solutions improve.

In many cases much of the information that the business consultant needs to gather about the client and about possible solutions is available in the company but is located in many places and or in many formats. For example a client may have information about the organization of the company key performance indicator s etc. in a document such as an annual report. The client also may have detailed metrics that are measured for specific business areas in one or more databases or spreadsheets which are separately managed by an administrator for the corresponding business function. Similarly the business consultant s company may maintain marketing material that indicates the various solution offerings and the corresponding types of business metrics that each improves. Further an industry standards body may publish documents that present typical business processes the related activities in a business process and or the metrics for measuring the performance of those business activities. In summary information that the business consultant needs is distributed in multiple places and in multiple formats thereby making it difficult for the business consultant to gather and assimilate the information.

To date the business consultant is required to gather the above mentioned types of information from multiple sources assimilate it conduct qualitative as well as quantitative analyses on the specific business problems presented by the client and provide recommendations. Interviewing data gathering and data assimilation are the most time consuming part of this process. Once the data is gathered and the corresponding connections are made between various business processes the underlying activities their performance metrics and the solution offerings the business consultant often is able to conduct the analyses and present recommendation s in a relatively short period of time. Subsequently the gathered information is retained in informal forms such as documents spreadsheets and or presentations thereby making it difficult to reuse for other similar engagements.

Returning to the invention automates semi automates the data assimilation process to aid the business consultant e.g. user . Further the information can be retained in a formal semantic business model for subsequent reuse. In particular when a business consultant seeks to assess the impact of a VOIP solution on a particular business entity the business consultant will interview one or more individuals at the business entity. In general the business consultant will determine how the business entity is organized the type of phone technology currently used metrics the entity uses to measure communication effectiveness etc. The business consultant and or client may locate such information in an internal document that contains the entity s organizational information a document in XML format from an external source such as a standards body outlining the business processes and activities that involve human communication and a spreadsheet containing the metrics measuring the performance of the current phone technology. Additionally the business consultant s company may have a spreadsheet that outlines the solutions that are offered and the benefits of implementing those solutions. In this case there are four different sources of information that the business consultant is required to gather and assimilate.

The business consultant can build a semantic business model that connects the various business metrics with business activities components and solutions to answer the particular question e.g. the impact of implementing a VOIP solution . Referring to as an illustrative example user e.g. the business consultant can use import system to obtain the business area models A D. Subsequently user can use transform system to transform each business area model A D into one or more business area sub models A H which are represented using the same meta modeling language such as the OWL ontology modeling language.

Once business area sub models A H have been generated user can use merge system to merge the various models A H into a set of intermediate models A D. The merging can accommodate possible overlap in the business area sub models A H. For example an internal document may contain the entity s organizational information as well as information about metrics for measuring the performance of current phone technology which may overlap with information in a second source e.g. a spreadsheet containing the metrics that measure the performance of the current phone technology. Consequently merge system merges business area sub models A H to ensure that a single intermediate model A D includes all the information related to one aspect e.g. metric . Merge system can use key word matching as discussed herein to merge business area sub models A H into intermediate models A D. Regardless merge system can match each object in one business area sub models A H with all of the objects in other business area sub model s A H using lexical matching synonym matching and or the like. Merge system notes related objects and places them in a single intermediate model A D.

When merge system detects one or more conflicts in the matching conflict resolution system can resolve the conflict s . For example conflict resolution system can present each conflict to user and enable user to decide the appropriate matching. In any event merge system and or conflict resolution system will generate an intermediate model A D for each type of information. Continuing with the VOIP scenario the resulting intermediate models A D will include an intermediate model A that comprises a set of business objects e.g. IT investments HR management facilities operation and maintenance etc. for the business entity an intermediate model B that comprises a set of business activity objects that are associated with employee communication process manage employee productivity manage IT projects manage test evaluate and deploy IT infrastructure etc. an intermediate model C that comprises a set of business metric objects for measuring the performance of employee communication such as IT staff costs Intra company employee travel costs intra company employee travel for education etc. and an intermediate model D that comprises a set of solution objects that are related to VOIP solutions such as IP convergence solution with remote management IP convergence solution without remote management supply chain planning solution etc. .

In any event merge system can merge intermediate models A D into semantic business model . In particular merge system can map associate various objects in one intermediate model A D with those in another. For example merge system can map associate a facilities operation and maintenance object in intermediate model A with an IT staff costs object in intermediate model C which merge system can map associate with a manage IT projects object in intermediate model B and which merge system can map associate with both an IP convergence solution with remote management object and an IP convergence solution without remote management object in intermediate model D. Merge system can map associate the various objects with or without the interaction of user based on for example common keywords matched using the matching solution s described herein in the descriptions associated with each object.

User can be involved in each stage of the mapping to validate the models being generated and or resolve any conflicts. The resulting mappings associations are stored in semantic business model . The business map that is represented in semantic business model can be stored using a semantic markup language such as OWL which enables queries. For example semantic business model can be queried to obtain a response to the query What part s of my client s business will be impacted by implementing a VOIP solution In the illustrative scenario described herein the answer would be the facilities operation and maintenance component of the business. Further semantic business model can be used to determine that the VOIP solution will impact the manage IT costs business activity which will result in an impact to the IT staff costs metric as well.

The scenario discussed herein is only illustrative. When implemented the invention can be used to in other more or less complex situations in which understanding the interplay of the impact of a particular business decision on all parts of a business is important. For example a solution that optimizes production planning alone may improve operational metrics but may adversely impact customer satisfaction related metrics. While some of the interplay may be obvious the details of which business area s get impacted due to certain business decisions can be quite involved. As a result semantic business model will assist consultants and business decision makers in conducting what if scenarios and other qualitative experiments relatively easily thereby saving time and money for the business.

While shown and described herein as a method and system for managing generating semantic business model s it is understood that the invention further provides various alternative embodiments. For example in one embodiment the invention provides a program product stored on a computer readable medium which when executed enables a computer infrastructure to manage and or generate semantic business model . To this extent the computer readable medium includes program code such as semantic modeling system that implements the unique process described herein. It is understood that the term computer readable medium comprises one or more of any type of physical embodiment of the program code. In particular the computer readable medium can comprise program code embodied on one or more portable storage articles of manufacture e.g. a compact disc a magnetic disk a tape etc. on one or more data storage portions of a computing device such as memory A and or storage system B e.g. a fixed disk a read only memory a random access memory a cache memory etc. and or as a data signal traveling over a network e.g. during a wired wireless electronic distribution of the program code .

In another embodiment the invention provides a business method that performs the process described herein on a subscription advertising and or fee basis. That is a service provider such as an Application Service Provider could offer to manage and or generate semantic business model s as described herein. In this case the service provider can manage e.g. create maintain support etc. a computer infrastructure such as computer infrastructure that performs the process described herein for one or more customers. In return the service provider can receive payment from the customer s under a subscription and or fee agreement and or the service provider can receive payment from the sale of advertising to one or more third parties.

In still another embodiment the invention provides a method of generating a system for managing and or generating semantic business model s . In this case a computer infrastructure such as computer infrastructure can be obtained e.g. created maintained having made available to etc. and one or more systems for performing the process described herein can be obtained e.g. created purchased used modified etc. and deployed to the computer infrastructure. To this extent the deployment of each system can comprise one or more of 1 installing program code on a computing device such as computing device from a computer readable medium 2 adding one or more computing devices to the computer infrastructure and 3 incorporating and or modifying one or more existing systems of the computer infrastructure to enable the computer infrastructure to perform the process steps of the invention.

As used herein it is understood that the terms program code and computer program code are synonymous and mean any expression in any language code or notation of a set of instructions intended to cause a computing device having an information processing capability to perform a particular function either directly or after any combination of the following a conversion to another language code or notation b reproduction in a different material form and or c decompression. To this extent program code can be embodied as one or more types of program products such as an application software program component software a library of functions an operating system a basic I O system driver for a particular computing and or I O device and the like. Further it is understood that the terms component and system are synonymous as used herein and represent any combination of hardware and or software capable of performing some function s .

The foregoing description of various aspects of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed and obviously many modifications and variations are possible. Such modifications and variations that may be apparent to a person skilled in the art are intended to be included within the scope of the invention as defined by the accompanying claims.

