---

title: Apparatus for spinning rocket motor tubes
abstract: An apparatus for spinning tubes includes a horizontal, adjustable bed, the bed including a bed housing and a slide movably disposed in the bed housing, a tailstock assembly fixed to a top of the slide, the tailstock assembly including a tailstock coupling, bearings for supporting the tailstock coupling and a locking clamp that moves the tailstock coupling and bearings relative to the slide, a drive coupling, a drive unit connected to the drive coupling, and a rocket motor tube disposed between the drive and tailstock couplings, the rocket motor tube including a mask, each mask including an angled surface thereon.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07470328&OS=07470328&RS=07470328
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07470328
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050623
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for government purposes without the payment of any royalties thereof.

The invention relates in general to devices for spinning hollow cylindrical tubes and in particular to devices for spinning rocket motor tubes to distribute evenly viscous liner material deposited on the interior of the tube.

Rocket motor tubes are lined with a fire retardant liner to prevent the propellant from burning through the tube wall. The rocket tubes are for example about three feet long and two to three inches in diameter. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 927 647 filed on Aug. 25 2004 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 163 584 entitled Apparatus For Applying Liquid Liner To Rocket Tube having the same inventor as the present application discloses an apparatus for dispensing a continuous bead of liner into a rocket motor tube. The contents of the above noted previous application are hereby expressly incorporated by reference.

After depositing the continuous bead of liner in the rocket tube the liner must be spread around to cover the interior of the rocket tube. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 985 064 filed on Nov. 10 2004 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 029 534 entitled Apparatus for Spreading Liquid Liner in Rocket Tube having the same inventor as the present application discloses a brushing apparatus for spreading viscous liner over the interior of a rocket motor tube. The contents of the above noted previous application are hereby expressly incorporated by reference.

After the brushing operation that spreads the liner the present invention is used to spin the tubes to uniformly distribute the liner on the interior of the tube. The spinning operation uses centrifugal force to form a uniform layer of liner on the interior of the tube.

The invention includes an apparatus for spinning hollow cylindrical tubes. The hollow cylindrical tubes may be for example rocket motor tubes. The interior of the rocket motor tubes are coated with a viscous liner material. Initially the viscous liner material is not evenly distributed on the interior of the rocket motor tubes. The purpose of spinning the rocket motor tubes is to distribute evenly the viscous liner on the interior of the tubes by a centrifugal force of spinning.

The invention will be better understood and further objects features and advantages thereof will become more apparent from the following description of the preferred embodiments taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

Spinner is mounted on a table or other stable and sturdy horizontal surface. Spinner includes an adjustable bed guard cover manual locking clamps tailstock bearings tailstock coupling drive coupling and drive unit . Drive couplings are only partially visible in because of splatter shields installed around drive couplings . In an exemplary embodiment drive unit is torque controlled. Drive unit comprises a torque controlled electric motor with associated control components. As an alternative to an electric motor an air motor with regulator may be used for the drive unit .

Referring to one or more drive coupling bearings are mounted on the drive coupling support strut . Each drive coupling is supported by a set of drive coupling bearings . Drive unit comprises among other components a drive motor a drive pulley connected to the drive motor drive pulley bearings mounted on the drive unit strut and a belt connecting the drive pulley and the drive couplings . Where more than two drive couplings are used the belt would connect couplings and drive pulley in a known serpentine manner.

Motor torque is controlled by for example computer software or one or more appropriate hard wired controller s . Motor speed is controlled by the balance between motor output torque and bearing friction resistance torque. In the embodiment shown the bearing friction is supplied by tailstock bearings drive coupling bearings and drive pulley bearings . The drive motor rotational speed equals a tube rotational speed. Motor speed is proportional to the amount of drag in the bearing drive system. The greater the bearing drag the lower the steady state speed. The lower the bearing drag the higher the steady state speed.

As the motor rpm increases the bearing friction increases due to bearing grease shear and or tube vibration until bearing friction matches motor torque. When bearing friction equals motor torque the rotational speed becomes approximately constant. Rotational speed should be for example in a range of about 3000 rpm to about 4000 rpm. If no tube is mounted in the spinner the motor may overspeed and automatically shut down by using the appropriate overspeed detection circuits. Motor overspeed occurs at for example about 5000 rpm. Spinning time is in general about ten seconds to about sixty seconds.

As shown in tube includes mask at the tailstock end and mask at the drive end. Each of masks includes angled surfaces and O ring . O rings are situated substantially adjacent masks of the tube . The O rings perform several over functions in addition to being a structural interface between the masks and the tube . O rings when installed under compression prevent liner from entering the areas of the tube adjacent the masks masking function . O rings help center the tube during the spinning operation and also transfer torque from the mask at the drive end to the tube .

Tailstock coupling includes a flanged portion having interior angled surface . Drive coupling includes a flanged portion having interior angled surface . When tube is in an operable position in spinner angled surfaces of masks contact angled surfaces of the tailstock coupling and the drive coupling respectively. During the spinning operation tailstock coupling is stationary with mask and tube rotating against angled surface of tailstock coupling . Drive coupling rotates angled surface . Angled surface drives angled surface of mask . O ring of mask drives tube . Couplings may be made of a metal for example stainless steel. Masks may be made of a plastic such as ultra high molecular weight polyethylene.

The angle of angled surfaces of the tailstock coupling and the drive coupling and the angle of the angled surfaces of the masks are substantially the same. For optimum operation this angle alpha as shown in is in the range of about ten degrees to about forty five degrees and in particular the angle alpha is about thirty degrees. Note that angle alpha corresponds to twice the angle between one of the angled surfaces and the central horizontal axis of the tube . That is the angle between the angled surfaces and the central horizontal axis of the tube is in the range of about five to about twenty three degrees and in particular about fifteen degrees.

In another embodiment the couplings may be constructed with only the small or only the large size of angled surfaces. Such an embodiment would not be as versatile as the couplings shown in . In general different types of small class tubes may have some difference in diameter but each small class tube will have individual masks with angled surfaces that will fit the angled surfaces . Likewise large class tubes may have differing diameters but each large class tube will have individual masks with angled surfaces that will fit the angled surfaces . In this manner the use of standard size masks for each tube simplifies the connection to the couplings. In addition the standard size masks cooperate with the apparatuses disclosed in copending application Ser. Nos. 10 927 647 and 10 985 064.

Each pair of drive and tailstock couplings is provided with an adjustable bed . Thus in the embodiment of the invention shown in there are two adjustable beds shown with a way cover in place to prevent liner contamination. is a perspective view of an adjustable bed with no way cover. Bed includes a bed housing a slide axially movable along the bed housing an externally threaded rod a turning knob attached to one end of rod and a digital indicator attached to the other end of rod . Bed housing includes top surfaces upon which slide axially moves. is a sectional view of a slide . Slide includes an internally threaded bushing that threadingly engages rod and through which rod passes. Bottom surfaces of slide slide on the top surfaces of bed housing . Thus by rotating turn knob slide may be positioned axially at any point along bed housing .

When loading a rocket motor tube into the spinner the bed is adjusted to a length of the rocket motor tube by rotating turn knob until digital indicator indicates a numeral corresponding to the length of the rocket motor tube. Because the tailstock assembly is fixed to the top of slide as discussed in more detail below the tailstock coupling will then be in the proper position for loading the tube. A locking cover may be used to lock the turning knob in place to prevent any unwanted axial movement of the slide during operation of the spinner .

As shown in more detail in the locking clamp is connected to the shuttle plate by for example a threaded stud that threads into opening in shuttle plate and threads into tapped hole in locking clamp . Shuttle slide shown in more detail in allows locking clamp to move the shuttle plate relative to the locking clamp support plate .

Drive unit comprises among other components a drive unit support plate attached to the vertical struts a drive unit strut attached to the drive unit support plate using brackets for example and disposed between vertical struts a drive motor attached to the drive unit support plate a drive pulley connected to the drive motor drive pulley bearings mounted on the drive unit strut and a belt connecting the drive pulley and the drive couplings . Where more than two drive couplings are used the belt would connect couplings and drive pulley in a known serpentine manner.

Drive unit support plate includes two threaded holes in a top edge . A tension plate is fixed to a top of each vertical strut . Each tension plate has an opening therein for receiving a threaded stud . Stud passes through the opening in the tension plate and threads into hole in the top edge of the drive unit support plate . Alternatively stud may be for example welded bonded or machined as part of the drive unit support plate . A nut is disposed on a top of each tension plate . The nuts engage the studs . By first loosening bolts that attach support plate to struts one may adjust the vertical position of the drive unit support plate by simply rotating nuts . This action allows gravity to lower the drive unit support plate . Vertical adjustment of the drive unit support plate adjusts the tension in belt .

While the invention has been described with reference to certain embodiments numerous changes alterations and modifications to the described embodiments are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

Finally any numerical parameters set forth in the specification and attached claims are approximations for example by using the term about that may vary depending upon the desired properties sought to be obtained by the present invention. At the very least and not as an attempt to limit the application of the doctrine of equivalents to the scope of the claims each numerical parameter should at least be construed in light of the number of significant digits and by applying ordinary rounding.

