---

title: Vehicle wake vortex modifier
abstract: Wake vortices are made less detectable or reduced in their effect on nearby vehicles by re-orientation of vorticity about an axis in the direction of vehicle motion to transverse vorticity interacting with the longitudinal vorticity. The re-orientation may be by a flapping foil, and arrangements of a plurality of foils moving toward or from each other may be used. Alternatively, fluid may be injected longitudinally between opposite surfaces each having a port so that selective suction through the ports alternately attaches the fluid to the surfaces to deflect the fluid from the longitudinal direction and generate transverse vortices. Oppositely rotating vortices may be formed by separators extendable from each surface to engage the deflected fluid, and extension of the separators may be varied to control vortex trajectory. The transverse vortices may be intermittent, selected for speed, or made asymmetric for maneuvering.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07150434&OS=07150434&RS=07150434
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07150434
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050225
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

The present invention relates to fluid dynamic forces in ships and in aeronautics. More particularly the invention relates to vortex generation and dissipation for warship concealment and aircraft sustentation by movably mounted hull adjunct or fluid introducing elements.

It is known to attempt to modify the wakes of aerial and marine vehicles to make the wakes less detectable or to reduce wake vortices which adversely affect nearby vehicles. Related wake and vortex reduction arrangements are also known for decreasing ship resistance and increasing air foil efficiency.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 088 433 issued to Osawa et al. on 18 Feb. 1992 discloses decreasing the wave making resistance of a ship by adjustable fins mounted at the front of the ship and extending above and below the draft line. The fins are thus not applicable to underwater or aerial vehicles and do not directly affect wake vortices.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 158 251 issued to Taylor on 27 Oct. 1992 for stemming tip vortex generation at its source by discharging fluid span wise over a fluid foil tip to form a Coanda curtain which extends downwardly from the upper side of the foil and prevents vortex generating flow over the tip from its lower side. Tip vortices are thus prevented rather than being dissipated by counter vortices and the Coanda effect is induced by a continuous flow at from one side of the foil.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 222 455 which issued on 29 Jun. 1993 to Furey discloses a casing parallel to a ship hull to divert the hull boundary layer fluid to a pump which then expels the fluid alongside of and transversely from the hull. Fluid with the highest concentration of vorticity which is the source of the most detectable vorticity features of a ship s wake is thus removed from the wake. The disclosed system thus removes vortices from the wake rather than counteracting and dissipating the vortices.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 787 048 issued 28 Jul. 1998 to Sanford for ship wake signature suppression by projecting ultrasonic acoustic energy in a range of 0.5 to 2.5 MHz into the wake for coalescence of microbubbles which make the wake detectable. There is no mention of or direct effect on wake vorticity.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 791 875 issued to Ngo on 11 Aug. 1998 discloses the use of the Coanda effect to suppress free stream air flow around the tip of a lifting body to attenuate or remove the tip vortex. Since in a helicopter blade high pressure can occur on either surface an embodiment shown on FIG. 4 can direct the Coanda flow in either direction. However in any one time the Coanda effect inducing flow is continuous and tip vortices are not subsequently dissipated by counter vortices.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 954 009 issued to Esmiol on Sep. 21 1999 for a ship and submarine wake attenuation system having plates parallel to and outboard of a hull to reflect the wake back and forth between the plates and the hull to attenuate the wake. There is no mention of or direct effect on wake vorticity.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 082 679 issued to Crouch et al. on 4 Jul. 4 2000 for as stated in column 1 a method and apparatus addressing aircraft trailing vortices . The only disclosed embodiment which is in accordance with claim moves a pair of existing control surfaces that are spaced span wise on an aircraft wing aileron and flaperon or aileron and spoiler so as to excite instabilities of the vortices. As stated in column 7 the control surface motions are preferably a waveform with an aileron having positions above the wing upper surface and below the wing lower surface while a spoiler can only move to positions above the wing upper surface. 

In Crouch the generation of counter vortices is not mentioned. And the use of a single moveable surface or multiple surfaces flapping toward or and from each other is not disclosed. While Crouch states in column 4 that one embodiment may be a submarine with lifting surfaces that produce at least two vortex pairs. no such embodiment is disclosed.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 513 761 issued on 4 Feb. 2003 to Huenecke discloses the use of a vortex generating flap to reduce a trailing vortex from an aircraft wing by generating a corresponding counteracting vortex imposed on the trailing vortex. As stated in Column 5 with reference to FIG. 6 where it is seen that the trailing vortices are about longitudinal axes counter vortices 13 and 14 are injected into the respective flap vortices 12B and 11B to thereby cause these flap vortices 11B and 12B to vibrate as indicated by the zigzag lines 11C and 12C whereby the intensity of the respective flap vortices 11B and 12B is rapidly diminished or dissipated. Also as stated in Column 8 vortex generating flaps 9 and 10 may be in a stationary extended position . . . or they can be operated dynamically by repeatedly extending . . . into the airstream . . . Moreover the flaps on the opposite wings . . . may be . . . extended and retracted simultaneously . . . or . . . one extended while the other is retracted . . . In both instances . . . longitudinal vibrations or asymmetric counter vortices are generated . . . suitable for accelerating the dissipating of the trailing vortices. 

In Huenecke as shown in FIG. 6 the counteracting vortices 13 and 14 are axially parallel to the flap vortices 12B and 11B which are to be dissipated and the use of surfaces flapping toward and from each other is not mentioned.

The present invention is concerned with an device and methods for modification of vehicle wake vortices to make surface ships submarines and torpedoes less detectable by reducing their wakes and varying the signature thereof and to reduce the wakes of marine and aerial vehicles so that nearby vehicles as in harbors or airports are not adversely affected by the wakes.

The present invention provides such wake modification by re orientation of wake vorticity from about a longitudinal axis in the direction of vehicle motion to transverse vorticity which interacts with the longitudinal vorticity.

The present invention provides such wake modification by re orientation of wake vorticity which is typically about a longitudinal axis in the direction of vehicle motion due to a propeller to shedding by vehicle structure as in the above mentioned FIG. 6 of U.S. Pat. No. 6 513 761 or to a necklace vortex starting from a submarine sail juncture where the incoming boundary layer vorticity is wrapped around the sail to transverse vorticity which interacts with the longitudinal vorticity.

The invention resulted from biomimetics research using flapping foils as described in the above paper Experimental Simulation of Fish Inspired Unsteady Vortex Dynamics on a Rigid Cylinder . Measurements of the vorticity distribution phase averaged to the flapping foil motion were carried out using advanced multi plane laser Doppler anemometry and showed that within a surprisingly downstream distance the wake dies down by a factor of 3 due to re orientation of vorticity.

For the purposes of the present invention this re orientation may be carried out in any suitable manner which in a vehicle wake produces vortex trains that react with and neutralize the wake. Two arrangements for this re orientation are a flapping foil or foils and a Coanda effect fluidic amplifier. These arrangements are typically disposed at a vehicle tail or trailing portion where the portion may be the stern of a ship a submarine sail a hydrofoil that can be placed behind a torpedo or submarine propulsor or an airfoil.

When a flapping foil is used the foil moves generally about an axis transversely related to the direction of vehicle movement as does an aileron or rudder but the foil is oscillated so as to generate vortices about axes transversely related to this direction. A single foil may be used or a plurality of foils variously moving toward or from each other may be used. The foil movements and phases of multiple foils may variously be intermittent be altered in frequency and amplitude or be asymmetric. These variations are advantageously selected for conditions when wake detection or reduction is not important when vehicle speed changes or when a vehicle maneuvers.

When a Coanda effect fluidic amplifier is used for the purposes of the present invention a vehicle portion such as an above identified trailing portion is provided with a slot or cavity having transversely opposite surfaces extending in the longitudinal direction to a narrow opening in the trailing region of the vehicle portion. From each of the opposite surfaces an arcuate surface extends outwardly at first rearwardly and then forwardly of the opening to the exterior of the tail portion. Each of the recurved surfaces is provided at its inward portion with a fluidic amplifier suction port.

The tail portion is associated with any suitable device such as a pump providing a flow of ambient fluid through the slot toward the opening. This will produce thrust and the source of the fluid may be a region of the vessel where suction would advantageously produce an attached flow.

The suction ports are each connected to a fluidic device for selectively drawing or sucking fluid through each port. When this occurs at one port the fluid flow through the slot attaches by the Coanda effect to the corresponding arcuate surface so that the fluid flow is deflected in the direction of the activated suction port. It is apparent that when suction is applied alternately to the ports the fluid flow is oscillated transversely of the tail portion so as to create transverse vortices for the purposes of the present invention.

Preferably each of the arcuate surfaces is provided with a vane like salient edge obstruction extending rearwardly in the longitudinal direction from the rearwardmost part of the surface. This obstruction may be rectangular in cross section or may terminate in a sharp edge disposed at the obstruction side toward the slot. Also the obstruction may be provided with any suitable actuator to selectively locate or reciprocate the obstruction in the longitudinal direction from within the arcuate surface to a position fully extended therefrom.

With one of the obstructions extended from the arcuate surface and fluid flow deflected toward the obstruction by suction through the corresponding suction port flow of the fluid over the obstruction as at the sharp edge leads to the formation of a vortex which leaves the arcuate surface while rotating in a direction where the side of the vortex toward the slot moves away from the arcuate surface. As a result when suction is applied alternately to the ports as before mentioned vortices rotating oppositely about a transverse axis are shed alternately from the obstructions into the fluid flow.

The obstructions may be selectively oscillated or otherwise positioned in and out of the arcuate surfaces to control the trajectory and phasing of the shed vortices.

As with the above described flapping foil or foils vortices selected for different conditions maybe generated by suitably timed applications of suction to the suction ports and coordinated movements of the salient edge obstructions. The periods during which suction is applied may be different in phasing and period for the opposite deflections of the fluid flow so as to create an asymmetric wake shedding of vortices as during maneuvering.

Devices embodying the principles of the present invention whether using a flapping foil or the fluid amplifier may be disposed at any suitable location on a vehicle. With surface vessels this is typically on the stern above a propulsor with one device being used with a sharp stern and a pair of devices being spaced transversely of the hull with a square stern. Such a device may also be conveniently overhung from the stern. With a torpedo or submarine shapes tapering to a propulsor such devices may be overhung from the vehicle or mounted on the propulsor assembly. An array of such devices may be spaced transversely of a vessel.

Another object of the present invention is to minimize marine and aerial vehicles wake vortices that may affect other vehicles.

A further object of the present invention is to modify the detectable signature of marine vehicle wakes in ways that may be selected for particular speeds and maneuvers.

Yet another object of the present invention is to modify vehicle wakes for the above purposes without significant adverse effects on vehicle speed or maneuverability.

Further objects are to provide for the above purposes a device which is simple in construction retrofittable and unobtrusive.

Referring more particularly to the drawings in a device for modification of vehicle wake vortices in accordance with the present invention is indicated by numeral in a representative operating environment in which the device is mounted on a vehicle moving through a fluid in a forward or longitudinal direction A . The vehicle is represented as a surface ship having a waterline and having the device mounted below the waterline on a stern or trailing portion of the ship. The vehicle has a representative propulsor such as a propeller rotating about a longitudinal axis.

While the longitudinal direction A is represented as being generally horizontal or parallel to a waterline it will be apparent that the principles of the present invention may be applied to other vehicles such as underwater or aerial vehicles whose direction of movement particularly during maneuvers may be otherwise oriented.

It will also be apparent that a device which corresponds to the device in having structure embodying the principles of the present invention and in being adapted to perform a method in accordance therewith may be disposed at other vehicle trailing portions including portions of vehicles completely immersed in fluids through which the vehicle moves. Representative such vehicle portions include a submarine sail a hydrofoil disposed behind a torpedo or submarine propulsor or an airfoil.

Movement of the vehicle in the longitudinal direction A results in wake vorticity indicated by numeral about a longitudinal axis .

The source of this vorticity is not involved in the present invention which is concerned with minimization or suppression of disadvantageous effects of such longitudinal vorticity. However such vorticity typically arises by the rotation of a propulsor or by shedding from a vehicle structure. The longitudinal vorticity is present in the wake of the vehicle where this vorticity which may extend for a great distance behind and to the sides of the vehicle may result in the detection of a military vehicle or have hazardous effects on the control of nearby aerial or marine vehicles.

The present invention provides modification of such longitudinal wake vorticity by its re orientation into transverse counter vorticity which is indicated in by numeral and is about a transverse axis that is generally orthagonal to the longitudinal axis . In the axis of vorticity is represented as being about an axis which generally vertical or generally normal to waterline however the present invention may utilize otherwise oriented counter vorticity generated in any suitable manner and substantially transversely related to vorticity which corresponds to wake vorticity to modify the original wake vorticity as by vortex trains that react with and minimize or neutralize the wake.

The present invention is thus effective to modify vehicle wakes so that surface ships submarines and torpedoes are less detectable by reducing their wakes and varying the signature thereof and so that the wakes of marine and aerial vehicles are reduced so that nearby vehicles as in harbors or airports are not adversely affected by the wakes.

Devices suitable for re orienting wake vortices in accordance with the present invention include flapping foil structures and structures using a Coanda effect fluidic amplifier.

With the as well as the embodiment it is evident that the counter vortices of the present invention may be directed in one direction transversely of the longitudinal movement B by oscillating the foil or of the longitudinal movement C by oscillating the foil asymmetrically.

The embodiment using a Coanda effect fluidic amplifier is like that of in dispersing an unperturbed trailing wake indicated by numerals the dispersion being indicated by numerals and being due to transverse vortices not shown generated by the Coanda effect fluidic amplifier whose structure and operation will now be described in connection with .

In it is seen that the fluidic amplifier structure includes at each transverse side an arcuate surface which is convex in the trailing direction and recurved so as to join and be continuous with the surfaces and . Each surface is provided at its inward region with a fluidic amplifier suction port . The fluidic amplifier structure also includes any suitable device indicated by block and connected by individual conduits to ports for selectively drawing fluid through each of the ports.

The fluidic amplifier structure is associated with any suitable device such as a pump not shown providing a flow of ambient fluid through slot toward opening as indicated by arrow . Although not necessary for the present invention this flow will produce thrust and the source of the fluid may be a vehicle region where suction would advantageously produce an attached flow.

When suction is applied to one of the ports as indicated by arrow flow attaches by the Coanda effect to the corresponding arcuate surface so that the flow is deflected in the direction of the activated suction port as indicated by arrow . This deflection may result in transverse counter vortices for the purposes of the present invention and phased alternate application of suction to the ports will provide and remove the Coanda effect at each surface to oscillate the fluid flow for this purpose. If the Coanda effect is provided and removed alternately at each surface in asymmetric time phased relation the counter vortices may be directed transversely of the longitudinal movement D .

Preferably and to promote the formation of transverse vortices for the purposes of the present invention each of the arcuate surfaces is provided with a vane like salient edge obstruction shown in and in greater detail in . Each obstruction extends in the longitudinal direction from the trailingmost part of the corresponding surface . The obstruction may be rectangular in cross section or preferably and as seen in may terminate in a sharp edge disposed at the obstruction side toward the slot . As a result deflected fluid from the slot indicated in by arrow is shed from the obstruction as transverse vortices .

Each obstruction may be provided with any suitable actuator not shown to selectively locate or reciprocate the obstruction in the longitudinal direction as indicated by arrow from within the arcuate surface to a position fully extended therefrom.

It is apparent from that with one of the obstructions extended from the corresponding arcuate surface and fluid flow deflected toward the obstruction by suction through the corresponding suction port flow of the fluid over the obstruction as at the edge leads to the formation of a vortex which leaves the arcuate surface while rotating in a direction indicated by arrows and where the side of the vortex toward the slot moves away from the arcuate surface. As a result when suction is applied alternately to the ports vortices rotating oppositely about a transverse axis as indicated by arrows and are shed alternately from the obstructions into the fluid flow .

It is apparent that the salient edge obstructions may be selectively oscillated or otherwise positioned in and out of the arcuate surfaces to control the trajectory and phasing of the shed vortices. As a result and as with the above described flapping foil or foils and vortices selected for different conditions maybe generated by suitably timed applications of suction to suction ports and coordinated movements of the obstructions. The periods during which suction is applied may be different in phasing and period for the opposite deflections of the fluid flow so as to create an asymmetric wake shedding of vortices as during maneuvering.

Since the rate of fluid flow suction at ports and extension of obstructions may be selectively controlled the transverse vortices indicated by arrows and may be omitted if unneeded used intermittently for deception selected for vehicle speed or made asymmetric for vehicle maneuvering.

Devices embodying the principles of the present invention whether using a flapping foil as in or a fluid amplifier as in may be disposed at any suitable locations on a vehicle. With surface vessels this may be as shown in with device on the stern above a propulsor . One device may be used with a sharp stern and as shown in a pair of devices may be spaced transversely of a propulsor on a hull having a square stern and proceeding in a longitudinal direction E . Such devices may also be conveniently overhung from the stern as in a hydrofoil. It will be apparent that with torpedo or submarine shapes not shown and tapering to a propulsor such devices may be overhung from the vehicle or mounted on the propulsor assembly. An array of such devices may be spaced transversely of a vessel.

As shown in devices embodying the principles of the present invention may be mounted in any suitable manner on a vehicle which is moving in a longitudinal direction F immediately aft of a propulsor so that the device is particularly effective in modifying longitudinal vortices generated by the propulsor.

With marine vehicles devices embodying the principles of the present invention are conveniently and effectively disposed so that the generated vortices have generally vertical axes. With aircraft such devices may be disposed along the wing trailing edge and generate transverse vortices about axes parallel to the wing or a transverse array of the devices positioned as in a marine vehicle.

It is apparent that both the flapping foil embodiments of the present invention and the Coanda effect fluidic amplifier embodiments are amenable to digital control in that they can be turned on or off and programmed for varying speeds and maneuvers or asymmetric wake control the vortex trajectory being selectively controlled in maneuvering and vortex oscillations being selected in frequency and amplitude to augment wake dispersion by resonance. It is also apparent that these embodiments may alter the noise signature of a wake and in contrast to prior art for this purpose may be configured to provide thrust or at least minimally increase drag. It is further apparent that these embodiments which may be placed aft of a propeller or other propulsor for greatest effect are applicable in unobtrusive configurations to all platforms surface vessels submarines torpedoes and aircraft and typically can be retrofitted thereto.

Although the present invention has been herein shown and described in connection with what is conceived as the preferred embodiment it is recognized that departures may be made therefrom within the scope of the invention which is not limited to the illustrative details disclosed.

