---

title: Multi-sensory speech enhancement using synthesized sensor signal
abstract: A synthesized alternative sensor signal is produced from an alternative sensor signal. The synthesized alternative sensor signal is computed using vocal tract resonances estimated based on the alternative sensor signal, and using a waveform synthesis technique that converts the estimated vocal tract resonance sequence into a spectral magnitude sequence. The synthesized alternative sensor signal and the alternative sensor signal are used to estimate a clean speech value.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07406303&OS=07406303&RS=07406303
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07406303
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050916
---
This application claims priority benefit of U.S. Provisional Application 60 696 678 filed on Jul. 5 2005.

A common problem in speech recognition and speech transmission is the corruption of the speech signal by additive noise. In particular corruption due to the speech of another speaker has proven to be difficult to detect and or correct.

Recently systems have been developed that attempt to remove noise by using a combination of an alternative sensor such as a bone conduction microphone and an air conduction microphone. Various techniques have been developed that use the alternative sensor signal and the air conduction microphone signal to form an enhanced speech signal that has less noise than the air conduction microphone signal.

The discussion above is merely provided for general background information and is not intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

A synthesized alternative sensor signal is produced from an alternative sensor signal. The synthesized alternative sensor signal and the alternative sensor signal are used to estimate a clean speech value.

This Summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the Detailed Description. This Summary is not intended to identify key features or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter

Embodiments are operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with various embodiments include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers telephony systems distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

Embodiments may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Some embodiments are designed to be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules are located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing some embodiments includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard a microphone and a pointing device such as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer is operated in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a hand held device a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on remote computer . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Memory is implemented as non volatile electronic memory such as random access memory RAM with a battery back up module not shown such that information stored in memory is not lost when the general power to mobile device is shut down. A portion of memory is preferably allocated as addressable memory for program execution while another portion of memory is preferably used for storage such as to simulate storage on a disk drive.

Memory includes an operating system application programs as well as an object store . During operation operating system is preferably executed by processor from memory . Operating system in one preferred embodiment is a WINDOWS CE brand operating system commercially available from Microsoft Corporation. Operating system is preferably designed for mobile devices and implements database features that can be utilized by applications through a set of exposed application programming interfaces and methods. The objects in object store are maintained by applications and operating system at least partially in response to calls to the exposed application programming interfaces and methods.

Communication interface represents numerous devices and technologies that allow mobile device to send and receive information. The devices include wired and wireless modems satellite receivers and broadcast tuners to name a few. Mobile device can also be directly connected to a computer to exchange data therewith. In such cases communication interface can be an infrared transceiver or a serial or parallel communication connection all of which are capable of transmitting streaming information.

Input output components include a variety of input devices such as a touch sensitive screen buttons rollers and a microphone as well as a variety of output devices including an audio generator a vibrating device and a display. The devices listed above are by way of example and need not all be present on mobile device . In addition other input output devices may be attached to or found with mobile device .

Air conduction microphone receives ambient noise V generated by one or more noise sources and generates its own sensor noise U . Depending on the type of ambient noise and the level of the ambient noise ambient noise may also be detected by alternative sensor . However under embodiments of the present invention alternative sensor is typically less sensitive to ambient noise than air conduction microphone . Thus the alternative sensor signal B generated by alternative sensor generally includes less noise than air conduction microphone signal Y generated by air conduction microphone . Although alternative sensor is less sensitive to ambient noise it does generate some sensor noise W and does detect teeth clack noise that is formed when the teeth of the user s upper jaw contact the teeth of the lower jaw.

The path from speaker to alternative sensor signal can be modeled as a channel having a channel response H.

Alternative sensor signal B is provided to an alternative sensor signal synthesizer which generates a synthesized alternative sensor signal circumflex over B by extracting Vocal Tract Resonances VTRs from alternative sensor signal and converting the extracted VTR s into complex spectrum values.

Defined as the acoustic resonances for the oral portion of the vocal tract when the excitation is forced at the glottis VTRs correspond to natural frequencies of the physical system. VTRs are related to but different from formants. Unlike formants VTRs do not disappear merge or split during any part of speech. Rather they exist at real frequencies at all times even when the mouth is closed. While VTRs exist at all times they are not always observable and as such represent hidden dynamics of the speech signal.

VTRs from the alternative sensor are generally not affected by leakage noise or teeth clack in the alternative sensor signal. As a result the synthesized alternative sensor signal formed from the VTRs has less noise and is thus useful in identifying an estimate of a clean speech signal.

Alternative sensor signal B air conduction microphone signal Y and the complex spectral domain values for the synthesized alternative signal are provided to a clean signal estimator which estimates a clean signal . Clean signal estimate is provided to a speech process . Clean signal estimate may either be a time domain signal or a Fourier Transform vector. If clean signal estimate is a time domain signal speech process may take the form of a listener a speech coding system or a speech recognition system. If clean signal estimate is a Fourier Transform vector speech process will typically be a speech recognition system or contain an Inverse Fourier Transform to convert the Fourier Transform vector into waveforms.

At step the frames of digital values are applied to a feature extractor. Under one embodiment the feature extractor is an LPC cepstra feature extractor that identifies LPC coefficients that describe the digital values in the frame and then converts the LPC coefficients into cepstral values. Such feature extractors are well known in the art.

The features produced by feature extractor are provided to an Extended Kalman Filter algorithm which uses the features to identify VTRs for the frame.

To do this the hidden vocal tract resonance frequencies and bandwidths are modeled as a sequence of hidden states that each produces an observation. In one particular embodiment the hidden vocal tract resonance frequencies and bandwidths are modeled using a state equation of Eq. 1 and an observation equation of Eq. 2 where xis a hidden vocal tract resonance vector at time t consisting of x f f f f b b b b xis a hidden vocal tract resonance vector at a previous time t 1 is a system matrix I is the identity matrix u is a target vector for the vocal tract resonance frequencies and bandwidths wis noise in the state equation ois an observed vector C x is a mapping function from the hidden vocal tract resonance vector to an observation vector is a residual between the mapping function and the observation and vis the noise in the observation. Under one embodiment is a diagonal matrix with each entry having a value between 0.7 and 0.9 that has been empirically determined and u is a vector which in one embodiment has a value of 500 1500 2500 3500 200 300 400 400 

Under this embodiment the noise parameters wand vhave values determined by random Gaussian samples with a zero mean vector and with diagonal covariance matrices. The diagonal elements of these matrices in this embodiment have values between 10 and 30 000 for wt and values between 0.8 and 78 for vt.

Under one embodiment the observed vector is a Linear Predictive Coding Cepstra LPC cepstra vector where each component of the vector represents an LPC order. As a result the mapping function C x can be determined precisely by an analytical nonlinear function. The nth component of the vector valued function C x for frame t is 

To identify a sequence of hidden vocal tract resonance vectors from a sequence of observation vectors the present invention uses an Extended Kalman filter. An Extended Kalman filter provides a recursive technique that can determine a best estimate of the continuous valued hidden vocal tract resonance vectors in the non linear dynamic system represented by Equations 1 and 2. Such Extended Kalman filters are well known in the art.

The Extended Kalman filter requires that the right hand side of Equations 1 and 2 be linear with respect to the hidden vocal tract resonance vector. However the mapping function of Equation 3 is non linear with respect to the vocal tract resonance vector. To address this the present invention uses a piecewise linear approximation in place of the non linear term. Under one embodiment each cycle of the sinusoid in each of the P 4 terms of Equation 3 is divided into ten non uniform regions over the frequency axis. For example for the first order cepstrum consisting of only half a cycle of a sinusoid five regions are predefined and as many as 75 regions are used for the I 15 order cepstrum.

In this form as long as the parameters are fixed based on the regions of the segment an Extended Kalman Filter is applied directly to obtain the sequence of continuous valued states xfrom a sequence of observed LPC cepstral feature vectors o.

In step the model parameters for the state equation and the observation equation are initialized. In particular parameters u and and the covariance of the noise wand vare initialized in step . Under one embodiment the target VTRs u are empirically set as a phone independent values that represent roughly the mean VTR values across all phones. Under one particular embodiment u 500 Hz 1500 Hz 2500 Hz 3600 Hz 100 Hz 150 Hz 200 Hz 250 Hz . The system matrix is set as a diagonal matrix with each diagonal element being fixed at 0.6. The variances for the noise w which is designated as Q is assumed to be a diagonal matrix and is initialized by taking sample variances component by component based on the difference between formants identified by an existing formant tracker on a training speech sample and the formants predicted by the model of equation 1. The variance for the noise v which is designated as R is also assumed to be a diagonal matrix and is initialized by taking the determining the residual component by component by taking the difference between the LCP cepstra determined from a training speech sample and one predicted by equations 1 and 2.

After the model parameters have been initialized a frame is selected at step and a prediction step of the Extended Kalman filter is run at step to produce initial VTRs for the frame. This involves computing the following values EQ. 13 EQ. 14 where Pis zero and Q is the covariance of the noise win the state model.

Using the initial VTR linear regions r in the piecewise linear approximation to the mapping function are identified at step . At step the linear parameters Aand dare determined using equations 9 10 and 11 above.

Once the parameters have been determined the Extended Kalman Gain and correction are calculated at step to provide a refined estimate of the VTR for the frame based on the observation. Specifically the following calculations are made EQ. 15 EQ. 16 EQ. 17 where Kis the Extended Kalman gain equation 16 is the Extended Kalman correction which provides the refined VTR ois the observed LPC cepstra from the alternative sensor signal R is the covariance of the noise term v and I is the identity matrix.

After step the process determines if there are more frames of the alternative sensor signal at step . If there are more frames the process returns to step to select the next frame and steps through are performed for the next frame.

When all of the frames have been processed at step Extended Kalman smoothing is performed on the sequence of frames at step .

After step a sequence of VTRs has been produced. At step the sequence of VTRs is converted into LPC cepstra using equation 3 above. The calculated LPC cepstra are then subtracted from the observed LPC cepstra of the alternative sensor signal to form a set of residuals at step . The residuals are grouped using K mean clustering to form M classes at step . At step the mean of each class is used to update the value of residual p and the variance of each class is determined and is used to update the variance of the noise term v which is denoted as R. Separate values for the residual and variance terms are identified for each class and are associated with the frames assigned to those classes.

At step the process determines if additional iterations should be performed to refine the estimates of the VTRs. If more iterations are desired the process returns to step to select the first frame. During the next iteration the values for the residual and the variance R determined at step are used based on the association between the frame and the class.

When sufficient iterations have been performed Extended Kalman filter process of is complete. At step of the sequence of VTRs produced by the Extended Kalman filter are smoothed using a 1 2 1 kernal across time which generates a VTR vector for a current frame by averaging across the preceding frame the current frame and the following frame while applying twice the weight to the current frame as to the two neighboring frames.

At step the smoothed VTRs are converted into the cepstral domain using equations 2 and 3 above. At step the cepstra values are converted into the complex spectral domain using the following equation square root over EQ. 18 where M and C are the mel and discrete cosine transform filters respectively B and circumflex over B are the complex spectra of the alternative sensor signal and the synthesized alternative sensor signal respectively and Band circumflex over B are the mel cepsta of the alternative sensor signal and the synthesized alternative sensor signal respectively. The mel cepstra are formed by applying the mel filter to the LPC cepstra formed in step and to the LPC cepstra of the observed alternative sensor signal produced by feature extractor .

In another embodiment the synthesized alternative sensor signal is formed by fusing VTRs from the alternative sensor signal with VTRs from the air conduction microphone. In such an embodiment the VTRs for the alternative signal are determined as described above. VTRs for the air conduction microphone are determined in a similar manner using air conduction microphone signal instead of alternative sensor signal in the method described above.

The VTRs from the air conduction microphone signal and the VTRs from the alternative sensor signal are combined as 1 EQ. 19

where VTRis the combined VTR vector for a frame VTRis the VTR vector identified from the alternative sensor signal VTRis the VTR vector identified from the air conduction signal is a weighting parameter and J is a mapping from VTRs for the air conduction microphone to VTRs for the alternative sensor where the mapping is trained on VTRs identified for both channels from a same speech signal.

The combined VTRs are then converted into the cepstral domain using equations 2 and 3 above. The cepstra values are then converted into the complex spectral domain using equation above with the cepstral values formed from the combined VTRs used as circumflex over B . This produces the complex spectra for the synthesized alternative sensor signal.

The complex spectral domain values for the synthesized alternative signal alternative sensor signal B and air conduction microphone signal Y are provided to a clean signal estimator which estimates a clean signal . Within clean signal estimator alternative sensor signal and microphone signal are converted into the complex spectral domain. As shown in alternative sensor signal and air conduction microphone signal are provided to analog to digital converters and respectively to generate a sequence of digital values which are grouped into frames of values by frame constructors and respectively. In one embodiment A to D converters and sample the analog signals at 16 kHz and 16 bits per sample thereby creating 32 kilobytes of speech data per second and frame constructors and create a new respective frame every 10 milliseconds that includes 20 milliseconds worth of data.

Each respective frame of data provided by frame constructors and is converted into the complex spectral domain using Fast Fourier Transforms FFT and respectively.

The complex spectral domain values for the alternative sensor signal the air conduction microphone signal and the synthesized alternative sensor signal are provided to clean signal estimator which uses the values to estimate clean speech signal .

Under one embodiment the clean speech signal is estimated by fusing the alternative sensor signal the air conduction microphone signal and the synthesized alternative sensor using the following equation 

The variances of the noise terms for the air conduction microphone and the alternative sensor signal and are determined from frames that do not include speech.

To identify frames where the user is not speaking the alternative sensor signal can be examined. Since the alternative sensor signal will produce much smaller signal values for background speech than for noise when the energy of the alternative sensor signal is low it can be assumed that the speaker is not speaking. The values of the air conduction microphone signal and the alternative sensor signal for frames that do not contain speech are stored in a buffer and are used to compute variance of the noise in the alternative sensor signal as 

The variance of the noise for the air conduction microphone is estimated based on the observation that the air conduction microphone is less prone to sensor noise than the alternative sensor. As such the variance of the air conduction microphone can be calculated as 0.0001 EQ. 22

The variance for the noise for the synthesized alternative signal is not determined directly from the synthesized alternative signal because the process of forming the synthesized alternative signal removes most noise from the signal. To avoid having a value of zero for the variance of the noise in the alternative sensor signal which would provide a zero weight to the air conduction microphone signal and the alternative sensor signal in equation 20 one embodiment sets the noise of the synthesized alternative sensor signal equal to the noise of the alternative sensor signal such that .

The alternative sensor signal s channel distortion H is estimated from the air conduction microphone signal Yand of the alternative sensor signal Bacross the last T frames in which the user is speaking. Specifically His determined as 

The synthesized alternative sensor signal s channel distortion G is estimated in a manner similar to H such that 

In an alternative embodiment the synthesized alternative sensor signal s channel distortion is estimated based on the channel distortion of the alternative sensor signal and the channel distortion between the alternative sensor signal and the synthesized alternative sensor signal such that G HG EQ. 26 where Gis determined as 

At step frames of an input utterance are identified where the user is not speaking. These frames are then used to determine the variance for the ambient noise the variance for the alternative sensor noise and the variance for the air conduction microphone noise and the variance for the noise of the synthesized alternative sensor signal .

At step the channel distortion for the alternative sensor is determined using equation 23 above and at step the channel distortion for the synthesized alternative sensor is determined using either equation 25 or equation 27 above. The clean signal estimate is then formed at step using fusion equation 20 above.

Although the present invention has been described with reference to particular embodiments workers skilled in the art will recognize that changes may be made in form and detail without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

