---

title: Quad shaft contrarotating homopolar motor
abstract: A homopolar motor features radially inner and outer pairs of axially aligned rotor drums to which axially aligned drive shafts are respectively connected and extend therefrom through an outer motor housing to drive a corresponding number of propellers located in axial spaced relation to each other outside of the housing for rotation about a common axis. A magnetic shield is fixedly mounted within the housing to enclose the rotor drums within a magnetic field established by disk and ring magnets positioned within the radially inner pair of the rotor drums. Current collector brushes maintain electrical contact between the rotor drums and a source of DC electrical energy supplied through a power input tube to the magnetic shield from a location between opposite axial ends of the housing. The drive shafts journaled within the housing extend from either opposite axial ends of the housing or from only one axial end of the housing to the propellers.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07026738&OS=07026738&RS=07026738
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07026738
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050113
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

The present invention relates generally to a homopolar type electric motor having four propeller drive shafts.

Homopolar motors and machines are generally known in the art as referred to for example in U.S. Pat. No. 6 628 036 B1 issued Sep. 30 2003. Such homopolar motors produce differential DC torque within a uniform magnetic field. It is an important object of the present invention to provide a single relatively small homopolar type motor through which two sets of contrarotating drive shafts are provided.

Pursuant to the present invention two pairs of coaxial contrarotating drive shafts of a homopolar motor are respectively connected to a pair of axially aligned outer rotor drums and a pair of axially aligned inner rotor drums within the outer drums. The rotor drums are positioned by bearings within a dipole magnetic field established within an outer shield fixed to the motor housing into which DC electrical current is conducted by wiring connected to annular conductors. The magnetic field is established by neodymium iron permanent magnets centrally positioned by bearings within the inner rotor drums. Toroidal current collector brush devices maintain electrical contact between the annular conductors and between the two pair of drums for electrically powered drive of the four drive shafts to which propellers may be connected outside of the motor housing either at opposite axial ends thereof or at one axial end thereof.

Referring now to the drawing in detail illustrate a podded propulsor application of a homopolar type of electric motor having an outer pod housing formed by an axially intermediate cylindrical section from which a pair of curved shaped end sections extend axially in opposite directions about a common axis . According to one embodiment a pair of concentric power driven shafts and project from each of the two axial end sections of the pod housing with propellers and respectively attached to the shafts and at their axial ends for rotation about the axis in close axially spaced relation to each other as shown in . Accordingly the motor features a power driven symmetrical dipole field arrangement through which the shafts and extend at the opposite axial ends of the pod housing . Electrical energy for simultaneous powered drive of the motor shafts and respectively in opposite rotational directions about the axis is supplied to the motor as hereinafter explained through a power input tube extending laterally from the intermediate section of the housing at a right angle hereto.

With continued reference to the two pairs of contrarotating power shafts and are configured as part of a push pull podded type of propulsor. The pod housing serves primarily as a hydrodynamic shell as shown in . An inner shell is positioned within the outer pod housing to provide additional bearing support and structure. The motor includes a centrally located magnetic field establishing disk magnet made of neodymium iron positioned in the center of a ferromagnetic core with a pair of anisotropic radial ring type of Neodymium iron magnets positioned thereon. An optional field winding is also shown positioned between the magnets enclosed between a pair of radially inner cylindrical rotor drums in axial alignment with each other to which the two inner shafts are respectively connected and extend axially therefrom in opposite directions toward the two propellers . The rotor drums are respectively supported for rotation relative to the radial ring magnet by bearings and are in electrical contact with each other through toroidal current collector brush devices which may be made of fibers of a suitable metal such as silver by way of example. A pair of radially outer rotor drums are positioned in axial alignment with each other about the radially inner rotor drums for rotation independently thereof under rotational support thereon by bearings . The two outer tubular drive shafts are respectively connected to the outer rotor drums which are in electrical contact with each other through toroidal current collector brush devices . The rotor drums and with the magnets and therein are enclosed within an outer magnetic flux shield portion of the outer housing which may serve as an additional magnetic shield if made of steel. A pair of closely spaced annular conductors and are fixedly mounted internally on the flux shield portion of the housing from which wiring extends through the power input tube to positive and negative terminals and of a DC electric power source as diagrammed in . Electrical current is according conducted into and out of the outer rotor drums through toroidal current collector brush devices and respectively associated with the annular conductors and .

It will be apparent from the foregoing description that electrical energy in the form of DC current will enter the motor through the conductor and the brush devices into the outer rotor drums for rotation of the propellers through the tubular drive shafts . The electrical current is simultaneously conducted through the brush devices into the inner rotor drums for counterrotation of the propellers by the inner drive shafts . Such rotation of the two pairs of propellers and is well suited for use in four wheel drive vehicles for marine propulsion for electric aircraft or for equipment heretofore utilizing multiple electric motors.

According to another embodiment as shown in a homopolar motor generally similar to the motor hereinbefore described has an outer housing closed at one axial end. The power input tube extends laterally from the housing . Powered drive is effected by a tractor pod propulsor motor for all four propeller drive shafts and extending axially therefrom in one axial direction from an open end of the outer housing .

According to other embodiments the brush devices may be sealingly covered with solid liquid or gas additives thereabout. The brush devices may furthermore consist of a continuous ring of fibers or axially assembled brush elements. While the motor as hereinbefore described features one pair of motor drive shafts and connected to opposite axial ends of the one pair of rotor drums and any other number of rotor drum pairs and corresponding number of pairs of motor drive shafts connected thereto may be utilized pursuant to the present invention. Furthermore each of the rotor drums may be formed by any number of electrically insulated conductive cylinders providing additional electrical turns with an additional corresponding number of current collectors. Such multi turn rotor arrangement will provide for a high voltage motor. Also the field winding between the ring magnets may be eliminated and the core radially enlarged along opposite end portions thereof to replace the ring magnets positioned thereon. As to the fiber type of current collector brush devices hereinbefore described they may be replaced by other suitable types of current collector devices which include foils or liquid metal.

Obviously still other modifications and variations of the present invention may be possible in light of the foregoing teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described.

