---

title: Selective estrogen receptor modulators
abstract: 

or any other of the structures contained herein, or of a stereoisomer, enantiomer, rotomer, tautomer or pharmaceutically acceptable salt form thereof.

url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07687486&OS=07687486&RS=07687486
owner: Florida Agricultural & Mechanical University
number: 07687486
owner_city: Tallahassee
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050305
---
This is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 835 312 now abandoned filed in the name of John S. Cooperwood on Apr. 28 2004 which claims the benefit of provisional patent application No. 60 466 521 filed Apr. 29 2003. The entire disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

This invention was supported with United States government funding through the National Institutes of Health Grant No. RR0320 18 ARC.

The present invention relates to compounds that have biological activity with respect to estrogen receptors. The invention also relates to the use of such compounds to treat diseases and disorders related to estrogen receptor activity. More particularly the present invention provides selective estrogen receptor modulators SERMs for use for example in treating mammalian cancers. The present invention therefore relates to the fields of medicine medicinal chemistry biochemistry and endocrinology.

Estrogen is a hormone critical to normal human development and function. Although estrogen is the predominant sex hormone in women in whom estrogen controls the development of female sex characteristics and the development and function of the reproductive system Berkow Beers et al. 1997 it is also found in men Gustafsson 1998 . Women produce estrogen primarily in the ovaries however estrogen affects a variety of physiological functions in women including body temperature regulation maintenance of the vaginal lining and preservation of bone density Jordan 1998 . In addition estrogen provides additional effects that are related to its ability to modulate production of cholesterol in the liver as demonstrated by the reduced occurrence of atherosclerosis in women compared to men due in part to the reduction of low density lipoprotein LDL Jordan 1998 . Estrogen has also been implicated in delaying and or reducing the severity of Alzheimer s Disease Jordan 1998 .

Failure to produce estrogen has profound physiological consequences in females. Failure to produce estrogen resulting from incomplete or absent ovary development Turner s Syndrome causes deficiencies in the skin bone e.g. severe osteoporosis and other organs severely affecting the life of the afflicted individual Dodge 1995 . In normal women estrogen production falls sharply upon the onset of menopause usually at about 50 years of age. The effects of the loss of estrogen production include increased atherosclerotic deposits leading to an increased incidence of heart disease decreased bone density osteoporosis and fluctuations in body temperature Jordan 1998 . Often the effects of reduced estrogen production are addressed by hormone replacement therapy Dodge 1995 Berkow Beers et al. 1997 Jordan 1998 .

However estrogen also has some undesirable side effects. In menopausal women supplementation of estrogen is associated with alleviation of the above described unwanted indications. But administration of estrogen is also associated with increased risks for breast and endometrial cancer as well as blood clots Jordan 1998 . The increased risk of endometrial cancer can be addressed by the administration of progesterone or its synthetic analog progestin to re initiate menstruation and thereby shed potentially malignant cells but many older women find this undesirable Jordan 1998 . Breast cancer however is by far the greater risk of estrogen replacement therapy affecting one woman in every 15 between the ages of 60 and 79 Jordan 1998 .

Estrogen has also been shown to function as a mitogen in estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cells. Thus treatment regiments which include antiestrogens synthetic compounds which oppose the actions of estrogen have been effective clinically in halting or delaying the progression of the disease Jordan and Murphy Endocrine Reviews 11 578 610 1990 Parker Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 26 131 137 1993 . The availability of these synthetic estrogen receptor modulators and subsequent dissection of their mechanism s of action have provided useful insights into estrogen receptor action.

The human estrogen receptor is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily of transcription factors Evans Science 240 889 895 1988 . In the absence of the hormone it resides in the nucleus of target cells in a transcriptionally inactive state. Upon binding ligand the estrogen receptor undergoes a conformational change initiating a cascade of events leading ultimately to its association with specific regulatory regions within target genes O Malley et al. Hormone Research 47 1 26 1991 . The ensuing effect on transcription is influenced by the cell and promoter context of the DNA bound receptor Tora et al. Cell 59 471 487 1989 Tasset et al. Cell 62 1177 1181 1990 McDonnell et all Mol. Endocrinol. 9 659 669 1995 Tzukerman et al. Mol. Endocrinol. 8 21 30 1994 . It is in this manner that the physiological estrogen receptor agonist estradiol exerts its biological activity in the reproductive skeletal and cardiovascular systems Clark and Peck Female Sex Steroids Receptors and Function eds Monographs Springer Verlag New York 1979 Chow et al. J. Clin. Invest. 89 74 78 1992 Eaker et al. Circulation 88 1999 2009 1993 .

Thus for a long time the treatment options for the serious health problems caused by a failure to produce estrogen were limited and entailed severe risks. However the discovery that some agents acted as estrogen agonists in some tissues e.g. bone and as an antagonists in other tissues e.g. breast provided hope that more effective treatments for estrogen loss could be found Gradishar and Jordan 1997 Gustafsson 1998 Jordan 1998 MacGregor and Jordan 1998 .

Currently the SERM s consist of two main chemical classes the triphenylethylene derivatives and benzothiophene derivatives. SERM s approved by the Food and Drug Administration FDA and used in the treatment of breast cancer are tamoxifen and toremifene. Another SERM raloxifene is currently approved by the FDA for osteoporosis. Tamoxifen has been associated with endometrial cancer due to its estrogenic activity within the uterus while raloxifene lacks estrogenic activity within the uterus. However tamoxifen has been associated with endometrial cancer and venous blood clots Jordan 1998 MacGregor and Jordan 1998 . In addition tumor resistance to tamoxifen can occur MacGregor and Jordan 1998 .

It is apparent that there is a need to find a SERM with antiestrogenic activity and minimal side effects.

The best known of these so called Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators SERMs tamoxifen has been demonstrated to have therapeutic utility in treating and preventing breast cancer and lowering LDL concentrations yet without significant reduction in bone density Jordan 1998 MacGregor and Jordan 1998 .

Estrogen is thought to be involved in the triggering of breast cancer as well as other cancers due to improper or excessive signaling. Tamoxifen as well as other SERMs are believed to block this triggering affect of estrogen. Over the years tamoxifen has become the agent of choice in the treatment of all stages of breast cancer. Tamoxifen has provided an effective treatment against Estrogen receptor positive breast cancers. Clinical trials have shown that tamoxifen when used as an adjuvant therapy can increase the survival rate of women with estrogen receptor positive tumors and in women whose estrogen receptor status is not known. Nevertheless tamoxifen is associated with serious side effects such as thromboembolic events negative vasomotor symptoms and an increased risk of endometrial cancer and cataracts.

Tamoxifen has been followed recently by newer SERMs in particular raloxifene that promise to provide many of tamoxifen s benefits with fewer risks Howell Downey et al. 1996 Gradishar and Jordan 1997 Gustafsson 1998 Jordan 1998 Purdie 1999 Sato Grese et al. 1999 . These newer SERMs including idoxifene Nuttall Bradbeer et al. 1998 CP 336 156 Ke Paralkar et al. 1998 GW5638 Willson Norris et al. 1997 LY353581 Sato Turner et al. 1998 are part of the second and third generation of partial estrogen agonists antagonists. In addition a new generation of pure antiestrogens such as RU 58 688 Van de Velde Nique et al. 1994 have been reported. A large number of additional partial and pure estrogen agonist antagonist compounds and treatment modalities have reported Bryant and Dodge 1995 Bryant and Dodge 1995 Cullinan 1995 Dodge 1995 Grese 1995 Labrie and Merand 1995 Labrie and Merand 1995 Thompson 1995 Audia and Neubauer 1996 Black Bryant et al. 1996 Thompson 1996 Cullinan 1997 Wilson 1997 Miller Collini et al. 1999 Palkowitz 1999 Wilson 1999 .

One embodiment of the present invention comprises a method of using aminoalkyloxy derivatives of 1 3 5 10 Estratrien steroids as selective estrogen receptor modulators in the treatment of mammalian cancers. These compounds consist of various aminoalkyloxy derivatives of 1 3 5 10 Estratrien steroids and are used for example as agents in the treatment of cancer in mammals. Selective estrogen receptor modulators SERMs are comprised of a group of compounds that act as estrogen receptor agonists in some tissues and as estrogen receptor antagonists in others. SERMs may interact with receptors for example by diffusing into the cell and binding to estrogen receptor subunits or . During this process there is a conformational change to the receptors which results in dimerization. It is this dimerization of receptors that facilitates binding to the promoter regions on DNA. The conformational change of receptors particularly the position of helix 12 dictates whether the SERM is agonist or antagonist causing activation or suppression of estrogen target genes.

Toremifene is another FDA approved SERM used in the treatment of advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women. Toremifene s efficacy is very similar to that of tamoxifen against estrogen positive metastatic breast cancer. In a worldwide phase III multi center clinical trial comparing toremifene with tamoxifen results indicated that the two drugs had very similar response rates of 44 for tamoxifen 20 mg day while the response rates for toremifene were 50 and 48 at 60 and 200 mg day respectively. These results indicated that both drugs have similar efficacy in treating advanced breast cancer. As with tamoxifen toremifene has also been studied as an adjuvant therapy. In this multi center clinical trial toremifene was not found to exhibit a statistically significant reduction in the recurrence of breast cancer. Surprisingly toremifene has been associated with fewer side effects in comparison with tamoxifen. This advantage may be pivotal in the approval by the FDA as an adjuvant therapeutic treatment for breast cancer. Raloxifene is a SERM approved by the FDA in treatment and prevention of osteoporosis. Raloxifene has estrogen antagonist activity in breast tissue. Unfortunately preclincal studies indicated that it has no advantage over tamoxifen in treating postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer. In an addition raloxifene is not effective against tamoxifen resistant breast cancer. But it is still being considered as a prophylactic therapy against cancer in high risk women. Based upon the in vitro studies the aminoalkyloxy derivatives of 1 3 5 10 Estratrien steroids are effective at inhibiting the growth of cancer cells. Particularly these derivatives are effective at inhibiting the growth of breast cancer cells such as MCF 7 cells. These same compounds may be effective against endometrial cancer cells.

Embodiments of the present invention provide aminoalkyloxy estrogen receptor agonist and antagonist compounds in addition to methods and compositions for treating or preventing estrogen receptor mediated disorders. The compounds described herein have been found to have unexpected and surprising activity in modulating estrogen receptor activity. Thus the compounds of the present invention may have utility in preventing or treating estrogen receptor mediated disorders such as for example breast cancer osteoporosis endometrial cancers atherosclerosis menopause premenstrual syndrome and Alzheimer s disease.

In yet another aspect embodiments of the present invention provide methods for treating or preventing an estrogen receptor mediated disorders in a mammalian subject in which an amount of an estrogen receptor modulating compound of the invention that is effective to modulate estrogen receptor activity in the subject is administered. Other embodiments provide methods for treating a cell or an estrogen receptor mediated disorder in a human or animal subject comprising administering to the cell or to the human or animal subject an amount of a compound or composition of the invention embodiments effective to modulate estrogen receptor activity in the cell or subject. Representative estrogen receptor mediated disorders include for example osteoporosis atherosclerosis estrogen mediated cancers such as for example breast and endometrial cancer and Alzheimer s disease.

These and other aspects and advantages will become apparent when the description below is read in conjunction with the accompanying examples and claims.

 Estrogen Receptor as defined herein refers to any protein in the nuclear receptor gene family that binds estrogen including but not limited to any isoforms or deletion mutations having the characteristics just described. More particularly the present invention relates to estrogen receptor s for human and non human mammals. Human estrogen receptors included in the present invention include the alpha and beta isoforms referred to herein as estrogen receptor alpha. and estrogen receptor beta. in addition to any additional isoforms as recognized by those of skill in the biochemistry arts.

 Estrogen Receptor Modulator refers herein to a compound that can act as an inhibitor estrogen receptor alpha enriched breast cancer cells having an ICor ECof no more than about 50 muM as determined using the estrogen receptor alpha enriched breast cancers proliferation assay described herein below. Representative compounds of the present invention have been discovered to exhibit antagonist activity via. estrogen receptor alpha enriched breast cancer cells. Compounds of the present invention specifically exhibit an antagonist ICor ECwith respect to estrogen receptor alpha enriched breast cancer cells of no more than about 50.mu.M IC is that concentration of inhibitor at which 50 percent of growth or inhibition of a target such as for example estrogen receptor alpha enriched breast cancer cells. The term MCF 7 cells as used herein relates to estrogen receptor alpha enriched breast cancer cells taken from patients.

A Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulator or SERM is a compound that exhibits activity as an agonist or antagonist of an estrogen receptor e.g. estrogen receptor alpha or estrogen receptor beta in a tissue dependent manner. Thus as will be apparent to those of skill in the biochemistry and endocrinology arts compounds of the invention that function as SERMs can act as estrogen receptor agonists in some tissues such as for example bone brain and or heart and as antagonists in other tissue types such as for example the breast and or the uterine lining.

 Optionally substituted refers to the replacement of hydrogen with a monovalent or divalent radical. Suitable substitution groups include for example hydroxyl nitro amino imino cyano halo thio thioamido amidino oxo oximino oxamidino methoxamidino imidino guanidino sulfonamido carboxyl formyl lower alkyl halo lower alkyl lower alkoxy halo lower alkoxy lower alkoxyalkyl alkylcarbonyl arylcarbonyl aralkylcarbonyl heteroarylcarbonyl heteroaralkylcarbonyl alkylthio aminoalkyl cyanoalkyl and the like. The substitution group can itself be substituted. The group substituted onto the substitution group can be for example carboxyl halo nitro amino cyano hydroxyl lower alkyl lower alkoxy aminocarbonyl SR thioamido SOH SOR or cycloalkyl where R is typically hydrogen hydroxyl or lower alkyl. When the substituted substituent includes a straight chain group the substitution can occur either within the chain e.g. 2 hydroxypropyl 2 aminobutyl and the like or at the chain terminus such as for example 2 hydroxyethyl 3 cyanopropyl and the like. Substituted substitutents can be straight chain branched or cyclic arrangements of covalently bonded carbon or heteroatoms.

Alkyl lower alkyl and Related Terms Lower alkyl as used herein refers to branched or straight chain alkyl groups comprising one to ten carbon atoms that independently are unsubstituted or substituted e.g. with one or more halogen hydroxyl or other groups. Examples of lower alkyl groups include but are not limited to methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl n butyl t butyl n hexyl neopentyl trifluoromethyl pentafluoroethyl and the like.

 Alkylenyl refers to a divalent straight chain or branched chain saturated aliphatic radical having from 1 to 20 carbon atoms. Typical alkylenyl groups employed in compounds of the present invention are lower alkylenyl groups that have from 1 to about 6 carbon atoms in their backbone. Alkenyl refers herein to straight chain branched or cyclic radicals having one or more double bonds and from 2 to 20 carbon atoms. Alkynyl refers herein to straight chain branched or cyclic radicals having one or more triple bonds and from 2 to 20 carbon atoms.

 Lower alkoxy as used herein refers to RO wherein R is lower alkyl. Representative examples of lower alkoxy groups include methoxy ethoxy t butoxy trifluoromethoxy and the like.

The term alkoxyalkyl refers to the group alk O alkwhere alkis alkylenyl or alkenyl and alkis alkyl or alkenyl. The term lower alkoxyalkyl refers to an alkoxyalkyl where alkis lower alkylenyl or lower alkenyl and alkis lower alkyl or lower alkenyl. The term aryloxyalkyl refers to the group alkylenyl O aryl. The term aralkoxyalkyl refers to the group alkylenyl O aralkyl where aralkyl is a lower aralkyl.

 Cycloalkyl refers to a mono or polycyclic lower alkyl substituent. Typical cycloalkyl substituents have from 3 to 8 backbone i.e. ring atoms in which each backbone atom is optionally substituted carbon. When used in context with cycloalkyl substituents the term polycyclic refers herein to fused non fused cyclic carbon structures and spirocycles. Examples of cycloalkyl groups include but are not limited to cyclopropyl cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl adamantyl bornyl norbornyl and the like.

The term cycloheteroalkyl refers herein to cycloalkyl substituents that have from 1 to 5 heteroatoms and more typically from 1 to 4 heteroatoms i.e. non carbon atoms such as nitrogen sulfur and oxygen in the ring structure with the balance of atoms in the ring being optionally substituted carbon. Representative heterocycloalkyl moieties include for example morpholino piperazinyl piperidinyl pyrrolidinyl methylpyrrolidinyl pyrrolidinonyl and the like.

The terms cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl refer to alkyl chains substituted with cycloalkyl and cycloheteroalkyl groups respectively.

The term haloalkoxy refers to an alkoxy radical substituted with one or more halogen atoms. The term halo lower alkoxy refers to a lower alkoxy radical substituted with one or more halogen atoms.

 Aryl refers to monocyclic and polycyclic aromatic groups or fused ring systems having at least one aromatic ring having from 3 to 14 backbone carbon atoms. Examples of aryl groups include without limitation phenyl naphthyl dihydronaphtyl tetrahydronaphthyl and the like.

 Aralkyl refers to an alkyl group substituted with an aryl group. Typically aralkyl groups employed in compounds of the present invention have from 1 to 6 carbon atoms incorporated within the alkyl portion of the aralkyl group. Suitable aralkyl groups employed in compounds of the present invention include for example benzyl picolyl and the like.

The term heteroaryl refers herein to aryl groups having from one to four heteroatoms as ring atoms in an aromatic ring with the remainder of the ring atoms being aromatic or non aromatic carbon atoms. When used in connection with aryl substituents the term polycyclic refers herein to fused and non fused cyclic structures in which at least one cyclic structure is aromatic such as for example benzodioxozolo naphthyl and the like. Exemplary heteroaryl moieties employed as substituents in compounds of the present invention include pyridyl pyrimidinyl thiazolyl indolyl imidazolyl oxadiazolyl tetrazolyl pyrazinyl triazolyl thiophenyl furanyl quinolinyl purinyl benzothiazolyl benzopyridyl and benzimidazolyl and the like.

 Amino refers herein to the group NH. The term lower alkylamino refers herein to the group NRR where R and R are each independently selected from hydrogen or loweralkyl. The term arylamino refers herein to the group NRR where R is aryl and R is hydrogen lower alkyl aryl or aralkyl. The term aralkylamino refers herein to the group NRR where R is aralkyl and R is hydrogen lower alkyl aryl or aralkyl. The terms heteroarylamino and heteroaralkylamino are defined by analogy to arylamino and aralkylamino.

The term aminocarbonyl refers herein to the group C O NH.sub.2. The terms lower alkylaminocarbonyl arylaminocarbonyl aralkylaminocarbonyl heteroarylaminocarbonyl and heteroaralkylaminocarbonyl refer to C O NRR where R and R independently are hydrogen and optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl aralkyl heteroaryl and heteroaralkyl respectively by analogy to the corresponding terms above.

The term thio refers to SH. The terms loweralkylthio arylthio heteroarylthio cycloalkylthio cycloheteroalkylthio aralkylthio heteroaralkylthio cycloalkyl alkylthio and cycloheteroalkyl alkylthio refer to SR where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively.

The term sulfonyl refers herein to the group SO . The terms lower alkylsulfonyl arylsulfonyl heteroarylsulfonyl cycloalkylsulfonyl cycloheteroalkylsulfonyl aralkylsulfonyl heteroaralkylsulfonyl cycloalkyl alkylsulfonyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkylsulfonyl refer to SOR where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively.

The term sulfinyl refers herein to the group SO . The terms lower alkylsulfinyl arylsulfinyl heteroarylsulfinyl cycloalkylsulfinyl cycloheteroalkylsulfinyl aralkylsulfinyl heteroaralkylsulfinyl cycloalkyl alkylsulfinyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkylsulfinyl refer to SOR where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively.

 Carbonyl refers to the divalent group C O . The terms lower alkylcarbonyl arylcarbonyl heteroarylcarbonyl cycloalkylcarbonyl cycloheteroalkylcarbonyl aralkycarbonyl heteroaralkylcarbonyl cycloalkyl alkylcarbonyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkylcarbonyl refer to C O R where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively.

 Thiocarbonyl refers to the group C S . The terms lower alkylthiocarbonyl arylthiocarbonyl heteroarylthiocarbonyl cycloalkylthiocarbonyl cycloheteroalkylthiocarbonyl aralkythiocarbonyloxithiocarbonyl heteroaralkylthiocarbonyl cycloalkyl alkylthiocarbonyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkylthiocarbonyl refer to C S R where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively.

 Carbonyloxy refers generally to the group C O O . The terms lower alkylcarbonyloxy arylcarbonyloxy heteroarylcarbonyloxy cycloalkylcarbonyloxy cycloheteroalkylcarbonyloxy aralkycarbonyloxy heteroaralkylcarbonyloxy cycloalkyl alkylcarbonyloxy cycloheteroalkyl alkylcarbonyloxy refer to C O OR where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively.

 Oxycarbonyl refers to the group O C O . The terms lower alkyloxycarbonyl aryloxycarbonyl heteroaryloxycarbonyl cycloalkyloxycarbonyl cycloheteroalkyloxycarbonyl aralkyoxycarbonyloxloxycarbonyl heteroaralkyloxycarbonyl cycloalkyl alkyloxycarbonyl cycloheteroalkyl alkyloxycarbonyl refer to O C O R where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively.

 Carbonylamino refers to the group NH C O . The terms lower alkylcarbonylamino arylcarbonylamino heteroarylcarbonylamino cycloalkylcarbonylamino cycloheteroalkylcarbonylamino aralkylcarbonylamino heteroaralkylcarbonylamino cycloalkyl alkylcarbonylamino and cycloheteroalkyl alkylcarbonylamino refer to NH C O R where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl or cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively. In addition the present invention includes N substituted carbonylamino NR C O R where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl aralkyl or heteroaralkyl and R retains the previous definition.

 Carbonylthio refers to the group C O S . The terms lower alkylcarbonylthio arylcarbonylthio heteroarylcarbonylthio cycloalkylcarbonylthio cycloheteroalkylcarbonylthio aralkycarbonylthio heteroaralkylcarbonylthio cycloalkyl alkylcarbonylthio cycloheteroalkyl alkylcarbonylthio refer to C O SR where R is optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl respectively.

As used herein the term guanidino or guanidyl refers to moieties derived from guanidine HN C .dbd.NH NH. Such moieties include those bonded at the nitrogen atom carrying the formal double bond the 2 position of the guanidine e.g. diaminomethyleneamino HN C.dbd.NH and those bonded at either of the nitrogen atoms carrying a formal single bond the 1 and or 3 positions of the guanidine e.g. HN C .dbd.NH NH . The hydrogen atoms at either nitrogen can be replaced with a suitable substituent such as loweralkyl aryl or loweraralkyl.

As used herein the term amidino refers to the moieties R C .dbd.N NR the radical being at the N nitrogen and R NR C.dbd.N the radical being at the N nitrogen where R and R can be hydrogen lower alkyl aryl or lower aralkyl.

The term imino refers to the group C .dbd.NR where R can be hydrogen or optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl or heteroaralkyl respectively. The terms lower iminoalkyl iminocycloalkyl iminocycloheteroalkyl iminoaralkyl iminoheteroaralkyl cycloalkyl iminoalkyl cycloiminoalkyl alkyl cycloiminoheteroalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl iminoalkyl refer to optionally substituted loweralkyl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl groups that include an imino group respectively.

The term oximino refers to the group C .dbd.NOR where R can be hydrogen hydroximino or optionally substituted lower alkyl aryl heteroaryl or heteroaralkyl respectively. The terms lower oximinoalkyl oximinocycloalkyl oximinocycloheteroalkyl oximinoaralkyl oximinoheteroaralkyl cycloalkyl oximinoalkyl cyclooximinoalkyl alkyl cyclooximinoheteroalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl oximinoalkyl refer to optionally substituted lower alkyl cycloalkyl cycloheteroalkyl aralkyl heteroaralkyl cycloalkyl alkyl and cycloheteroalkyl alkyl groups that include an oximino group respectively.

The term methylene as used herein refers to an unsubstituted monosubstituted or disubstituted carbon atom having a formal sphybridization i.e. CRR where R and R are hydrogen or independent substituents .

The term methine as used herein refers to an unsubstituted or carbon atom having a formal sphybridization i.e. CR.dbd. or .dbd.CR where R is hydrogen a substituent .

 Safe and effective amount as used herein refers to an amount that effective enough to inhibit cancer cell growth in mammals and more particularly in humans without severe side effects.

The term pharmaceutical carrier means one or more compatible solid or liquid filler diluents or encapsulating substances which are suitable for administration to mammals.

As used herein the term heterocycle or heterocyclic system is intended to mean a stable 5 to 7 membered monocyclic or bicyclic or 7 to 10 membered bicyclic heterocyclic ring which is saturated partially unsaturated or unsaturated aromatic and which consists of carbon atoms and from 1 to 4 heteroatoms independently selected from the group consisting of N O and S and including any bicyclic group in which any of the above defined heterocyclic rings is fused to a benzene ring. The nitrogen and sulfur heteroatoms may optionally be oxidized. The heterocyclic ring may be attached to its pendant group at any heteroatom or carbon atom which results in a stable structure. The heterocyclic rings described herein may be substituted on carbon or on a nitrogen atom if the resulting compound is stable. If specifically noted nitrogen in the heterocycle may optionally be quaternized. In particular embodiments when the total number of S and O atoms in the heterocycle exceeds 1 then these heteroatoms are not adjacent to one another. In specific embodiments the total number of S and O atoms in the heterocycle is not greater than 1. As used herein the term aromatic heterocyclic system is intended to mean a stable 5 to 7 membered monocyclic or bicyclic or 7 to 10 membered bicyclic heterocyclic aromatic ring which consists of carbon atoms and from 1 to 4 heterotams independently selected from the group consisting of N O and S. In even more specific embodiments the total number of S and O atoms in the aromatic heterocycle is not more than 1.

Examples of heterocycles include but are not limited to 1H indazole 2 pyrrolidonyl 2H 6H 1 5 2 dithiazinyl 2H pyrrolyl 3H indolyl 4 piperidonyl 4aH carbazole 4H quinolizinyl 6H 1 2 5 thiadiazinyl acridinyl azocinyl benzimidazolyl benzofuranyl benzothiofuranyl benzothiophenyl benzoxazolyl benzthiazolyl benztriazolyl benztetrazolyl benzisoxazolyl benzisothiazolyl benzimidazalonyl carbazolyl 4aH carbazolyl b carbolinyl chromanyl chromenyl cinnolinyl decahydroquinolinyl 2H 6H 1 5 2 dithiazinyl dihydrofuro 2 3 b tetrahydrofuran furanyl furazanyl imidazolidinyl imidazolinyl imidazolyl 1H indazolyl indolenyl indolinyl indolizinyl indolyl isobenzofuranyl isochromanyl isoindazolyl isoindolinyl isoindolyl isoquinolinyl isothiazolyl isoxazolyl morpholinyl naphthyridinyl octahydroisoquinolinyl oxadiazolyl 1 2 3 oxadiazolyl 1 2 4 oxadiazolyl 1 2 5 oxadiazolyl 1 3 4 oxadiazolyl oxazolidinyl oxazolyl oxazolidinylperimidinyl phenanthridinyl phenanthrolinyl phenarsazinyl phenazinyl phenothiazinyl phenoxathiinyl phenoxazinyl phthalazinyl piperazinyl piperidinyl pteridinyl piperidonyl 4 piperidonyl pteridinyl purinyl pyranyl pyrazinyl pyrazolidinyl pyrazolinyl pyrazolyl pyridazinyl pyridooxazole pyridoimidazole pyridothiazole pyridinyl pyridyl pyrimidinyl pyrrolidinyl pyrrolinyl pyrrolyl quinazolinyl quinolinyl 4H quinolizinyl quinoxalinyl quinuclidinyl carbolinyl tetrahydrofuranyl tetrahydroisoquinolinyl tetrahydroquinolinyl 6H 1 2 5 thiadiazinyl 1 2 3 thiadiazolyl 1 2 4 thiadiazolyl 1 2 5 thiadiazolyl 1 3 4 thiadiazolyl thianthrenyl thiazolyl thienyl thienothiazolyl thienooxazolyl thienoimidazolyl thiophenyl triazinyl 1 2 3 triazolyl 1 2 4 triazolyl 1 2 5 triazolyl 1 3 4 triazolyl xanthenyl. More particular heterocycles include but are not limited to pyridinyl furanyl thienyl pyrrolyl pyrazolyl imidazolyl indolyl benzimidazolyl 1H indazolyl oxazolidinyl benzotriazolyl benzisoxazolyl oxindolyl benzoxazolinyl or isatinoyl. Also included are fused ring and spiro compounds containing for example the above heterocycles.

The term heteroaryl as used herein refers to a 5 membered or 6 membered heterocyclic aromatic group that can optionally carry a fused benzene ring and that can be unsubstituted or substituted.

The terms linear and cyclic heteroalkyl are defined in accordance with the term alkyl with the suitable replacement of carbon atoms with some other atom such as nitrogen or sulfur which would render a chemically stable species.

As used herein pharmaceutically acceptable salts refer to derivatives of the disclosed compounds wherein the parent compound is modified by making acid or base salts thereof. Examples of pharmaceutically acceptable salts include but are not limited to mineral or organic acid salts of basic residues such as amines alkali or organic salts of acidic residues such as carboxylic acids and the like. The pharmaceutically acceptable salts include the conventional non toxic salts or the quaternary ammonium salts of the parent compound formed for example from non toxic inorganic or organic acids. For example such conventional non toxic salts include those derived from inorganic acids such as hydrochloric hydrobromic sulfuric sulfamic phosphoric nitric and the like and the salts prepared from organic acids such as acetic propionic succinic glycolic stearic meglumine lysine lactic malic tartaric citric ascorbic palmoic maleic hydroxymaleic phenylacetic glutamic benzoic salicylic sulfanilic 2 acetoxybenzoic fumaric toluenesulfonic methanesulfonic ethane disulfonic oxalic isethionic and the like.

The pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the present invention may be synthesized from the parent compound which contains a basic or acidic moiety by conventional chemical methods. Generally such salts can be prepared by reacting the free acid or base forms of these compounds with a stoichiometric amount of the appropriate base or acid in water or in an organic solvent or in a mixture of the two for example nonaqueous media like ether ethyl acetate ethanol isopropanol or acetonitrile are preferred. Lists of suitable salts are found in Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences 18th ed. Mack Publishing Company Easton Pa. 1990 p. 1445 the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The phrase pharmaceutically acceptable is employed herein to refer to those compounds materials compositions and or dosage forms which are within the scope of sound medical judgment suitable for use in contact with the tissues of human beings and animals without excessive toxicity irritation allergic response or other problem or complication commensurate with a reasonable benefit risk ratio.

Embodiments of the present invention provide compounds that have useful agonist and or antagonist activity with respect to mammalian estrogen receptors in addition to compounds compositions and methods useful for treating estrogen receptor mediated disorders in mammals. More particularly the compounds of the present invention have been found to possess a surprising degree of activity with respect to the alpha isoforms of human estrogen receptor in MCF 7 breast cancer cells. Thus the compounds compositions and methods described herein have utility in preventing and or treating a wide variety of estrogen receptor mediated disorders including but not limited to osteoporosis breast cancer uterine cancer and congestive heart disease.

The method of use disclosed is directed to various classes of aminoalkyloxy derivatives of 1 3 5 10 Estratrien steroids as agents in the treatment of cancer in mammals. The relevant compounds used in the treatment of cancer are represented by 

The compounds of the present invention can be used in the form of salts derived from inorganic or organic acids. These salts include but are not limited to the following acetate adipate alginate citrate aspartate benzoate benzenesulfonate bisulfate butyrate camphorate camphorsulfonate digluconate cyclopentanepro pionate dodecylsulfate ethanesulfonate glucoheptanoate glycerophosphate hemi sulfate heptanoate hexanoate fumarate hydrochloride hydrodromide hydroiodide 2 hydroxyethanesulfonate lactate maleate methanesulfonate nicotinate 2 naphth alenesulfonate oxalate pamoate pectinate sulfate 3 phenylpropionate picrate pivalate propionate succinate tartrate p toluenesulfonate and undecanoate. Also any basic nitrogen containing groups can be quaternized with agents such as loweralkyl halides such as methyl ethyl propyl and butylchloride bromides and iodides dialkyl sulfates like dimethyl diethyl dibutyl and diamyl sulfates long chain halides such as decyl lauryl myristyl and stearyl chlorides bromides and iodides aralkyl halides like benzyl and phenethyl bromides and others. Water or oil soluble or dispersible products are thereby obtained.

Examples of acids which may be employed to form pharmaceutically acceptable acid addition salts include such inorganic acids as hydrochloric acid sulfuric acid and phosphoric acid and organic acids such as oxalic acid maleic acid succinic acid and citric acid. Basic addition salts can be prepared in situ during the final isolation and purification of the compounds of the invention or separately by reacting carboxylic acid moieties with a suitable base such as the hydroxide carbonate or bicarbonate of a pharmaceutically acceptable metal cation or with ammonia or an organic primary secondary or tertiary amine. Pharmaceutically acceptable salts include but are not limited to cations based on the alkali and alkaline earth metals such as sodium lithium potassium calcium magnesium aluminum salts and the like as well as nontoxic ammonium quaternary ammonium and amine cations including but not limited to ammonium tetramethylammonium tetraethylammonium methylamine dimethylamine trimethylamine triethylamino ethylamine and the like. Other representative organic amines useful for the formation of base addition salts include diethylamine ethylenediamine ethanolamine diethanolamine piperazine and the like.

In accordance with other embodiments of the present invention there is provided a composition comprising an estrogen receptor modulating compound of the present invention together with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier or excipient.

Suitable pharmaceutically acceptable excipients include processing agents and drug delivery modifiers and enhancers such as for example calcium phosphate magnesium stearate talc monosaccharides disaccharides starch gelatin cellulose methyl cellulose sodium carboxymethyl cellulose dextrose hydroxypropyl beta cyclodextrin polyvinylpyrrolidinone low melting waxes ion exchange resins and the like as well as combinations of any two or move thereof. Other suitable pharmaceutically acceptable excipients are described in Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences Mack Pub. Co. N.J. 1991 incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Pharmaceutical compositions containing estrogen receptor modulating compounds of the present invention embodiments may be in any form suitable for the intended method of administration including for example a solution a suspension or an emulsion. Liquid carriers are typically used in preparing solutions suspensions and emulsions. Liquid carriers contemplated for use in the practice of the present invention include for example water saline pharmaceutically acceptable organic solvent s pharmaceutically acceptably oils or fats and the like as well as mixtures of two or more thereof. The liquid carrier may contain other suitably pharmaceutically acceptable additives such as solubilizers emulsifiers nutrients buffers preservatives suspending agents thickening agents viscosity regulators stabilizers and the like. Suitable organic solvents include for example monohydric alcohols such as ethanol and polyhydric alcohols such as glycols. Suitable oils include for example soybean oil coconut oil olive oil safflower oil cottonseed oil and the like. For parenteral administration the carrier can also be an oily ester such as ethyl oleate isopropyl myristate and the like. Compositions of the present invention may also be in the form of microparticles microcapsules liposomal encapsulates and the like as well as combinations of any two or more thereof.

The compounds of the present invention may be administered orally enterally parenterally sublingually by inhalation spray rectally vaginally or topically in dosage unit formulations containing conventional nontoxic pharmaceutically acceptable carriers adjuvants and vehicles as desired. Topical administration may also involve the use of transdermal administration such as transdermal patches or ionophoresis devices. The term parenteral as used herein includes subcutaneous injection intravenous intramuscular intrasternal injection intraperitoneal or infusion techniques.

Injectable preparation includes for example sterile injectable aqueous or oleginous suspensions that may be formulated according to the known art using suitable dispersing or wetting agents and suspending agents. The sterile injectable preparation may also be a sterile injectable solution or suspension in a nontoxic parenterally acceptable diluent or solvent for example as a solution in 1 3 propanediol. Among the acceptable vehicles and solvents that may be employed are water Ringer s solution and isotonic sodium chloride solution. In addition sterile fixed oils are conventionally employed as a solvent or suspending medium. For this purpose any bland fixed oil may be employed including synthetic mono or diglycerides. In addition fatty acids such as oleic acid can be useful in the preparation of injectables.

Suppositories for rectal or vaginal administration of the compound can be prepared by mixing the compound with a suitable nonirritating excipient such as cocoa butter and polyethylene glycols that are solid at ordinary temperatures but liquid at the rectal temperature and will therefore melt in the rectum and release the compound.

Solid dosage forms for oral administration may include capsules tablets pills powders and granules. In such solid dosage form the active compound may be admixed with at least one inert diluent such as sucrose lactose or starch. Such dosage forms may also comprise as is normal practice additional substances other than inert diluents for example lubricating agents such as magnesium stearate. In the case of capsules tablets and pills the dosage forms may also comprise buffering agents. Tablets and pills can additionally be prepared with enteric coatings.

Liquid dosage forms for oral administration may include pharmaceutically acceptable emulsions solutions suspension syrups and elixirs containing inert diluents commonly used in the art such as water. Such compositions may also comprise adjuvants such as wetting agents emulsifying and suspending agents cyclodextrins and sweetening flavoring and perfuming agents.

The compounds of the present invention can also be administered in the form of liposomes. As is known in the art liposomes are generally derived from phospholipids or other lipid substances. Liposomes are formed by mono or multilamellar hydrated liquid crystals that are dispersed in an aqueous medium. Any non toxic physiologically acceptable and metabolizable lipid capable of forming liposomes can be used. The present compositions in liposome form can contain in addition to a compound of the present invention stabilizers preservatives excipients and the like. Particular lipids are the phospholipids and phosphatidyl cholines lecithins both natural and synthetic. Methods to form liposomes are known in the art Prescott 1976 .

While the compounds of the invention can be administered as the active pharmaceutical agent they can also be used in combination with one or more other compounds as described herein and or in combination with other agents used in the treatment and or prevention of estrogen receptor mediated disorders. Alternatively embodiments of the present invention can be administered sequentially with one or more such agents to provide sustained therapeutic and prophylactic effects. Suitable agents include but are not limited to other SERMs as well as traditional estrogen agonists and antagonists. Representative agents useful in combination with the compounds of the invention for the treatment of estrogen receptor mediated disorders include for example tamoxifen 4 hydroxytamoxifen raloxifene toremifene droloxifene TAT 59 idoxifene RU 58 688 EM 139 ICI 164 384 ICI 182 780 clomiphene MER 25 DES nafoxidene CP 336 156 GW5638 LY139481 LY353581 zuclomiphene enclomiphene ethamoxytriphetol delmadinone acetate bisphosphonate and the like. Other agents that can be combined with one or more of the compounds of the invention include aromatase inhibition such as but not limited to 4 hydroxyandrostendione plomestane exemestane aminogluethimide rogletimide fadrozole twice vorozole letrozole and anastrozole.

Still other agents useful for combination with the compounds of the invention include but are not limited to antineoplastic agents such as alkylating agents. Other classes of relevant antineoplastic agents include antibiotics hormonal antineoplastics and antimetabolites. Examples of useful alkylating agents include alkyl sulfonates such as busulfan improsulfan and piposulfan aziridines such as a benzodizepa carboquone meturedepa and uredepa ethylenimines and methylmelamines such as altretamide triethylenemelamine triethylenephosphoramide triethylenethiophosphoramide and trimethylolmelamine nitrogen mustards such as chlorambucil chlornaphazine cyclophosphamide estramustine iphosphamide mechlorethanine mechlorethamine oxide hydrochloride melphtalan novembichine phenesterine prednimustine trofosfamide and uracil mustard nitroso urea such as carmustine chlorozotocin fotemustine lomustine nimustine ranimustine dacarbazine mannomustine mitobronitol mitolactol mitolactol and pipobroman.

Additional agents suitable for combination with the compounds of the present invention include protein synthesis inhibitors such as abrin aurintricarboxylic acid chloramphenicol colicin E3 cycloheximide diphtheria toxin edeine A emetine erythromycin ethionine fluoride 5 fluorotryptophan fusidic acid guanylyl methylene diphosphonate and guanylyl imidodiphosphate kanamycin kasugamycin kasugamycin kirromycin and O methyl threonine modeccin neomycin norvaline pactanycin paromomycine puromycin ricin alpha sarcin shiga toxin showdomycin sparsomycin spectinomycin streptomycin tetracycline thiostrepton and trimethoprin. Inhibitors of DNA synthesis including alkylating agents such as dimethyl sulfate mitomycin C nitrogen and sulfur mustards MNNG and NMS intercalating agents such as acridine dyes actinomycins adriamycin anthracenes benzopyrene ethidium bromide propidium diiodide intertwining and agents such as distamycin and netropsin can also be combined with compounds of the present invention in pharmaceutical compositions. DNA base analogs such as acyclovir adenine beta 1 D arabinoside amethopterin aminopterin 2 aminopurine aphidiolin 8 azaguanine azaserine 6 azauracil 2 azido 2 deoxynucleosides 5 bromodeoxycytidine cytsine .beta. 1 D arabinoside diazooxynorleucine dideoxynucleosides 5 fluorodeoxycytidine 5 fluorodeoxyuridine 5 fluorouracil hydroxyurea and 6 mercaptopurine also can be used in combination therapies with the compounds of the invention. Topoisomerase inhibitors such as coumermycin nalidixic acid novobiocin and oxolinic acid inhibitors of cell division including colcemide colchicine vinblastine and vincristine and RNA synthesis inhibitors including actinomycin D alpha amanitine and other fungal amatoxins cordycepin 3 deoxyadenosine dichloroibofuranosyl benzimidazole rifampicine streptovarin and streptolydigin also can be combined with the compounds of the invention to provide pharmaceutical compositions. Other agents will be known to those having skill in the medicinal chemistry and oncology arts.

In addition the compounds of the present invention in embodiments can be used either singly or in combination as described above in combination with other modalities for preventing or treating estrogen receptor medicated disease or disorders. Such other treatment modalities include without limitation surgery radiation hormone supplementation and diet regulation. These can be performed sequentially such as for example treatment with a compound of the invention following surgery or radiation or in combination e.g. in addition to a diet regimen .

In other embodiments the present invention includes compounds and compositions in which a compound of the invention is either combined with or covalently bound to a cytotoxic agent bound to a targeting agent such as a monoclonal antibody for example a humanized monoclonal antibody. It will be appreciated that the latter combination may allow the introduction of cytotoxic agents into cancer cells with greater specifically. Thus the active form of the cytotoxic agent i.e. the free form will be present only in cells targeted by the antibody. Of course the compounds of the invention may also be combined with monoclonal antibodies that have therapeutic activity against cancer.

The additional active agents may generally be employed in therapeutic amounts as indicated in the PHYSICIANS DESK REFERENCE PDR 53rd Edition 1999 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety or such therapeutically useful amounts as would be known to one of ordinary skill in the art. The compounds of the invention and the other therapeutically active agents can be administered at the recommended maximum clinical dosage or a lower dosage. Dosage levels of the active compounds in the compositions of the invention may be varied in order to obtain a desired therapeutic response depending on the route of administration severity of the disease and the response of the patient. The combination can be administered as separate compositions or as a single dosage form containing both agents. When administered as a combination the therapeutic agents can be formulated as separate compositions that are given at the same time or different times or the therapeutic agents can be given as a single composition.

In accordance with the yet other embodiments the present invention provides methods for treating or preventing an estrogen receptor mediated disorder in a mammalian subject in which an amount of an estrogen receptor modulating compound modulates estrogen receptor activity in the subject. Other embodiments provide methods for treating a cell or an estrogen receptor mediated disorder in a mammalian subject said methods comprising administering to the cell or to the human or mammalian subject an amount of a compound or composition of the invention effective to modulate estrogen receptor activity in the cell or mammalian subject.

Effective amounts of the compound of the invention generally include any amount sufficient to detectably modulate estrogen receptor activity by any of the assays described herein by other activity assays known to those having ordinary skill in the art or by the detection prevention or alleviation of symptoms in a subject afflicted with an estrogen receptor mediated disorder.

Estrogen receptor mediated disorders that may be treated in accordance with the invention include any biological or medical disorder in which estrogen receptor activity is implicated or in which the inhibition of estrogen receptor potentiates or retards signaling through a pathway that is characteristically defective in the disease to be treated. The condition or disorder may either be caused or characterized by abnormal estrogen receptor activity. Representative estrogen receptor mediated disorders include for example osteoporosis atherosclerosis estrogen mediated cancers e.g. breast and endometrial cancer . Other disorders include Turner s syndrome benign prostate hyperplasia i.e. prostate enlargement prostate cancer elevated cholesterol restenosis endometriosis uterine fribroid disease skin and or vagina atrophy and Alzheimer s disease. Successful treatment of a subject in accordance with the invention may result in the prevention inducement of a reduction in or alleviation of symptoms in a subject afflicted with an estrogen receptor mediated medical or biological disorder. Thus for example treatment can result in a reduction in breast or endometrial tumors and or various clinical markers associated with such cancers. Likewise treatment of Alzheimer s disease can result in a reduction in the rate of disease progression detected for example by measuring a reduction in the rate of increase of dementia.

The amount of active ingredient that may be combined with the carrier materials to produce a single dosage form will vary depending upon the host treated and the particular mode of administration. It will be understood however that the specific dose level for any particular patient will depend upon a variety of factors including the activity of the specific compound employed the age of the patient body weight general health sex diet time of administration route of administration rate of excretion drug combination and the severity of the particular disease undergoing therapy. The prophylactically or therapeutically effective amount for a given situation can be readily determined by routine experimentation and is within the skill and judgment of the ordinary clinician.

For exemplary purposes of the present invention a prophylactically or therapeutically effective dose will generally be from about 0.1 mg kg day to about 100 mg kg day more specifically from about 1 mg kg day to about 20 mg kg day and most specifically from about 2 mg kg day to about 10 mg kg day of a estrogen receptor modulating compound of the present invention which may be administered in one or multiple doses.

The following Examples are provided to illustrate certain aspects of the present invention and to aid those of skill in the art in practicing the invention. These Examples are in no way to be considered to limit the scope of the invention in any manner.

The following procedure was used in embodiments to synthesize the compounds. Sodium metal 3 mole equivalent was dissolved in about 50 mL of ethanol. To this solution a 1 mole equivalent of the steroid was added. To the resulting solution alkylamine chloride 1.2 mole equivalent was added and refluxed for about 17 hours. The mixture was then filtered and the filtrate was concentrated to dryness. The residue was re dissolved in 150 mL of ethyl acetate and washed with 0.1 N aqueous hydrochloric acid 2 100 mL then 2 N sodium hydroxide 2 100 mL and water 100 mL . The organic layer was dried over magnesium sulfate filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure to obtain the residue. The residue was dissolved in 100 mL of diethyl ether and acidified with gaseous hydrochloric acid to reach a pH of about 3. The acidified mixture was filtered washed with ether and solid collected. Impurities in the solid were removed and analyzed by preparative TLC or by flash chromatography. The following is an illustrative list of the compounds but is not meant to be an exhaustive list of the compounds falling within the broad scope of this disclosure.

The hydrochloric salts of the compounds were prepared using methanolic hydrochloric solution. Trans 4 Hydroxytamoxifen was purchased from Sigma Aldrich company and its HCl salt was prepared using methanolic HCl solution to avoid isomerization which occurs with the basic free amine species. The HCl salts of the compounds of structures I III were compared with trans 4 hydroxytamoxifen in groups of four. However preparation of the compounds was not necessarily limited to salt forms but may include free base forms.

All reagents obtained from commercial sources were used without further purification. Anhydrous solvents were obtained from commercial sources and used without further drying. Separation and purification of the products were carried out using any single or combination of the following methods. Flash column chromatography was performed with silica gel 200 400 mesh 60 A obtained from Fisher Scientific St. Louis Mo. Typical solvents employed were dichloromethane DCM methanol MeOH ethyl acetate EtOAc and hexanes Hex . Preparative TLC was conducted using 20 times 20 cm plates coated with silica gel.

Steroids were purchased from Steroloids Inc. Newport R.I. . H NMR spectra were obtained with a spectrometer and chemical shifts are reported in parts per million ppm using tetramethylsilane as an internal reference.

Thus the present invention will be seen to provide new compounds that have strong estrogen receptor modulating action. These compounds can be employed in compositions and methods for treating estrogen receptor mediated disorders such as osteoporosis breast and endometrial cancer Alzheimer s disease and atherosclerosis.

The disclosure above is for the purposes of illustration and not limitation. Those having skill in the arts relevant to the present invention will appreciate from the foregoing the present invention encompasses many additional embodiments of the invention that are not described explicitly but which nevertheless are provided by the teachings of the present invention. Such additional embodiments include but are not limited to estrogen receptor mediated diseases other than osteoporosis breast and endometrical cancer alzheimers s disease and atherosclerosis that are preventable or treatable using the compounds compositions and methods of the invention. Still other aspects include compounds that can be designed synthesized and tested for therapeutic or prophylactic effect using the teachings of the foregoing disclosure.

1H NMR 300 MHz d DMSO 0.65 s 3H 1.3 m 10H 1.82 m 3H 2.08 m 2H 2.24 m 2H 2.76 br s 2H 3.6 m 7H 4.29 br s 3H 6.63 m 2H 7.2 d 1H J 4 Hz 7.68 s 1H 9.90 br s 1H 

1H NMR 300 MHz d DMSO 0.65 s 3H 1.28 m 8H 1.25 m 3H 1.8 m 5H 2.08 m 2H 2.25 m 2H 2.79 br s 6H 3.26 m 4H 6.68 m 2H 7.19 d 1H J 6 Hz 7.68 s 1H 10.54 br s 1H 

1H NMR 300 MHz d DMSO 0.65 s 3H 1.27 m 7H 1.72 m 8H 3.26 m 2H 3.41 m 6H 4.2 m 4H 5.34 br s 1H 6.7 m 2H 7.2 br s 1H 7.68 s 1H 10.81 br s 1H 

1H NMR 300 MHz d DMSO 0.81 s 3H 0.85 br s 3H 1.35 m 10H 1.9 m 8H 2.12 m 2H 2.4 m 2H 4.25 m 4H 5.35 br s 1H 6.7 m 2H 7.19 d 1H J 9 Hz 7.68 s 1H 10.89 br s 1H 

1H NMR 300 MHz d DMSO 0.60 s 3H 1.22 m 14H 1.7 2.3 m 10H 2.79 br s 2H 3.15 br s 4H 4.3 m 3H 6.69 m 2H 7.2 d 1H J 9 Hz 7.68 s 1H 10.38 br s 1H 

1H NMR 300 MHz d DMSO 0.64 s 3H 1.2 m 4H 1.8 m 3H 2.12 m 2H 2.24 m 2H 2.09 m 3H 2.75 br s 3H 3.15 m 3H 3.47 m 5H 3.88 m 4H 6.68 m 2H 7.18 d 1H J 9 Hz 7.68 s 1H 11.55 br s 1H .

The above compounds that were made and analyzed are included in the following structures. The compounds may be used to treat cancer in mammals by administering a safe and effective amount of a pharmaceutical composition comprising compounds selected for the group consisting of compounds according to Structures II IV.

The compounds selected are those having attached groups wherein Rand Rare independently alkyl of 1 to 8 carbon atoms or taken together with the nitrogen form a saturated 5 to 6 ring heterocycle. Optionally if a ring is formed Rand Rmay contain a second nitrogen or oxygen in the ring Ris alpha or beta methyl n is an integer from 2 to 10 Rand Rtogether are double bonded to oxygen O or hydroximino NOH or Ris independently hydrogen hydroxyl OH ethynyl fluorine chlorine bromine iodine and acyloxy of an organic carboxylic acid of up to 12 carbon atoms and alkyl alkenyl and alkynyl of up to 8 carbon atoms and Ris independently hydrogen hydroxyl OH ethynyl fluorine chlorine bromine iodine and acyloxy of an organic carboxylic acid of up to 12 carbon atoms and alkyl alkenyl and alkynyl of up to 8 carbon atoms Rand Rare double bonded oxygen or are independently hydrogen hydroxyl OH ethynyl fluorine bromine chlorine iodine and acyloxy of an organic carboxylic acid of up to 12 carbon atoms or Rand Rform a double bond and Rand Rare hydrogen and their non toxic pharmaceutically acceptable acid addition salts in an amount sufficient for the treatment of a mammalian cancer.

Examples of R Rand Ras alkyl of from 1 to 8 carbon atoms consist of methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl butyl isobutyl tert butyl n pentyl n hexyl 2 methylpentyl 2 3 dimethylbutyl n heptyl 2 methylhexyl 2 2 dimethyl pentyl 3 3 dimethyl pentyl 3 ethylpentyl n octyl 2 2 dimethylhexyl 3 3 dimethylhexyl and 3 methyl 3 ethylpentyl. Of particular interest are methyl ethyl and isopropyl.

In another embodiment Rand Rform a heterocyclic ring with nitrogen comprising 5 to 6 members of a heteroatom chosen from oxygen and nitrogen optionally. In particular piperidinyl piperazinyl morpholinyl or pyrrolindinyl ring systems are encompassed in embodiments of this invention.

Examples of acyloxyl of an organic carboxylic acid of up to 12 carbon atoms include for example formyloxyl acetyloxy propionyloxyl butyryloxyl hexanoyloxyl and benzoyloxyl.

Examples of suitable acids for the non toxic pharmaceutically acceptable acid salts are hydrochloric acid hydrobromic acid nitric acid sulfuric acid phosphoric acid acetic acid formic acid propionic acid benzoic acid maleic acid furmaric acid succinic acid tartaric acid citric acid oxalic acid glyoxylic acid aspartic acid alkane sulfonic acids such as methane or ethane sulfonic acid arylsulfonic acids such as benzene acid or p toluene sulfonic acids such as p toluene sulfonic or benzene acid and arylcarboxylic acids. In particular hydrochloric acid may be used

The following structures depict embodiments of compounds for treating cancer in mammals by administering a safe and effective amount of one or more compounds comprised of compounds according to Structure II.

The following compounds found in embodiments of the present invention include but are not limited to 

The wavy lines in position 17 indicate that the Rand Rgroups are in the or positions. Ris in the position and Ris in position or Ris position or Ris in a position.

Among the specific compounds of this invention are those wherein Ris alpha or beta methyl those of the formula wherein R R Rand n are defined as above those of the formula wherein Rand Rare independently alkyl of from 1 to 8 carbons atoms n is defined as above and either Ris hydrogen or hydroxy and Ris hydroxy OH or hydrogen or Rand Rare both hydrogen or Rand Rare double bonded oxygen O or hydroximino NOH those of the formula wherein R Rand n are defined as above and either Rand Rare independently hydrogen hydroxyl OH ethynyl fluorine chlorine bromine iodine and acyloxyl of an organic carboxylic acid of up to 12 carbon atoms and Rand Rtogether form a double bond or are selected from the group consisting of hydrogen hydroxyl OH ethynyl fluorine chlorine bromine iodine and acyloxyl of an organic carboxylic acid of up to 12 carbon atoms or Rand Rtogether to form a double bond and Rand Rare hydrogen and their non toxic. More specific compounds of formula 1 are those wherein Rand Rare both methyl ethyl and isopropyl and those wherein n equals 2 or 3 and including and their non toxic pharmaceutically acceptable acid salts. In embodiments the compounds of this disclosure are not limited to the salt forms but may include free base forms also.

The compounds of Structures I IV have been shown to exhibit anti breast cancer activities in assays involving MCF 7 cells. MCF 7 breast cancer cells are estrogen receptor alpha enriched breast cells taken from patients. These compounds shown potent inhibition of the growth of MCF 7 breast cancer cells. These compounds can therefore be used in the treatment of breast cancer in mammals and may also find usefulness in the treatment of endometrial cancer as well.

The compounds can be administered for example in the manner suitable for medicinal or pharmacology purposes. The particular route of administration will depend on the kind of cancer and the dosage form chosen. In embodiments the compounds of Structures I IV can be administered orally rectally vaginally parenterally or by local route such as sub cutaneous in the breast of mammals. Orally all of the compounds can be in the form of tablets capsules granules suppositories injectable preparations and vaginal preparations.

MCF 7 ATCC HTB 22 cells purchased from ATCC Rockville Md. were grown in RPMI medium 1640 with 10 FBS GIBCO Grand Island N.Y. and 1 Antibiotic Antimycotic GIBCO Grand Island N.Y. in an incubator NUAIRE NU 1500 Plymouth Minn. with 5 COand 95 air at about 37 Celsius. Cells were grown as monolayer doubling time is from about 19 to about 24 hours. The stock solution of the test compound was prepared at 1 mg ml drug concentration. The stock solution was diluted serially to obtain the desired drug concentrations of from about 20 to about 200 g ml. Plates with twelve wells 5 ml capacity well were employed for all the experiments. In a typical experiment each well contained 1 10initial cells and about 100 l drug solution in a total volume of about 2 ml media. The final concentrations of compounds were from about 0 to about 100 g ml in triplicate sample wells. The plates were incubated at 5 CO2 and 37 C. for about 72 hours. After incubation cells were washed with PBS 1 treated by 0.5 ml trypsin EDTA for about 10 minutes and the cells were suspended by adding about 1.5 ml medium. Cells were counted by using a hemacytometer under a microscope. The data was converted to micromolar concentration using the various molecular weights and represent the mean values and standard errors.

Tables 1 4 illustrate the IC 50 inhibitory concentration values of compounds described in this application against the MCF 7 breast cancer cell line.

The compounds used in embodiments of the present invention can be formulated into pharmaceutical compositions for use in the treatment of cancer cells. Standard pharmaceutical formulation techniques should be used as illustrated in acceptable pharmaceutical texts. A safe and effective amount is an amount that effective enough to inhibit cancer cell growth in warm blooded mammals particularly in humans without severe side effects. The safe and effective amount of the compound effective to inhibit cancer cell growth may vary depending on the type of cancer cells the stage of the disease the physical and biological characteristics of the patient and the duration of the treatment.

The compositions of the subject invention contain at least one pharmaceutical carrier. The term pharmaceutical carrier means one or more compatible solid or liquid filler diluents or encapsulating substances which are suitable for administration to mammals. The carriers should be sufficiently pure and have low toxicity to render them suitable for administration to mammals. Some examples of substances which can serve as pharmaceutical carriers are sugars such as lactose glucose and sucrose starches such as corn starch and potato starch cellulose and its derivatives such as sodium carboxymethyl cellulose ethyl cellulose and methyl cellulose powdered tragacanth malt gelatin talc solid lubricants such as stearic acid 5 and magnesium stearate calcium sulfate vegetable oils such as peanut oil cottonseed oil sesame oil olive oil corn oil and oil of theobroma polyols such as propylene glycol glycerine sorbitol mannitol and polyethylene glycol alginic acid emulsifiers wetting agents such sodium lauryl sulfate coloring agents flavoring agents tableting agents stabilizers antioxidants preservatives pyrogen free water isotonic saline phosphate buffer solutions and the like. The choice of a pharmaceutical carrier to be used in conjunction with the subject compound is basically determined by the way the compound is to be administered.

While the present invention has been described in conjunction with specific embodiments set forth many alternatives modifications and variations are intended to fall within the spirit and scope of the present invention.

