---

title: Apparatus and method controlling use of individual segments of instant messaging content
abstract: An apparatus and method is provided for a configuration of client work stations for instant messaging, wherein a participant intending to send a particular segment of chat content can elect to send the segment in an “off the record” mode. Content sent in this mode can be viewed but cannot be copied or saved by other instant messaging participants. The apparatus usefully includes a mode select device operable by the participant at a given station to designate each of a succession of chat content segments generated at the given station to be either for unrestricted use, or for off the record use, selectively. The apparatus further includes a component for applying a first use control message to each of the off the records segments sent from the given station to one or more of the other stations. A content control device located at a station receiving the off the record segments is responsive to the applied first use control messages to prevent the receiving station from retaining or otherwise propagating any of the received off the record segments.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07689653&OS=07689653&RS=07689653
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 07689653
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050118
---
This application is related to commonly assigned and co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 039 727 entitled Apparatus and Method for Controlling Use of Instant Messaging Content and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 038 323 entitled Apparatus and Method for Limiting Access to Instant Messaging Content on a Display Screen .

The invention disclosed and claimed herein generally pertains to an apparatus and method for preventing unintended use or dissemination of information content exchanged between participants during instant messaging conversations. More particularly the invention pertains to apparatus of the above type wherein respective participants operate client computer terminals or work stations that are remotely located from one another. Even more particularly the invention pertains to apparatus of the above type wherein each individual segment of instant messaging content generated by a participant is designated to be either for unrestricted use or for controlled use and participants are prevented from retaining or propagating any controlled use segments.

Businesses increasingly are relying on a diverse set of electronic communication tools in the work place. Accordingly security measures that have been in place for some time on more traditional forms of business communications such as letters should now be applied to the increasingly broad spectrum of electronic business communications. This is necessary to control propagation and prevent unintended dissemination of sensitive business information.

Previously efforts made to prevent proliferation of information in the new electronic mediums for communication have generally been directed to email. One solution in the email space is to attach a flag to an email which prevents the forwarding of the email. This flag can also prevent clipboard copying of the text. However in the case of email this can be easily thwarted such as by taking pictures of the screen or using a non compliant email system.

Another important type of electronic communication is known by those of skill in the art as instant messaging or chat. In an instant messaging or chat conversation two or more participants operate client work stations that are remotely located from one another but are also interconnected to enable bidirectional communication by all participants. Thus one participant can send a message to another and immediately receive back a response or reply. The instant messaging configuration enables participants located at different places to discuss a topic or to discuss multiple topics. Moreover the configuration can remain in place over time so that the participants can exchange messages during a period extending over days or longer.

It will be readily apparent that a great deal of important and valuable information content can be generated and exchanged in the course of an instant messaging or chat conversation or event. Thus as this communication medium is increasingly used in the work place it becomes necessary to enforce controls on the use that is made of content generated through this medium. In the past improper use of this medium and content produced thereby has resulted in misunderstandings dissemination of private information and disclosure of sensitive business data. Currently transcripts can be saved and forwarded and text can be clipped and copied. Often out of context chat content may be sent along through an unpredictable chain to the wrong parties. Moreover certain solutions available in the email space generally do not apply in the realm of instant messaging. Unlike email content in the medium of instant messaging is not discrete in the sense that it is not neatly divided into individual notes which can be identified by subject and marked as sensitive. Thus it is necessary to control the information contained within a chat transcript more granularly even line by line. Also since chat content is often non topical in nature a chat configuration involving two or more participants can remain open for days at a time and can cover a variety of unrelated subjects.

The invention generally pertains to a configuration of client work stations for instant messaging or chat conversations wherein each station user or participant is able to control every segment of chat content that he she generates or contributes. More particularly each participant can select or toggle a mode in the instant messaging conversation referred to for example as an off the record mode. Content contributed by the participant in this mode can be viewed but cannot be copied or saved by other participants in the instant messaging conversation. Thus embodiments of the invention basically provide a per line security policy for a chat transcript wherein the transcript is the total material contributed by all the chat participants collectively during the entire instant messaging conversation. In one embodiment directed to a configuration of client work stations interconnected to allow instant messaging between participants at respective stations apparatus is provided for controlling selected instant messaging content. The apparatus comprises a mode select device operable by the participant at a given station to designate each of a succession of chat content segments generated at the given station to be either for unrestricted use or for off the record use selectively. The apparatus further comprises a component for applying a first use message to each of the off the record segments sent from the given station to one or more of the other stations. A content control device located at a station receiving one or more of the off the record segments from the given station is responsive to the first use messages respectively applied to received segments to prevent the receiving station from retaining or otherwise propagating the received off the record segments.

Referring to there is shown a configuration of clients or client work stations wherein each client is connected to every other client by means of bidirectional communication links or paths . As used herein the terms client and client work station refer to a computer work station or other data processing work station operable by a user to communicate with other computer work stations over a network or other communication path. Communication paths may comprise for example segments of the Internet wireless communication links or electro optical communication paths such as fiber optic cables. Thus Participants shown by to be located at clients respectively may operate their respective client work stations to exchange information with one another. More particularly Participants of clients are disposed to engage in instant messaging or chat communication or conversations with one another as described above. Propagation of the chat information content disclosed among the instant messaging participants is intended to be controlled or regulated in accordance with an embodiment of the invention as described herein.

As used herein the terms propagate propagation and any variations thereof are broadly defined to include any acts whereby content is transferred to or stored or reproduced at a location external to a client computer and to further include retention or storage of content within the client computer such that at some time in the future content could be transferred to or stored or reproduced at a location external to the client computer.

Referring to there are shown client stations and respectively provided with components for implementing an embodiment of the invention. Referring specifically to client there is shown a transceiver connected to send and receive message data over links and . Transceiver by way of example and not limitation may alternatively include a modem configured to access the Internet an RF transceiver for accessing a wireless network or an electro optic coupling device for connecting to a fiber optic transmission path. Transceiver also includes any components needed for data conversion in order to enable data exchanges between transceiver and user interface U I devices of client . In U I devices is intended to collectively include all individual user interface devices that client is provided with which will occur to those of skill in the art. U I devices may include for example a monitor or display device as described above for enabling Participant to view incoming instant messaging or chat content received by transceiver . U I devices may further include a keyboard or the like for use in generating segments of instant messaging content that are to be sent out from client to other chat conversation participants.

In accordance with useful embodiments of the invention when client is engaged in an instant messaging conversation or activity the display screen of monitor displays a set of content use control elements for use by Participant to select one of two use control modes. Participant would select an off the record mode in association with a chat content segment if Participant sought to prevent other participants in the chat conversation from saving or otherwise propagating the segment. However if the content segment is intended to be made freely available to other participants without any need to restrict or limit its use Participant would select an unrestricted use mode.

In one embodiment described hereinafter in connection with the control elements would comprise two buttons. The buttons would be displayed on the work station monitor of client when the station was engaged in instant messaging. In another embodiment described hereinafter in connection with the control elements would comprise a single button and a check box. The control elements would be used to select a mode for each discrete segment of instant messaging content generated at client .

In another embodiment the mode select device can comprise a two mode physical switch manually operated by Participant to specify one of the two modes for controlling content segment use.

Referring further to there is shown a component connected to receive the mode select signals from mode select device . Each mode select signal corresponds to a content segment and indicates the use control mode that has been selected for its segment. Component responds to the mode select signals by attaching mode messages or other identifiers to respective segments to indicate the intended level of use control. If a content segment is to be transmitted from client by means of a data packet the packet could be provided with a mode identifier comprising a single bit set to either one or zero. Alternatively a flag could be set to indicate off the record mode. The content segment after attachment of the mode message as described above is sent from transceiver to the other clients. shows a content segment with an unrestricted use mode message CS URU being sent to client and further shows a content segment with an off the record message CS OTR likewise being sent thereto.

Referring now to client in there is shown a transceiver and U I devices . There is further shown a content control device positioned between U I devices and all data storage capability of client . Data storage shown in is intended to include the hard drive as well as all other disks and devices used to store data within client . further shows that any messages to be sent to clipboard of client must likewise be routed through content control device . Thus any instant message content segment received by client can be viewed by means of a U I device . However the segment content cannot be saved or stored in client unless this is permitted by content control device . Moreover shows that any connection to a printer or other terminals external to client must be made through data storage . Accordingly content control device may also be used to prevent or selectively limit the printing of received chat messages and the transfer thereof to any computers or other devices that are external to client .

When transceiver receives a content segment from client with a use mode message as described above an instruction representing the indicated mode is sent to content control device over a link . If the indicated use mode is off the record or CS OTR the instruction operates device to prevent the associated segment in its entirety from passing to data storage or clipboard . On the other hand if the indicated mode allows unrestricted use the corresponding instruction operates content control device to allow the entire content segment to pass freely to either data storage or the clipboard . In one useful implementation content control device includes an application programmable interface API that is operated as described above by the instructions sent thereto over link .

Thus each of the clients can be operated to both send and receive instant messaging content segments in accordance with embodiments of the invention as described above. The data storage of a client such as data storage of client could readily be configured to store all the content segments exchanged during an instant messaging conversation that were designated to be for unrestricted use. However none of the off the record segments would be contained in storage . Thus at the end of the instant messaging conversation data storage could be accessed to immediately provide a transcript of the entire conversation except for the portions thereof that were off the record. These portions would automatically be omitted from the transcript.

Referring to there is shown display screen displaying buttons and when client is in an instant messaging mode. Screen further shows text boxes and adjacent to buttons and respectively. Text box contains the text SUBMIT URU and text box contains the text OTR . Thus when a chat content segment is to be sent from client to other clients Participant can use button to allow unrestricted use of the segment and can use button to keep the segment off the record.

Referring to there is shown display screen displaying a button and a check box when client is in an instant messaging mode. Screen further shows text boxes and adjacent to button and check box respectively. Text box always contains the text SUBMIT . However text box contains the text OFF THE RECORD only when a check has been placed in box as shown in . However when the check is absent from box not shown the text in box will be UNRESTRICTED USE not shown . With the arrangement shown in each chat content segment to be contributed by client would be sent to other clients by pressing the submit button . The use mode attached to the submitted segment would be determined by the presence or absence of a check in check box .

Referring to there is shown a flow chart further illustrating operation of client stations and in accordance with an embodiment of the invention. Function box shows Participant intending to send a segment of content to Participant during an instant messaging conversation. Before transmitting the segment however Participant must first decide whether to send the segment on the record or off the record as indicated by decision block .

If the segment is to be sent on the record it will be transmitted to client in the clear as shown by function block . That is the content segment will be sent with the unrestricted use message CS URU as described above. Accordingly client will be able to enter the segment into the instant messaging conversation transcript in data storage in addition to presenting the segment to Participant for viewing by means of the U I devices . These tasks are respectively shown by function blocks and of .

Referring further to if the segment is to be sent off the record as shown by function block the message CS OTR will be applied to the segment. As described above such message could simply comprise a flag. In response to the CS OTR message content control device allows the segment to be viewed by means of U I devices but prevents the segment from being stored or copied into data storage or clipboard . This is shown by function block .

It is important to note that while the present invention has been described in the context of a fully functioning data processing system those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the processes of the present invention are capable of being distributed in the form of a computer readable medium of instructions and a variety of forms and that the present invention applies equally regardless of the particular type of signal bearing media actually used to carry out the distribution. Examples of computer readable media include recordable type media such as a floppy disk a hard disk drive a RAM CD ROMs DVD ROMs and transmission type media such as digital and analog communications links wired or wireless communications links using transmission forms such as for example radio frequency and light wave transmissions. The computer readable media may take the form of coded formats that are decoded for actual use in a particular data processing system.

The description of the present invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description and is not intended to be exhaustive or limited to the invention in the form disclosed. Many modifications and variations will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. The embodiment was chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention the practical application and to enable others of ordinary skill in the art to understand the invention for various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

