---

title: Content feed user interface with gallery display of same-type items
abstract: Additional content items that satisfy predefined criteria with respect to a user-selected content item are identified. The predefined criteria may be that the selected and additional content items have particular characteristics that are the same. Information corresponding to the selected and identified content items is presented to a user. Characteristics based on which additional content items may be identified may include data type, source, and absence of content. The information may be presented in a gallery view, which can be a thumbnails gallery for images or a playlist for digital audio or video.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08949154&OS=08949154&RS=08949154
owner: Google Inc.
number: 08949154
owner_city: Mountain View
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051007
---
U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 246 657 titled Personalized Content Feed Suggestions Page filed Oct. 7 2005 

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 246 656 titled Indirect Subscriptions to Top N Lists of Content Feeds filed Oct. 7 2005 and

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 246 597 titled Indirect Subscriptions to a User s Selected Content Feed Items filed Oct. 7 2005.

The disclosed embodiments relate generally to content syndication and more particularly to a content feed user interface with a gallery display of content feed items of the same type.

Content syndication is growing in popularity as a way to distribute frequently updated information such as news and blog postings on the Internet. Using content syndication formats such as Really Simple Syndication RSS content providers can include content and or links to such in a content feed. Users may subscribe to these content feeds using an application known as a reader or aggregator. When the content feed is updated with new content items the new content items are reflected in the user s reader.

A user may subscribe to many content feeds with each feed listing many content items. A user may be interested in content of particular types such as images or videos or content from particular sources and or categories. Looking through the many listed content items to find the ones of the desired type can be a time consuming and cumbersome task for the user.

In accordance with some embodiments a method of presenting content includes presenting identifying information associated with a number of content items upon user selection of one of the content items identifying one or more additional content items that satisfy predefined criteria with respect to the selected content item and presenting information corresponding to the selected and additional content items.

In some embodiments the aforementioned operations may be performed by a system having one or more processors memory and one or more modules stored in the memory and configured for execution by the processors with instructions to perform the aforementioned operations.

In a content feed aggregation system a user may subscribe to one or more content feeds and be presented with the content items included in those content feeds. However the user may be interested in particular types of content items. The disclosed embodiments provide the user a way to look for those particular types of content items. When a user selects a content item the user is presented with a gallery of the selected content item and other content items that satisfy predefined criteria with respect to the selected item. The gallery provides the user a more efficient manner of presenting to the user content items of particular types.

The server system accesses content feeds from the feed sources . The server system includes a server and a database . Server serves as a front end for the server system . Server retrieves the content feeds from the feed sources . The server provides an interface between the server system and the client systems .

The server system stores content items in the content feeds in the database . In some embodiments the database stores both metadata e.g. title description URL date time and possibly other metadata and the content of each content item. However in some other embodiments the database stores the metadata but not the content for each content item. The database also stores user feed information for a plurality of users. The user feed information for a particular user identifies content feed subscriptions as well as sources filters and read states for that particular user. That is user feed information associated with a user identifies the content feeds to which the user has subscribed any filters the user has defined for the feeds any labels the user has associated with individual feed items and an indication of whether each feed item has been marked as read by the user.

It should be appreciated that the server system including the server and the database may be implemented as a distributed system of multiple computers. However for convenience of explanation the server system is described below as being implemented on a single computer which can be considered a single logical system.

A content feed or channel is a resource or service that provides a list of content items that are present recently added or recently updated at a feed source . A content item in a content feed may include the content associated with the item itself the actual content that the content item specifies a title and or a description of the content a locator e.g. URL of the content or any combination thereof. For example if the content item identifies a text article the content item may include the article itself inline along with the title and locator. Alternatively a content item may include the title description and locator but not the article content. Thus some content items may include the content associated with those items while others contain links to the associated content but not the full content of the items. A content item may also include additional metadata that provides additional information about the content. The full version of the content may be any machine readable data including but not limited to web pages images digital audio digital video Portable Document Format PDF documents and so forth. Further details regarding content items are described below in relation to .

In some embodiments a content feed is specified using a content syndication format such as RSS. RSS is an acronym that stands for rich site summary RDF site summary or Really Simple Syndication. RSS may refer to any of a family of formats based on the Extensible Markup Language XML for specifying a content feed and content items included in the feed. In some other embodiments other content syndication formats such as the Atom syndication format or the VCALENDAR calendar format may be used to specify content feeds.

Further information regarding the RSS syndication format known as Really Simple Syndication is disclosed in the 2.0 by D. Winer which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. M. Nottingham et al. disclose further information regarding the Atom syndication format in which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

A user interfaces with the server system and views content items at a client system or device hereinafter called the client system for ease of reference . The client system includes a computer or computer controlled device such as a person digital assistant cellular telephone or the like hereinafter called the client system for ease of reference . The computer typically includes one or more processors not shown memory which may include volatile memory not shown and non volatile memory such as a hard disk drive and a display . The computer may also have input devices such as a keyboard and a mouse not shown .

In some embodiments a user may interact with the server system via a feed reader user interface that may be presented on the display . The user may create a list of feed subscriptions via the feed reader user interface . In some embodiments using the feed reader user interface the user may also create filters or labels to be applied to content feeds and or content items and modify the read states of content feeds and or content items. The feed reader user interface transmits a list of content feed subscriptions or modifications to a list of content feed subscriptions to the server system for storage at the database . The feed reader user interface presents content items stored at the database to the user based on the user s list of content feed subscriptions. That is feed reader user interface presents to the user content items specified in the content feeds to which the user has subscribed. A user may view the full version of the content of a content item in the feed reader user interface by selecting it e.g. by clicking on it with a mouse pointer . In some embodiments a copy of the user s list of content feed subscriptions and copies of the presented content items may be cached locally at the client system .

In some embodiments the feed reader user interface may be a web based user interface. That is the feed reader user interface displays one or more web pages in one or more browser e.g. web browser windows. The web pages may be written in the Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML or any other suitable language for preparing web pages and may include one or more scripts for interfacing with the server system . The user may subscribe to content feeds view content items and otherwise interact with the server system by interacting with the web pages of the feed reader user interface . In other words the server system and the web pages transmitted by the server system to the feed reader user interface provides a web based content aggregation service. The server system aggregates and stores content items in accordance with the user s content feed subscriptions. In some embodiments the server system also can apply filters or labels or change the read states of content items in accordance with user actions or instructions. When the user accesses the feed reader user interface content items to which the user has subscribed are presented to the user via the feed reader user interface .

In some other embodiments the feed reader user interface may be a part of a standalone application that is run on the client system . The standalone application may interface with the servers system via an application programming interface API .

A content field may include a synopsis or description of the full version of the content an excerpt from the content or the full version itself. The full version of the content may be any machine readable data such as text graphics digital audio digital video a Portable Document Format PDF file and so forth.

In some embodiments the full version of the content may be an enclosure to the content item. In the content item data structure the enclosure may be specified by an enclosure location that identifies the location of the enclosure. In some embodiments the enclosure location is the URL of the enclosure. The data structure may also include a size field for specifying the size of the enclosure e.g. in number of bytes and a data type field to identify the type of the enclosure. The data type may identify the data category of the enclosure the file type of the enclosure or both. For example if the enclosure is a JPEG image file the data type may specify that the enclosure is an image that the enclosure is a JPEG file or that the enclosure is an image of the JPEG file type. In some embodiments the data type may be specified using the Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions MIME standard which is well known in the art and need not be further described.

The content item may include one or more metadata fields . For example the content item may include a source identifier to identify the source content feed of the content item an author name or identifier to identify the author of the particular content item and a publication date to identify the date on which the content item was published.

It should be appreciated that the data structure for the content item and the described fields are merely exemplary. A content item may include a subset of the fields identified above may include additional fields and may take on alternative formats.

Attention is now directed to which is a flow diagram illustrating a process for displaying a gallery of content items in accordance with some embodiments. While the process flow described below includes a number of steps or operations that appear to occur in a specific order it should be apparent that these processes can include more or fewer steps or operations. Some of the operations that are described here as being executed serially may be performed in parallel e.g. using parallel processors or a multi threading environment . Furthermore in some embodiments some of the operations e.g. operations may be performed multiple times before a following operation e.g. operation is performed.

A plurality of content items is received . The received content items are specified in content feeds to which the user has subscribed. In some embodiments the content items are provided by the server system to the client system .

Identifying information associated with the received content items are displayed . In some embodiments the identifying information is displayed as a list of content items in the feed reader user interface . In some embodiments the feed reader user interface may have a finite display area. In such circumstances identifying information for a subset of the received content items may be in view at a given time. The user may scroll through the list to view identifying information associated with other received content items. The list may display all or a subset of the content item fields. For example the displayed identifying information may include the titles and the source content feeds of the content items. In some embodiments the identifying information that is displayed that is the fields that are displayed may be configured by the user.

In some embodiments the list includes content items from all subscribed feeds. This may be referred to as the universal view or an interleaved list. That is content items from the subscribed content feeds are all displayed in the same list and not separated by source. In some embodiments the list may be sorted by the publication date and time of the content item for example in reverse chronological order. In some other embodiments the user may toggle an option to display a universal view to display the items ordered by source author or some other field or to display only content items from a particular source by a particular author or the like.

The user selects a content item from the list . The user may select a content item by clicking on the content item with a mouse pointer or by using keyboard commands.

In response to the selection other content items in the list satisfying predefined criteria with respect to the selected content item are identified . In some embodiments other content items that are the same as the selected content item with respect to a set of predefined characteristics are identified. Thus the predefined criteria may require content items to match one or more characteristics of the selected content items. That is additional content items are identified based on matches to a particular set of characteristics of the selected item. For example additional content items having the same data type and source content feed as the selected item are identified. In some embodiments the characteristics that serve as criteria for identifying additional content items may be configured in advance by the user.

In some embodiments an exemplary characteristic for identifying additional content items is the data type of the full version of the content of a content item. When the user selects a content item and the content item includes content such as an image digital audio or digital video additional content items also having an image digital audio or digital video are identified respectively. In some embodiments the identification may be based on the data category such as whether the object is an image digital audio etc. The data category may be explicitly specified by the content item or inferred from the file type of the content. For example if the content item includes an MPEG digital video other content items that includes a file of any file type recognized as digital video such as QUICKTIME WINDOWS MEDIA REALVIDEO etc. may be identified. In some other embodiments the identification may be based on the specific file type rather than data categories. For example if the content item includes a JPEG image other content items including a JPEG image but not images of other file types such as GIF or TIFF images may be identified.

Another exemplary characteristic for identifying additional content items is that the additional content items follow the same format as the selected content item in that if the selected content item includes a title and a location but no content then the additional content items must also each have a title and a location but no content. This criterion may be helpful in identifying content items that include headlines in the title and links to the articles having the headlines.

It should be appreciated that data type and format are merely exemplary characteristics on which other content items may be identified. Other characteristics including but not limited to source author and or publication date or a publication date range may be used as identification criteria. Furthermore any combination of the characteristics may be used as the identification criteria. For example the identification criteria may be that the additional content items must have the same data type and the same source as the selected content item.

Information corresponding to the selected content item and the identified additional content items are presented to the user . The information is displayed in a gallery view. The gallery view includes a collection of information for each of the selected and additional content items or at least a subset of the selected and additional content items due to finite display regions . The gallery view provides a preview of the selected and additional content items. The gallery view gives the user an at a glance look of the selected and additional content items. From the gallery view the user may select a content item for viewing.

In some embodiments the information that is displayed in the gallery may depend at least in part on the identification criteria. For example if the identification criteria include having the same data type then the information that is displayed may be information that is related to the data type of the selected and additional content items. Further information regarding the gallery view and the information that is displayed in the gallery view is described below in relation to .

The feed reader module includes a content item identification module that identifies additional content items satisfying predefined criteria with respect to a user selected content item. The feed reader module also includes a gallery module for presenting information corresponding to the selected and additional content items in a gallery view.

In some embodiments the feed reader module may be a script based module embedded in a web page served from the server system . The web page may be rendered by a client application such as a web browser at the client computer . When the web page is rendered the feed reader module is executed thereby providing a web based interface to the server system . The script based feed reader module may be written in JavaScript ECMAScript or any other suitable scripting language.

In some other embodiments the feed reader module may be a standalone application stored in memory of the client computer . The standalone application may include but is not limited to a feed aggregator application. In further other embodiments the feed reader module may be an add on or a plug in to another application. For example the feed reader module may be a plug in to an email application.

In some embodiments received content items may be cached locally in memory . Similarly a user s list of content feed subscriptions may also be cached locally in memory .

Each of the above identified elements may be stored in one or more of the previously mentioned memory devices. Each of the above identified modules corresponds to a set of instructions for performing a function described above. The above identified modules or programs i.e. sets of instructions need not be implemented as separate software programs procedures or modules and thus various subsets of these modules may be combined or otherwise re arranged in various embodiments. In some embodiments memory may store a subset of the modules and data structures identified above. Furthermore memory may store additional modules and data structures not described above.

The user data stores data for users of the service such as login information and user preferences. The user data includes subscription lists which include lists of users feed subscriptions. Each user has a corresponding list of content feed subscriptions. In some embodiments the server computer may further store feed subscription information in one or more tables both not shown . The feed subscription information tables store information associated with content feeds such as the locations of the feeds e.g. the feeds URLs and per user subscription information with respect to individual content feeds.

Each of the above identified elements may be stored in one or more of the previously mentioned memory devices and corresponds to a set of instructions for performing a function described above. The above identified modules or programs i.e. sets of instructions need not be implemented as separate software programs procedures or modules and thus various subsets of these modules may be combined or otherwise re arranged in various embodiments. In some embodiments memory may store a subset of the modules and data structures identified above. Furthermore memory may store additional modules and data structures not described above.

Although shows a server computer is intended more as functional description of the various features which may be present in a set of servers than as a structural schematic of the embodiments described herein. In practice and as recognized by those of ordinary skill in the art items shown separately could be combined and some items could be separated. For example some items shown separately in could be implemented on single servers and single items could be implemented by one or more servers.

The user may view the content items in a universal view. The universal view includes a list of content items from all of the user s subscribed feeds. The content items shown in the list are interleaved without regard to source. In some embodiments the list is sorted by publication date and time for example in reverse chronological order. Also in some embodiments the list may show only content items that the user has not viewed. The list presents identifying information for the content items so that the user can identify a content item she wishes to view and select it. Because the UI may have a finite size and the list may include more items than can fit into the UI the UI may display a subset of the content items at a given time and the user may scroll through the list to find other content items. The list may also include an indicator of how many content items are in the list in total. Alternatively the indicator may indicate the number of content items yet to be viewed.

From the list the user may select a content item. When the user selects an item from the list in the universal view the UI may display the full version of the content in a viewer region . For example if the selected content item indicated by a box with a thick border includes a link to an article at a news web site or a link to a blog posting the article or the blog posting respectively may be displayed in the viewer region .

In the UI a gallery feature may be enabled. When the feature is enabled and a content item is selected from the list instead of displaying the full version of the content in the viewer region a gallery view of information corresponding to the selected content item and additional content items may be displayed in the viewer region .

When the selected content item includes an image the information that is displayed in the gallery view includes thumbnails of the selected content item and additional content items that also include images as illustrated in . In some embodiments the additional content items are all from the same content feed as the selected item. In other embodiments the additional content items may include content items from the same content feed as the selected item as well as content items from different content feeds. For each of the selected content item and additional content items the gallery view presents a thumbnail and information corresponding to the image such as a name of the image which may be derived from the title of the content item or the file name and a size which may be the size of the image file or the dimensions of the image in pixels . The user may select one of the thumbnails in the viewer region to open the image in the viewing region or in a new window.

When the selected content item e.g. content item in includes digital video or digital audio the information that is displayed in the gallery view includes a playlist of the video or audio clips respectively of the selected content item and additional content items as illustrated in . As in the example discussed above with respect to in some embodiments the additional content items are all from the same content feed as the selected item while in other embodiments the additional content items may include content items from the same content feed as the selected item as well as content items from different content feeds. In some embodiments for each of the selected content item and additional content items the gallery view presents a title of the clip which may be derived from the title of the content item the file name of the clip or metadata embedded in the clip and a running time of the clip. The user may select one of the clips in the viewer region to access the clip and playback controls for the clip.

In some embodiments the gallery view may display information corresponding to a selected content item and additional identified content items when the selected content item and the identified content items include a title and link to the full version of the content but no content itself as illustrated in . That is the identification criterion is that if the selected content item includes a title and location but no actual content then additional content items that follow the same pattern of having a title and a location but no actual content are identified. The viewer region shows the title of each of the selected and additional content items as a headline of the content item and optionally a date of each content item. In other embodiments the gallery of content items may be displayed in a number of different ways for example using a grid instead of a list. The user may select one of the content items in the viewer region to access the full version of the content to which the content item links.

In some embodiments additional content items from the same source content feed as the selected content item may be displayed in the gallery view as shown in . Titles and dates of the selected and additional content items may be displayed in the viewer region . The user may select one of the content items in the viewer region to access the content item.

The foregoing description for purpose of explanation has been described with reference to specific embodiments. However the illustrative discussions above are not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise forms disclosed. Many modifications and variations are possible in view of the above teachings. The embodiments were chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention and its practical applications to thereby enable others skilled in the art to best utilize the invention and various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

