---

title: Portable memory storage device with biometric identification security
abstract: A portable memory storage device is disclosed where access to information on the device is granted only upon proper biometric authentication of a user. The device includes a controller, a non-volatile memory which may be a flash memory, and a biometric scanner system for controlling access to the information within the non-volatile memory. Each of the controller, non-volatile memory and biometric scanner system may be mounted in a base of the portable device, with the biometric system having an exposed surface on a top portion of the base for accepting biometric data such as a fingerprint. A cover is provided which includes a USB connector capable of mating within a USB port of the host device to establish communications between the portable and host devices. The cover also covers the exposed portion of the biometric scanner to protect the sensor when the portable memory storage device is not in use.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08000502&OS=08000502&RS=08000502
owner: SanDisk Technologies Inc.
number: 08000502
owner_city: Plano
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050309
---
The present application is related to Design patent application Ser. No. 29 230 382 entitled Portable Memory Storage Device filed currently with the present application. A copy of this Design Patent Application is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

Embodiments of the present invention relate to a portable memory storage device with biometric identification security.

Non volatile semiconductor memory devices such as flash memory storage drives are becoming widely used to meet the ever growing demands on digital information storage and exchange. In addition to their small size portability high reliability and large capacity flash memory drives can be conveniently removed from and attached to a wide variety of electronic devices having the appropriate connection port e.g. a serial bus port such as a USB port or an IEEE 1394 Firewire port .

Concurrent with the rising demand to store and exchange data is the need to keep data secure against unauthorized access. In an effort to make flash memory drives more secure it is known to provide PIN and password authentication routines before drive access is granted. Additionally or alternatively it is also known to provide physical key and smartcard systems which allow access to the flash memory drive only upon acceptance of the proper key or smartcard. However a problem with these security systems is that the access medium may be lost stolen forgotten and or hacked. Biometric security systems such as fingerprint scanners have therefore been incorporated into data storage devices such as flash drives. Unlike passwords smartcards and the like biometric data is unique and cannot be stolen or reproduced hence only authorized users are able to access the information on the drive.

An example of a biometric flash memory is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 707 935 entitled High Security Flash Memory and Method. As disclosed therein a fingerprint scanner is embedded in the flash memory device. Before the information stored on the flash memory is accessible the user. places his or her finger on the scanner whereupon the user s fingerprint is scanned digitized and compared against a stored version of the print. Access to the flash memory is granted only upon a match of the scanned and stored prints.

While providing effective security conventional biometric flash memory devices have drawbacks. First the port in the host device to which the flash memory is inserted for use is often difficult to access. For example when used with a desktop or laptop computer the port is often on the side or back of the computer which makes it difficult to provide the fingerprint for authentication when the drive is plugged into the port. Moreover typical biometric scanners are formed of fragile materials. Unlike typical electronics that are encased in a protective housing biometric scanners must be relatively exposed so as to be able to obtain a clear image of the fingerprint thumbprint or other biometric data. Thus it is easy for the scanner to become scratched damaged or ruined thus rendering the security features and or the flash memory device itself useless.

One embodiment of the invention relates to a portable memory storage device where access to the information on the device is granted only upon proper biometric authentication of a user. The device has a multi piece construction so that the biometric scanner may remain in a convenient position while the portable memory device is connected to and communicating with a host device. The multiple pieces of the portable memory device also combine with each other when not in use to provide a compact size and convenient shape and one where the biometric scanner is covered for protection.

Embodiments of the portable memory storage device include a controller a non volatile memory which may be a flash memory and a biometric scanner system for controlling access to the information with the non volatile memory. Each of the controller non volatile memory and biometric scanner system may be mounted in a base of the portable device with the biometric system having an exposed surface on a top portion of the base for accepting biometric data such as a fingerprint. A cover is provided which in embodiments includes a USB connector capable of mating within a USB port of the host device to establish communications between the portable and host devices.

When not in use the cover affixes to the base to cover and protect the biometric scanner. The base further includes a docking enclosure having a similar configuration as the USB port. The connector on the cover is received within the docking enclosure when not in use to protect the connector and to provide a compact and convenient form factor to the portable device. The cover may be affixed to the base by a flexible communications cable which serves to tether the base and cover together and also to transmit information between the portable and host devices. The cable may be omitted in embodiments in favor of wireless communication between the base and cover.

While the cover is engaged with the serial port of the host device the cable allows the base and biometric scanner to be positioned in a location that is selectable and convenient to the user. Thus the biometric data such as a fingerprint may be easily entered while the cover is affixed to and allowing communication with the host USB port.

Embodiments of the invention will now be described with reference to which to relate to a portable memory storage device with biometric identification security. It is understood that the present invention may be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as being limited to the embodiments set forth herein. Rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the invention to those skilled in the art. Indeed the invention is intended to cover alternatives modifications and equivalents of these embodiments which are included within the scope and spirit of the invention as defined by the appended claims. Furthermore in the following detailed description of the present invention numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. However it will be clear to those of ordinary skill in the art that the present invention may be practiced without such specific details.

Referring now to there is shown a block diagram of functional components of a portable memory storage device coupled to a host device . The portable memory storage device in general includes an integrated circuit memory and a biometric scanner system . The integrated circuit may be implemented as an application specific integrated circuit ASIC but may be implemented as other types of integrated circuits. Some portion of the functions performed by ASIC may also be implemented in software.

Memory may be any of a variety of semiconductor non volatile memories such as for example a flash memory system. One example of a flash memory system suitable for implementing the present invention uses the NAND structure which includes arranging multiple transistors in series between two select gates. The transistors in series and the select gates are referred to as a NAND string. is a top view showing one NAND string. is an equivalent circuit thereof. The NAND string depicted in FIGS. and includes four transistors and in series and sandwiched between a first select gate and a second select gate . Select gate connects the NAND string to bit line . Select gate connects the NAND string to source line . Select gate is controlled by applying the appropriate voltages to control gate CG. Select gate is controlled by applying the appropriate voltages to control gate CG. Each of the transistors and has a control gate and a floating gate. Transistor has control gate CG and floating gate FG. Transistor includes control gate CG and floating gate FG. Transistor includes control gate CG and floating gate FG. Transistor includes control gate CG and floating gate FG. Control gate CG is connected to word line WL control gate CG is connected to word line WL control gate CG is connected to word line WL and control gate CG is connected to word line WL. In one embodiment transistors and are each memory cells. In other embodiments the memory cells may include multiple transistors or may be different than that depicted in .

Note that although show four memory cells in the NAND string the use of four transistors is only provided as an example. A NAND string can have less than four memory cells or more than four memory cells. For example some NAND strings will include eight memory cells 16 memory cells 32 memory cells etc. The discussion herein is not limited to any particular number of memory cells in a NAND string.

Each memory cell can store data represented in analog or digital form. When storing one bit of digital data the range of possible threshold voltages of the memory cell is divided into two ranges which are assigned logical data 1 and 0. In one example of a NAND type flash memory the threshold voltage is negative after the memory cell is erased and defined as logic 1. The threshold voltage after a program operation is positive and defined as logic 0. When the threshold voltage is negative and a read is attempted by applying 0V on the word line the memory cell will turn on to indicate logic one is being stored. When the threshold voltage is positive and a read operation is attempted by applying 0V on the word line the memory cell will not turn on which indicates that logic zero is stored. A memory cell can also store multiple levels of information thereby storing multiple bits of digital data. In the case of storing multiple levels of data the range of possible threshold voltages is divided into the number of storage levels. For example if four levels of information are stored there will be four threshold voltage ranges assigned to the data values 11 10 01 and 00. In one example of a NAND type memory the threshold voltage after an erase operation is negative and defined as 11 . Positive threshold voltages are used for the states of 10 01 and 00. 

Relevant examples of NAND type flash memories and their operation are provided in the following U.S. Patents all of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 570 315 5 774 397 6 046 935 5 386 422 6 456 528 and 6 522 580. Information about programming NAND flash memory including self boosting techniques can be found in U.S. Pat. No. 6 859 397 entitled Source Side Self Boosting Technique For Non Volatile Memory issued on Feb. 22 2005 and in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 629 068 titled Detecting Over Programmed Memory filed on Jul. 29 2003 which patent and application are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety. Other types of flash memory devices can also be used with the present invention. For example the following patents describe NOR type flash memories and are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 095 344 5 172 338 5 890 192 and 6 151 248. Another example of a flash memory type is found in U.S. Pat. No. 6 151 248 incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The technology described herein is not limited to floating gate types of memory but may also be applicable to memory cells that use other types of material for the charge storage. For example the technology described herein can be used with memory devices that use various types of charge storage regions layer s between the control gate or word line and the substrate such as a nitride layer or small silicon islands better known as nano crystals. In embodiments memory may have a storage capacity of 512 megabytes MB or 1 gigabyte GB . However these storage capacities are merely exemplary and the storage capacity may vary in alternative embodiments.

The data stored in the memory cells are read out by the column control circuit and are output to external I O lines via data input output buffer . Program data to be stored in the memory cells are input to the data input output buffer via the external I O lines and transferred to the column control circuit . The external I O lines are connected to controller .

Command data for controlling the flash memory device is input to controller . The command data informs the flash memory of what operation is requested. The input command is transferred to state machine which controls column control circuit row control circuit c source control circuit p well control circuit and data input output buffer . State machine can also output status data of the flash memory such as READY BUSY or PASS FAIL.

Controller is connected or connectable with a host device which may be a personal computer a digital camera personal digital assistant cellular telephone etc. Controller communicates with the host in order to receive commands from the host receive data from the host provide data to the host and provide status information to the host. Controller converts commands from the host into command signals that can be interpreted and executed by command circuits which are in communication with state machine . Controller typically contains buffer memory for the user data being written to or read from the memory array. Additional details relating to the memory system used in embodiments of the invention may be found in U.S. Patent Application No. 10 761 620 entitled Programming Non Volatile Memory attorney docket No. SAND 01017US0 which application is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

Biometric scanner system includes an authentication coprocessor and a biometric scanner . The coprocessor and scanner cooperate to accept and authenticate biometric data as explained in greater detail hereinafter. In embodiments of the invention the biometric scanner system is of the type to accept fingerprints and or thumbprints. However it is understood that biometric scanner system may be of the type to accept other unique personal identifier data including but not limited to a retina scanner and a voice print identification device.

In embodiments of the invention scanner may be a silicon based capacitive fingerprint thumbprint sensor of the type marketed by UPEK Inc. of Emeryville Calif. 94608. In general scanner is comprised of a two dimensional array of capacitive sensing cells each containing an active capacitive feedback circuit whose effective feedback capacitance is modulated by the presence of live skin close to the surface of the sensor. When live skin is brought in close proximity to a sensor cell the skin interferes with electric field lines within the cell and reduces the effective capacitance. When the skin is on the sensor surface fingerprint ridge the feedback capacitance is minimized while when the skin is far from the sensor surface fingerprint valley the feedback capacitance is maximized.

This difference in capacitance presence or absence of skin can be measured for each cell in the two dimensional array to capture the entire print image. The output of the sensor array may be passed through an analog signal conditioning block providing the capability to adjust sensor gain and offset before the signal is converted through an on chip A D converter into an 8 bit digital signal for encryption and storage as explained hereinafter. It is understood that the above method of obtaining biometric data is by way of example only and those of skill in the art would appreciate other devices and methods may be used for obtaining a digital signal of biometric data.

In embodiments of the invention all storage of scanned biometric data and comparison against input biometric data are performed within the biometric scanner system . In particular authentication coprocessor may have associated ROM having software for executing initialization of biometric scanner system and comparison of biometric data within the biometric scanner. The authentication coprocessor may also have non volatile memory for storing encrypted reference pattern s of biometric data as explained hereinafter. Non volatile memory may be a flash memory similar to flash memory described above. In alternative embodiments the non volatile memory may be omitted and the encrypted biometric data reference pattern s may be stored in a reserved area within flash memory . A system for storing a secure encrypted data reference pattern in a non volatile memory for use in a biometric memory device is disclosed in U.S. Patent Application No. 2004 0236954 entitled Biometric Based Authentication In A Nonvolatile Memory Device which application is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. The coprocessor may further include RAM for temporarily storing the biometric data reference pattern s and scanned biometric data during a comparison for verification of a user.

Once portable memory storage device is coupled to a host initialization or pass through firmware on ROM initializes the coprocessor and the coprocessor communicates with host via universal asynchronous receiver transmitter UART and universal serial bus USB device interface on ASIC . UART is a known interface component that handles asynchronous serial communication between the biometric scanner system and ASIC . Embodiments of the present invention use a USB connection to the host device. The host may include a USB host controller not shown and a USB port for receiving a USB connector of the portable memory storage device as explained hereinafter. Depending on the host operating system software drivers and or an application programming interface API may need to be downloaded into the host before communication with the portable memory storage device is enabled.

The invention is not limited to USB communication between the portable memory storage device and the host device and other communication protocols both cabled and wireless are contemplated. Moreover it is understood that ASIC may include additional known components in alternative embodiments of the invention. Examples of such additional components are disclosed in U.S. Patent Application No. 2003 0005336 entitled Portable Device Having Biometrics Based Authentication Capabilities which application is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. Further still while the storage and comparison of entered and stored biometric data has been described above as being performed by coprocessor it is understood that these operations may be carried out by processor on ASIC or within host device in alternative embodiments.

In embodiments power for the portable memory storage device is received from the host via the USB connection. However the device may include an independent onboard power supply in alternative embodiments.

An embodiment of the operation of the biometric scanner device to allow only authorized access to memory will now be described with reference to the flowchart of . In step the firmware in ROM checks to see whether the portable memory storage device has been connected to the USB port of the host device. Upon being coupled to a host platform portable device undergoes an initialization procedure step . In embodiments the initialization procedure involves establishing communication with the host platform via the USB device interface and ensuring the host platform is aware that portable memory storage device has been coupled thereto.

The authentication coprocessor next determines whether a user registration is necessary step . This may occur where device is being used for the first time and no reference pattern s of biometric data are stored in non volatile memory . In the event it is determined in step that no reference patterns are stored pass through communications between the authentication processor and host are carried out to perform the enrollment process step . The host displays instructions to guide the user through the registration process step and the user is prompted to place a finger or other applicable biometric indicia on the scanner step . This obtained biometric data is to be stored as the reference pattern for use in future comparisons with scanned user biometric data when access to the memory is sought. It may be necessary to repeat step as requested by the display on the host until a satisfactory reference pattern is obtained. Preferably the number of retries is user configurable. Assuming a satisfactory reference pattern is obtained step the reference pattern is then encrypted for additional security step . Known cryptographic or hashing algorithms may used to encrypt the reference pattern. The encrypted reference pattern is then stored in non volatile memory in step . The size of the stored reference pattern may vary in alternative embodiments but may for example be 512 bytes.

In embodiments portable memory storage device supports more than one user. In another embodiment the same user may register multiple fingerprints as separate reference patterns. In a further embodiment the same user fingerprint may be registered multiple times as different reference patterns. Thus portable device can facilitate the registration of additional user s and or additional reference pattern s . The software can prompt for additional user s and or additional reference pattern s in step . If additional user s and or additional reference pattern s are indicated steps through are repeated. The ability to add additional user s and or additional reference pattern s may also be provided for example on start up when there are already stored reference patterns.

The electronics forming the biometric scanner system is an integral chipset that may be added to or removed from the printed circuit board that supports the ASIC controller and memory . In order to prevent against the removal and addition of a new biometric scanner system to gain unauthorized access the information on the memory the coprocessor may additionally store the serial number of the biometric scanner system and possibly controller in memory in step . As non volatile memory associated with the biometric scanner system would likely be removed in the event the system is replaced the stored serial number is preferably not be stored in non volatile memory . The stored serial number information will be used during the verification process explained hereinafter. Step may be omitted in embodiments of the invention.

Once the registration process is completed the graphical user interface may then indicate the successful completion in step .

In the event the authentication coprocessor indicates that there are one or more stored reference patterns in step the software scans a user s biometric data to ensure that the user is authorized for access to the information on memory . The coprocessor first reads the scanner serial number step and compares that against the scanner serial number stored in memory to confirm that the serial number of the biometric scanner system is the same as was stored during the registration process step . In the event they are different access to the drive is denied and the appropriate message is displayed in step . In embodiments of the invention instead of simply denying access the user may be given the option to enter a password in the event the stored and read serial numbers do not match. If the appropriate password is entered access to the drive may still be granted. In embodiments where storage of the serial number is omitted steps may similarly be omitted.

Upon matching serial numbers the user is prompted in step to place his or her finger or other biometric indicia on the scanner and the scanned image is digitized and loaded into RAM . If an unsatisfactory image is obtained the user may be prompted to try again. Preferably the number of retries is user configurable. Assuming a satisfactory image is obtained the stored reference patterns s are then read from non volatile memory and loaded into RAM step decrypted step and compared in step against the data obtained in step . If an appropriate match is found the host display indicates a successful scan step and access to the data within memory is granted.

In embodiments of the invention when user authentication in steps fail to produce a corresponding match access to flash memory is blocked and the appropriate message is displayed by the host device . Blocking of memory can be done by various methods including shutting down or disabling the ASIC controller or the flash interface associated with memory or configuring the controller to refuse read and write commands. It can also be accomplished by the host device. In embodiments the user may be given the option of repeating steps in the event of a failed verification. Preferably the number of retries is user configurable.

In embodiments of the invention in the event of a failed verification the user may be provided with an option to bypass the fingerprint authentication and provide a password to gain access instead in step . If the bypass password is correctly entered user authentication is deemed to be successful and step is performed and access to the data within memory is granted. If the bypass password is not properly entered user verification remains a failure and access is denied. The amount of password entry retries may be user configurable. It should also be appreciated that if added security is desired a password requirement can be implemented in addition to the fingerprint authentication even for normal routine authentication within the scope of the present invention.

It should be appreciated that in an embodiment where authentication is carried out in the host device appropriate modifications to the authentication process described above are needed. Thus depending on the particular implementation or application the information being transmitted from portable device to host device can either be a simple notification of success upon successful authentication or image data representing a user fingerprint that is pending authentication.

Where there are stored reference patterns it is contemplated that different reference patterns will have different access privileges to the memory . Thus access to files and directories on memory may be blocked for certain users while being available to others. Access may be controlled to grant different degrees of access by either the coprocessor ASIC or in the host device . Access privileges may be set up for example by an administrator.

Perspective views of the portable memory storage device are shown in . illustrate the storage device in a closed position and illustrate the storage device in the open position as explained in greater detail below. As seen in device includes a base a cover and a flexible communications cable extending between and coupling the base to cover . Base includes a well or recessed section on an upper surface in which recessed section is positioned the biometric scanner . The recessed section is large enough to accept a finger or thumb so as not to interfere with the location of a finger or thumb on scanner during scanning.

Base further includes a docking enclosure mounted on or formed integrally with the upper surface . The docking enclosure defines an opening sized and shaped to accept a connector extending out of cover . As indicated above portable memory storage device is used with a USB serial port in embodiments of the invention and for such embodiments connector is sized and shaped to fit within a USB serial port on a host device. The opening is sized accordingly to provide a snug fit of the connector within the opening . It is understood that for other serial connections both connector and opening defined by docking enclosure will be configured differently than shown to match the host port into which the connector fits.

In embodiments of the invention the cable may have a length of between 70 mm and 110 mm and more particularly between 80 mm and 100 mm and more particularly about 90 mm. It is understood that the length of cable may be less than 70 mm and greater than 110 mm in alternative embodiments. In embodiments the cable is fixedly attached to the base and the cover . It is understood that the cable may be removably connected to the base and or the cover in alternative embodiments.

In a further embodiment of the invention shown in cable may be omitted so that communication between the base and cover occurs wirelessly. Wireless protocols such as Bluetooth may be used for such embodiments. The Bluetooth system is described in detail in the Specification of the Bluetooth System Version 1.1 Feb. 22 2001 available at www.Bluetooth.com and or www.Bluetooth.org a copy of which specification is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. It is understood that other Wireless Local Area Network WLAN protocols may be used to establish wireless communication between the base and cover in alternative embodiments. In embodiments that use wireless communication base and cover each include a wireless transmitter receiver. For example instead of or in addition to UART ASIC would connect to a wireless transmitter receiver and optionally support logic. Similarly system would include a wireless transmitter receiver and optionally support logic in communication with authentication coprocessor .

Docking enclosure may be formed of polycarbonate or other plastic or metal and may be mounted to the top portion of base by a snap fit connection or by welding or adhesive. A pin is mounted in a space at a corner of the base extending between the docking enclosure and bottom portion . The space and pin allow the portable memory device to be conveniently mounted on a cord for easy transport. The corner space and pin may be omitted in alternative embodiments. A rubber pad may be affixed to the underside of the bottom portion to improve the frictional engagement of the base and a surface on which the base is supported. The rubber pad may be omitted in alternative embodiments.

Cover includes a bottom portion and a top portion which enclose a portion of the cable and in embodiments a portion of connector . At least a portion of connector extends outside of the enclosure formed by bottom and top portions for receipt within the port of the host device. Cable may have a rigid or flexible portion within the enclosure formed between the bottom and top portions but the portion of the cable extending outside of the enclosure is preferably flexible. In the exploded view shown in the cable is separated from the base but would be coupled thereto in the assembled device with one or more leads within the cable being coupled to the PCB within the base . The top and bottom portions of the cover may be formed of polycarbonate or other plastic or metal and may snap fit together or be affixed by welding or adhesive.

The portable memory device may be manufactured by assembling the printed circuit board with ASIC memory LEDs and and biometric scanner system within the bottom portion . A first end of cable may then be affixed to the printed circuit board and the top portion of the base may then be affixed to the bottom portion . The docking enclosure pin and rubber pad may then be affixed to the base . It is understood that the order of these assembly steps may vary in alternative embodiments. Cable with the connector affixed to a second end opposite the first end may then have a portion enclosed between bottom portion and the top portion with at least a portion of the connector protruding from the cover and then the bottom and top portions of the cover affixed together.

As indicated above the portable memory device according to embodiments of the present invention moves between a closed position shown in and an open position shown in and . In the open position the connector of cover is capable of engaging with a USB port of a host device to allow communication between the portable memory device and the host device provided the biometric authentication has been successfully completed . While the cover is engaged with the USB port of the host device the cable allows the base to be positioned in a location that is selectable and convenient to the user for easy access when performing the biometric scan. That is while the cover is engaged with a USB port the orientation and position of the scanner and base can be changed to make it easier for the user to perform the biometric scan.

When communication with a host device has been completed the cover may be removed from the serial port and slid into secure engagement with the base . The docking enclosure may have an internal configuration similar in shape to the serial port of the host device so that the connector engages the internal wall of the docking enclosure in a press fit engagement to hold the cover on the base. Additionally or alternatively the base and cover may have mechanisms forming interlocking engagement to secure the base and cover together in the closed position. An example of such mechanisms are explained with respect to which is a cross section through line in . In embodiments the base may include rounded projections as seen for example in which protrude inward slightly from the sides of the top portion of base on either side of the biometric scanner . The cover may include a pair of dovetails as seen for example in . When the cover is slid onto the base the dovetails have a portion which slides beneath the projections to make an interlocking joint between the base and cover. Thus the cover will not dislodge from the base unless it is intentionally slid off of the base.

In the closed position the cover partially or fully covers the scanner thus protecting the scanner and preventing the scanner from being damaged while not in use. When closed the cover may lie substantially in contact with the base or may be slightly spaced therefrom with contact being established only at certain points around the periphery of the cover. In embodiments where portions of the cover periphery are spaced from the base the space is preferably small enough to prevent exposure of the scanner .

In the closed position the connector resides within the docking enclosure to also prevent the connector from being damaged while not in use. Moreover in a closed position the portable memory device attains a relatively compact form factor and convenient shape. In embodiments of the invention the portable memory device may be 60 mm long 24 mm wide and 14 mm high. It is understood that these dimensions are by way of example only and the various dimensions may be larger or smaller than that in alternative embodiments.

As indicated above in embodiments of the invention the ASIC memory and biometric scanner system are all housed within the base . In an alternative embodiment the ASIC and or the memory may be housed within the interior of the cover and be connected with the biometric scanner system via the cable .

The foregoing detailed description of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed. Many modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teaching. The described embodiments were chosen in order to best explain the principles of the invention and its practical application to thereby enable others skilled in the art to best utilize the invention in various embodiments and with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated. It is intended that the scope of the invention be defined by the claims appended hereto.

