---

title: System and method for musical sonification of data parameters in a data stream
abstract: One embodiment of a musical sonification system and method receives a data stream including different data parameters. The sonification system may apply different sonification processes to the different data parameters to produce a musical rendering of the data stream. In one embodiment, the sonification system and method maps data parameters related to options trades to pitch values corresponding to musical notes in an equal tempered scale.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07135635&OS=07135635&RS=07135635
owner: Accentus, LLC
number: 07135635
owner_city: Hanover
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050407
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 560 500 filed Apr. 7 2004 which is fully incorporated by reference. This application is also a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 446 452 filed on May 28 2003 which is fully incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention relates to musical sonification and more particularly to musical sonification of a data stream including different data parameters such as a financial market data stream resulting from trading events.

For centuries printed visual displays have been used for displaying information in the form of bar charts pie charts and graphs. In the information age visual displays e.g. computer monitors have become the primary means for conveying large amounts of information. Computers with visual displays for example are often used to process and or monitor complex numerical data such as financial trading market data fluid flow data medical data air traffic control data security data network data and process control data. Computational processing of such data produces results that are difficult for a human overseer to monitor visually in real time. Visual displays tend to be overused in real time data intensive situations causing a visual data overload. In a financial trading situation for example a trader often must constantly view multiple screens displaying multiple different graphical representations of real time market data for different markets securities indices etc. Thus there is a need to reduce visual data overload by increasing perception bandwidth when monitoring large amounts of data.

Sound has also been used as a means for conveying information. Examples of the use of sound to convey information include the Geiger counter sonar the auditory thermometer medical and cockpit auditory displays and Morse code. The use of non speech sound to convey information is often referred to as auditory display. One type of auditory display in computing applications is the use of auditory icons to represent certain events e.g. opening folders errors etc. . Another type of auditory display is audification in which data is converted directly to sound without mapping or translation of any kind. For example a data signal can be converted directly to an analog sound signal using an oscillator. The use of these types of auditory displays have been limited by the sound generation capabilities of computing systems and are not suited to more complex data.

Sonification is a relatively new type of auditory display. Sonification has been defined as a mapping of numerically represented relations in some domain under study to relations in an acoustic domain for the purposes of interpreting understanding or communicating relations in the domain under study C. Scaletti Sound synthesis algorithms for auditory data representations in G. Kramer ed. International Conference on Auditory Display no. XVIII in Studies in the Sciences of Complexity Jacob Way Reading Mass. 01867 Santa Fe Institute Addison Wesley Publishing Company 1994. . Using a computer to map data to sound allows complex numerical data to be sonified.

The human ability to recognize patterns in sound presents a unique potential for the use of auditory displays. Patterns in sound may be recognized over time and a departure from a learned pattern may result in an expectation violation. For example individuals establish a baseline for the normal sound of a car engine and can detect a problem when the baseline is altered or interrupted. Also the human brain can process voice music and natural sounds concurrently and independently. Music in particular has advantages over other types of sound with respect to auditory cognition and pattern recognition. Musical patterns may be implicitly learned recognizable even by non musicians and aesthetically pleasing. The existing auditory displays have not exploited the true potential of sound and particularly music as a way to increase perception bandwidth when monitoring data. Thus existing sonification techniques do not take advantage of the auditory cognition attributes unique to music.

One area in which large amounts of data must be monitored is options trading. Automated programs may be used to execute equity options trades. Computer programs may also be used to monitor portfolio changes in data parameters such as delta gamma and vega for these trades. Currently a single beep alert is generated for each trade that occurs. This traditional alarm strategy fails to capitalize on the opportunity to provide valuable additional information about the trade and its resulting effect on the overall options portfolio using human auditory cognition.

Accordingly there is a need for a musical sonification system and method capable of providing a musical rendering of a data stream including multiple data parameters such that changes in musical notes indicate changes in the different data parameters. There is also a need for a musical sonification system and method capable of providing a musical rendering of a financial data stream such as an options portfolio data stream such that changes in musical notes indicate changes in options data parameters at a portfolio level.

Referring to a sonification system may receive a data stream and may generate a musical rendering of data parameters in the data stream . Embodiments of the present invention are directed to musical sonification of complex data streams within various types of data domains as will be described in greater detail below. Musical sonification provides a data transformation such that the relations in the data are manifested in corresponding musical relations. The musical sonification preferably generates pleasing musical sounds that yield a high degree of human perception of the underlying data stream thereby increasing data perception bandwidth. As used herein music or musical refers to the science or art of ordering tones or sounds in succession in combination and in temporal relationships to produce a composition having unity and continuity. Although the music used in the present invention is preferably common practice music and the exemplary embodiments of the present invention use western musical concepts to produce pleasing musical sounds the terms music and musical are not to be limited to any particular style or type of music.

The sonification system may apply different sonification schemes or processes to different data parameters in the data stream . Each of the different sonification processes may produce one or more musical notes that may be combined to form the musical rendering of the data stream . The raw data in the data stream may correspond directly to musical notes or the raw data may be manipulated or translated to obtain other data values that correspond to the musical notes. The user may listen to the musical rendering of the data stream to discern changes in each of the different data parameters over a period of time and or relative to other data parameters. The distinction between the data parameters may be achieved by different pitch ranges instruments duration and or other musical characteristics.

One embodiment of a sonification method including different sonification processes applied to different data parameters is shown in greater detail in . According to this method the sonification system receives a data stream having the different data parameters e.g. A B C operation . The data stream may include a stream of numerical values for each of the different data parameters. In one embodiment the data stream may be provided as a series of data elements with each data element corresponding to a data event. Each of the data elements may include numerical values for each of the data parameters e.g. A B C . . . A B C . . . A B C . . . .

According to each of the sonification processes applied to the different data parameters e.g. A B C in the data stream the sonification system may obtain data values for each of the different data parameters in the data stream operations . The data values obtained for the different data parameters may be raw data or numerical values obtained directly from the data stream or may be obtained by manipulating the raw data in the data stream. To communicate information describing a series of events collectively for example the data value may be obtained by calculating a moving sum of the raw data in the data stream or by calculating a weighted average of the raw data in the data stream as described in greater detail below. Such data values may be used to provide a more global picture of the data stream. The manipulations or calculations to be applied to raw data to obtain the data values may depend on the type of data stream and the application.

The sonification system may then apply the different sonification processes to the data values obtained for each of the data parameters e.g. A B C to produce one or more musical parts that form the musical rendering of the data stream. The parts of the musical rendering may be arranged and played using different pitch ranges musical instruments and or other music characteristics. The sonifications of different data parameters may be independent of each other to produce different parts corresponding to different parameters e.g. sonifications of parameters A and B respectively . The sonifications of different data parameters may also be related to each other to produce one part representing multiple parameters e.g. sonification of both data parameters B and C .

According to one sonification process the sonification system may determine one or more first parameter pitch values P corresponding to the data value obtained for the first data parameter A operation . The pitch values P may correspond to musical notes on an equal tempered scale e.g. on a chromatic scale . A half step on the chromatic scale for example may correspond to a significant movement of the data parameter. The sonification system may then play one or more sustained notes at the determined pitch value s P corresponding to the data value operation . The sonification process may be repeated for each successive data value obtained for the first data parameter A of the data stream resulting in multiple sonification events. Successive sonification events may occur for example when a significant movement results in a pitch change to another note or at defined time periods. Each sustained note may be played until the next sonification event.

According to one example sonification the sonification process applied to a series of data values A A A . . . obtained for the first data parameter A produces a series of sonifications forming the part . A first data value A may produce a sustained note at pitch P. A second data value A may produce a sustained note at pitch P which is five 5 half steps below the note indicating a decrease of about five significant movements. A period of time in which there are no sonification events may result in the sustained note being played through another bar or measure. A third data value A may produce a sustained note at pitch P which is one 1 half step above the note indicating an increase of about one 1 significant movement. Thus changes in the pitch of the sustained notes that are played at the first parameter pitch value s P as a result of the sonification process indicate changes in the first data parameter A in the data stream. Although the exemplary embodiment shows single sustained notes being played for each of the data values A A A those skilled in the art will recognize that multiple notes may be played together e.g. as a chord for each of the data values.

According to another sonification process the sonification system may determine one or more second parameter pitch values P corresponding to the data value obtained for the second data parameter B operation . The pitch values P for the second data parameter may also correspond to musical notes e.g. on the chromatic scale and may be within a pitch range that is different from a pitch range for the first data parameter to allow the sonifications of the first and second data parameters to be distinguished. The sonification system may then play one or more notes at the determined pitch value s P operation . The note s played for the second data parameter B may be played for a limited duration and may be played with a reference note P to provide a reference point for a change in pitch indicating a change in the second data parameter B . The reference note may correspond to a predetermined data value obtained for the second data parameter e.g. 0 or may correspond to a first note played for the second data parameter. The sonification process may be repeated for each successive data value obtained for the second data parameter B of the data stream resulting in multiple sonification events. Successive sonification events may occur when each data value is obtained for the second data parameter or may occur less frequently for example when a significant movement results in a pitch change to another note or at defined time periods. Thus there may be a period of time between sonification events where notes are not played for the second data parameter.

According to one example sonification the sonification process applied to a series of data values B B B . . . obtained for the second data parameter B produces a series of sonification events in the part . A first data value B may produce note at pitch P. The note may be played following and one half step above a reference note at pitch P indicating that the first data value B has increased one significant movement from a reference value e.g. B 0 . A second data value B may produce a note at pitch P which is three half steps below the reference note indicating that the second data value B has decreased by three significant movements from the reference value Bref . The note may be played without a reference note because it is played relatively close to the previous sonification event. A period of time where there is no sonification event for the second data parameter is indicated by a rest where no notes are played. A third data value B may produce note at pitch P which may be played following the reference note . The note is played five half steps below the reference note indicating that the third data value has decreased by three significant movements from the reference value. Thus changes in the pitch of the notes played at the second parameter pitch value s P as a result of the sonification process indicate changes in the second data parameter B in the data stream.

According to a further sonification process related to the second sonification process the sonification system may determine one or more third parameter pitch values P corresponding to the third data parameter C operation . The pitch values for the third data parameter correspond to musical notes e.g. on the chromatic scale and may be determined relative to the notes played for the second parameter pitch value P e.g. at predefined interval spacings . The sonification system may then play additional note s at the third parameter pitch value s Pfollowing the note s played at the second parameter pitch value s P operation . Thus the sonifications of the second and third data parameters are related. According to one variation of this sonification process the additional notes may be played simultaneously e.g. a triad or chord to produce a harmony where the number of additional notes in the harmony corresponds to the magnitude of the data value obtained for the third data parameter. According to another variation of this sonification process the additional notes may be played sequentially e.g. a tremolo or trill to produce an effect such as reverberation echo or multi tap delay where the tempo of the notes played in sequence corresponds to the magnitude of the data value obtained for the third data parameter.

According to one example sonification the related sonification process applied to a series of data values C C C . . . obtained for the third data parameter C produces additional sonification events in the part . With respect to the third data parameter a first data value C may produce two notes played together. The notes may be played following and together with the note for the first data value B for the second data parameter and at a pitch below the note . The notes may form a minor triad with the note as the tonic or root note of the chord indicating that the first data value C is within an undesirable range. The second data value C may produce three notes played together. The notes may be played following and together with the note for the second data value B for the second data parameter and at a pitch above the note . The notes may form a major chord with the note as the tonic or root note of the chord indicating that the second data value is in a desirable range. The additional note played in the harmony or chord for the data value C indicates that the magnitude of the third data parameter has increased.

Alternatively the additional notes for the related sonification process may be played in sequence. For example a third data value C may produce an additional note one whole step above the note played for the third data value B for the second data parameter and the two notes may be played in rapid alternation for example as a trill or tremolo. The number of notes or the tempo at which the notes are played in rapid alternation may indicate the magnitude of the third data value C for the third data parameter.

The musical parts together form a musical rendering of the data stream. A sonification of a few data values for each data parameter is shown for purposes of simplification. The sonification processes can be applied to any number of data values to produce any number of notes and sonification events. Although the exemplary method involves three different sonification processes applied to different data parameters any combination of the sonification processes may be used together or with other sonification processes. Although the exemplary embodiment shows a specific time signature and values for the notes those skilled in the art will recognize that various time signatures and note values may be used. Although the exemplary embodiment shows sonification events corresponding to measures of music the sonification events may occur more or less frequently. The illustrated exemplary embodiment shows the parts on the bass clef and treble clef respectively because of the different pitch ranges. Those skilled in the art will also recognize that various pitch values and pitch ranges may be used for the notes. One embodiment uses MIDI Musical Instrument Digital Interface pitch values although other values used to represent pitch may be used. Those skilled in the art will also recognize that other musical effects may be incorporated.

Referring to one embodiment of the sonification system may be used to sonify financial data streams such as options trading data originating from trading software. According to this method the sonification system may receive a financial data stream including a series of data elements corresponding to a series of trading events operation . Each of the data elements may include a unique date and time stamp corresponding to specific trading events. Each of the data elements may also include values for the data parameters which may reflect a change in the data parameter as a result of the particular trading event. The financial data stream may include data elements for trades relating to a particular security or to an entire portfolio.

The sonification system may map the data parameters in the financial data stream to pitch operation . The sonification system may then determine the notes to be played based on the pitch and based on the data parameters operation . For example the sonification system may use the sonification method described above see to map the different data parameters to pitch depending on the data values obtained for the data parameters and to determine the note s to be played based on the type of data parameter e.g. sustained notes harmonies repetitive notes . The sonification system may then play the notes to create the musical rendering of the financial data stream operation . The sonification system may be configured such that each of the data elements corresponding to a trading event results in a sonification event or such that sonification events occur less frequently. The sonification of the financial data stream may be used to provide a global picture of the financial data for example a portfolio level view of how portfolio values change as a result of each trade.

One embodiment of this sonification system and method may be used for options trading as described in greater detail below. In options trading data parameters relating to an options trade may include delta gamma vega expiration E and strike S . In the exemplary embodiment each data element in the data stream may contain the changes in delta gamma and vega resulting from a single trade in dollars together with the expiration E in days and the strike S in standard deviations related to that trade.

The delta gamma and vega data parameters may be mapped to pitch by such that changes in the portfolio values of the delta gamma and vega over a period of time result in changes in pitch. To provide a portfolio level sonification for example data values may be obtained for the data parameters delta gamma and vega by calculating a weighted moving sum. The moving sum of delta gamma and vega respectively can be calculated according to 

The value of P calculated by the above equations can be rounded to the nearest whole number so that a pitch in the equal tempered scale results. In the MIDI system for example P 60 corresponds to middle C. The pitch range P for each data parameter delta gamma and vega may be different. For example the pitch range for the weighted moving sum of delta may be in a low register e.g. with a continual string ensemble sound the pitch range for the weighted moving sum of gamma may be in the midrange and the pitch range for the weighted moving sum of vega Y may be higher. The exponent k in the above three equations 7 9 may be set by the user and controls the distribution of pitch with respect to the moving sum for example k 1 yields a linear distribution.

The note s to be played at the determined pitch value may depend on the data parameter being sonified. In the exemplary embodiment a sustained note is played at the pitch P determined for the moving sum of delta and notes of limited duration are played at the pitches P and Pdetermined for the moving sums of gamma and vega. In general the basic note based on the determined pitch P may sound whenever the current calculated value of pitch P varies from the previous value at which it sounded by a whole number e.g. at least a half step change on the chromatic scale . If there is a substantial time lapse between sonification events a reference note representing a gamma and vega of 0 may sound before the calculated pitch values P and Pare sounded. If several sonification events occur in rapid succession the reference note may not sound because the trend based on the current notes and immediately previous notes should be apparent.

In the exemplary embodiment the data parameter delta stands alone as a one dimensional variable whereas the data parameters gamma and vega are loaded with the additional data parameters expiration E and strike S. Thus the sonifications of the expiration E and strike S data parameters may be related to the sonification of the gamma and vega parameters. In particular the expiry and strike data parameters may be mapped to pitch values relative to the pitch values determined for the gamma and vega parameters.

The data value obtained for the expiry E and the strike S data parameters may be a weighted average of the expiries and strikes of all individual trades occurring between the current sonification event and the immediately previous sonification event. Alternatively if each trade is sonified individually the data values obtained for the expiry and strike data parameters may be the raw data values in each of the data elements.

To represent expiration additional notes may be added to the basic mapping of pitch P to the data values obtained for the gamma and vega parameters and played in sequence. Expiration implies distance in the future and may be sonified using an effect such as reverberation echo or multi tap delay. For example immediately pending expirations may have no reverb while those furthest into the future may have maximum reverb. The tempo of the notes played in sequence may correspond to the magnitude of the expiration value. The type of reverb and the function relating the amount of reverb to expiration can be determined by listening experiments with actual data.

To represent strike additional notes can be added to the basic mapping of pitch P to the data values obtained for the gamma and vega parameters and played together. In the event of an in the money strike the additional notes may be higher in pitch than the basic note P to form intervals suggestive of a major triad. Major triads are traditionally believed to connote a happy mood. In the event of an out of the money strike the additional notes may be lower in pitch than the basic note P to form intervals suggestive of a minor triad connoting a sad mood. The number of notes played together may correspond to the degree of in the money or out of the money. An at the money strike e.g. values of strike between 0.5 and 0.5 may have no additional pitches added to the basic note.

Thus the notes that are played indicate changes in the portfolio values of delta gamma and vega over a period of time. According to the exemplary sonification system and method the notes indicating changes in delta gamma and vega may sound at the same time if conditions allow. The distinction between delta gamma and vega may be achieved by pitch register instrument duration and or other musical characteristics. For example the delta data parameter may be voiced as a stringed instrument with sustained tones and thus may be the soloist . The gamma data parameter may be in a middle register and the vega data parameter may be in a higher register voiced as keyboard or mallet instruments for easy distinction and also for the expiration and strike effects to be more easily heard as described below.

An example of a musical rendering of a sample of options trading data is shown in . The notes for the delta gamma and vega parameters may be played as three different parts for example using three different instruments. In the first part for the delta parameter the notes may be played with a Cello as the instrument and in a lower pitch range as indicated by the bass clef. Initially the sustained C note MIDI P 48 plays while the delta is neutral. When the delta decreases by two significant movements the note stops playing and the sustained B flat note MIDI P 46 begins playing. When the delta decreases by three significant movements the note stops playing and the sustained G note MIDI P 43 begins playing. When the delta decreases again by three significant movements the note stops playing and the sustained E note MIDI P 40 begins playing.

In the second part for the gamma parameter the notes may be played with a Harp as the instrument and in a higher pitch range as indicated by the treble clef. When the gamma increases by one significant movement a reference G note MIDI P 67 is played followed by a G sharp note MIDI P 68 . When the gamma decreases by four significant movements the reference note is played followed by an E flat note MIDI P 63 . When the gamma immediately decreases again by one more significant movement a D note MIDI P 62 may be played without a reference note. Where there are no sonification events for the gamma parameter e.g. where the moving sum has not changed notes may not be played as indicated by the rests .

In the third part for the vega parameter the notes may be played with a Glockenspiel as the instrument and in the higher pitch range as indicated by the treble clef. When the vega increases by four significant movements the reference G note MIDI P 67 is played followed by a B note MIDI P 71 . When the vega decreases by seven significant movements the reference note is played followed by the C note MIDI P 60 . Where there are no sonification events for the vega parameter e.g. where the moving sum has not changed notes may not be played as indicated by the rests .

As shown in the notes played for the expiration and strike may be played together with the notes played for the gamma and delta in the second and third parts . When the gamma increases and the strike is out of the money by two standard deviations a two note C sharp and E harmony MIDI P 64 and 61 may be played following and together with the G sharp note representing the gamma increase forming a G sharp minor triad. When the gamma decreases and the strike is in the money by one standard deviation a single G note MIDI P 67 may be played following and together with the E flat note for the gamma decrease forming a two note harmony. When the gamma decreases and the strike is in the money by three standard deviations a three note harmony MIDI P 66 69 and 74 may be played following and together with the D note representing the gamma decrease forming a D major chord. When the vega increases and the strike is in the money by one standard deviation a single D sharp note MIDI P 75 may be played following and together with the B note representing the vega increase forming a two note harmony. When the vega decreases the strike is in the money by one standard deviation and the expiry is 30 days a single E note MIDI P 64 is played following the C note representing the vega decrease and a rapid repetition of the note and the note is played with quarter notes to form a trill .

The sonification system and method applied to options trading data may advantageously provide a palette of sounds that enable traders to receive more detailed information about how a given trade has altered portfolio values of data parameters such as delta gamma and vega. The musical sonification system and method is capable of generating rich meaningful sounds intended to communicate information describing a series of trades and why they may have been executed thereby providing a more global picture of prevailing conditions. This can lead to new insight and improved overall data perception.

The exemplary sonification systems and methods may be used to sonify a real time data stream for example from an existing data source. The sonification system may use a data interface such as a relatively simple read only interface to receive real time data streams. The data interface may be implemented with a basic inter process communications mechanism such as BSD style sockets as is generally known to those skilled in the art. The entity providing the data stream may provide any network and or infrastructure specifications and implementations to facilitate communications such as details for the socket connection e.g. IP address and Port Number . The sonification processes may communicate with the real time data stream processes over the sockets. The sonification system may receive the real time data with a socket listener decode each string of data and apply the appropriate transforms to the data in order to generate the sonification or auditory display.

When receiving option trade data for example an inter process communication mechanism e.g. a BSD style socket may be used to communicate a delimited ASCII data stream of the general format 

The exemplary sonification systems and methods may also be used to sonify historical data files. When historical data files are sonified the user may be able to adjust the speed of the playback. The exemplary sonification methods may run on historical data files to facilitate historical data analysis. For example the sonification methods may process historical data files and generate the auditory display resulting from the data for example in the form of an mp3 file. The exemplary sonification methods may also run historical data files for prototyping e.g. through rapid scenario based testing to facilitate user input into the design of the sonification system and method. For example traders may convey data files representing scenarios for which auditory display simulations may be helpful to assist with their understanding of the behavior of the auditory display.

The exemplary sonification systems and methods may also be configured by the user for example using a graphical user interface GUI . The user may change the runtime behavior of the auditory display for example to reflect changing market conditions and or to facilitate data analysis. The user may also modify or alter equation parameters discussed above for example by capturing the numbers using a textbox. In particular the user may modify the weighting factor A together with its functional form and the length of time tused in equations 1 6. The user may also modify the exponent k the maximum and minimum pitch values and the maximum and minimum values for delta gamma and vega used in equations 7 9. The user may also modify the exponent k used in equations 10 13.

The user may also configure the exemplary sonification methods for different data sources for example to receive data files in addition to connecting to a real time data source. For example the user may specify historical data files meeting a specific file format to be used as an alternative data source to real time data streams.

The user may also configure the time event space for the sonifications. Users may be able to set the threshold levels of changes in data parameters e.g. portfolio delta gamma and vega that trigger a new sonification event of the data parameters. At lower thresholds the sonification events may occur more frequently. In an exemplary embodiment very low thresholds may result in a sonification event for each individual trade. If very low thresholds have been set and there are large changes in portfolio delta gamma and vega for example the sonification events may be difficult to follow because of the large pitch changes that may result. In the case that multiple sonification events are triggered in a short period of time e.g. for gamma or vega the events may be queued and played back according to the user specification. In particular users may be able to set the maximum number of sonification events per time period e.g. 1 sonification event per second and or a minimum amount of time between sonification events e.g. at least 2 seconds between sonification events .

The sonification system may be implemented using a combination of hardware and or software. One embodiment of the sonification system may include a sonification engine to receive the data and convert the data to sound parameters and a sound generator to produce the sound from the sound parameters. According to one implementation the sonification engine may execute as an independent process on a stand alone machine or computer system such as a PC including a 700 MHz PIII with 512 MB memory Win 2K SP2 JRE 1.4. The sound generator may include a sound card and speakers. Examples of speakers that can be used include a three speaker system i.e. two satellite speakers and one subwoofer with at least 6 watts such as the widely available brands known as Altec Lansing and Creative Labs.

The sonification engine may facilitate the real time sound creation and implementation of the custom auditory display. In the exemplary embodiment the sonification engine may provide the underlying high quality sound engine for string ensemble delta harp gamma and bells vega . The sonification engine may also provide any appropriate controls effects such as onset decay duration loudness tempo timbre instrument harmony reverberation echo and stereo location. One embodiment of a sonification engine is described in greater detail in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 446 452 which is assigned to assignee of the present application and which is fully incorporated herein by reference. Another embodiment of a sonification engine is shown in and is described in greater detail below. Those skilled in the art will recognize other embodiments of the sonification engine using known hardware and or software.

Referring now to one embodiment of the sonification system is described in greater detail. The sonification system may include a sonification engine which may be independent of any industry specific code and may function as a generic flexible and powerful engine for transforming data into musical sound. The sonification engine may also be independent of any specific arrangements for generating the sound. Thus the format of the musical output may be independent of any specific sound application programming interface API or hardware device. Communication between the sonification engine and such a device may be accomplished using a driver or hardware abstraction layer HAL . The concept of a musical output that is hardware independent may also be implemented using software generally known to those skilled in the art such as MIDI Musical Instrument Digital Interface JMSL Java Musical Specification Language and a general sonification interface called SONART implemented at CCRMA at Stanford University.

The exemplary embodiment of the sonification engine may be configured to accept time series data from any source including a real time data source and historical data from some storage medium served up to the sonification engine as a function of time. Industry specific data engines may be developed to transform raw time series data to a standard used by the sonification engine . The user may configure the sonification engine with any industry specific information or terminology and establish configuration information e.g. in the form of files or in some other permanent storage which contain industry specific data. The data to be sonified however may be formatted as to be industry independent to the sonification engine . Thus for example the sonification engine may not know whether a data stream is the temperature of oil in a processing plant or the change on the day of IBM stock. The sonification engine may generate the appropriate musical output to reflect the upward and downward movement of either quantity. Thus the exemplary sonification engine is useful for various generic data behaviors.

The exemplary embodiment of the sonification engine may also provide various types of sonifications schemes or modes including discrete sonification i.e. the ability to track several data streams individually moving to continuous sonification i.e. the ability to track relationships between data streams and polyphonic sonification i.e. the ability to track a large number of data streams as a gestalt or global picture . Examples of sonification schemes and modes are described above and in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 446 452 which has been incorporated by reference. Furthermore the sonification engine can be designed as a research and development and customized project tool and may allow for the plug in of specialized modules.

One exemplary implementation and method of operation of the sonification system including the sonification engine is now described in greater detail. Data may be provided from one or more data sources or terminals to one or more data engines . The data source s or terminal s may include external sources e.g. servers of data commonly used in target industries. Examples of financial industry or market data terminals or sources include those available from Bloomberg Thomson Talarian Tibco Rendezvous TradeWeb and Triarch. The data source or terminal s may also include a flat file to provide historical data exploration or data mining.

The data engine s may include applications external to the sonification engine which have the ability to serve data from a data source or terminal to the sonification engine . Data may be served either over a socket or over some other data bus platform e.g. Tibco or data exchange standard e.g. XML . The data engine s may be developed with the sonification engine or may have some prior existence as part of an API e.g. Tibco . An example of an existing data engine is the Bloomberg Data Server which is a Visual Basic application. Another example of an existing data engine is a spreadsheet such as a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet that adapts real time data delivered to the spreadsheet from data sources such as those available from Bloomberg Thomson and Reuters to the sonification engine.

The sonification engine may include one or more modules that perform the data processing and sound generation configuration functions. The sonification engine may also include or interact with one or more modules that provide a user interface and perform configuration functions. The sonification engine may also include or interact with one or more databases that provide configuration data.

In the exemplary embodiment the sonification engine may include a data source interface module that provides an entry point to the sonification engine . The data source interface module may be configured with source independent information e.g. stream field a pointer to a data storage object and with source specific information which may be read from one or more data source configuration data for example in a database . For example the source specific information for the Bloomberg data source may include an IP address and Port number the source specific information for the Tibco data source may include service network and daemon and the source specific information for a flat file may include the filename and path.

According to one method of operation the data source interface module initiates a connection based upon source specific configuration information and requests data based upon source independent configuration information. The data source interface module may sleep until data is received from the data engine . The data source interface module sends data to a sonification module in a specified format which may include filtering out data entities that are not necessary or are not complete and reformatting data to a standard format. According to one implementation one instance of the data source interface module may be created per data source with each instance being an independent thread.

The sonification module may serve as a data buffer and processing manager for each data entity sent by the data source interface module . The exemplary embodiment of the sonification module is not dependent on the sonification design. According to one method of operation the sonification module waits for data from the data source interface module places the data in queue and notifies a data analyzer module . According to one implementation one instance of the sonification module may be created per data entity with each instance being an independent thread. Alternatively the sonification module may be implemented as a number of static methods for example with the arguments of the methods providing a pointer to ensure that the output goes to the correct sound HAL module .

The data analyzer module decides if current data is actionable for example based on the sonification design and user controlled parameters from entity configuration data for example located in the configuration database . The data analyzer module may be configured based on the sonification design and may obtain information from the entity configuration data file s such as source ID sonification design sound and other sonification design specific user controlled parameters. According to one method of operation the data analyzer module waits for notification from the sonification module . The data analyzer module may perform additional manipulation of the data before deciding if the data is actionable. If the data is actionable the data analyzer module sends the appropriate arguments back to the sonification module . If the data is not actionable the data analyzer module may terminate. According to one implementation one instance of the data analyzer module may be created per data entity. According to another implementation one instance of the data analyzer module may be used for multiple sonifications. There may be one or more sonification designs applicable to a data entity for example a treasury note could have a bid ask sonification and a change on the day sonification.

The sonification module may convert actionable data to training information such as visual cues or voice descriptions by passing the actionable data to a trainer module . The trainer module may perform further manipulations on the data to determine the type of training information to convey to the end user. According on one implementation the training module may change the visual interface presented to the user by changing the color of a region or text to indicate both the data entity being sonified and whether the actionable data is an up event or a down event. According to another implementation the training module may generate speech or play speech samples that indicate which data entity is being sonified and the reason for the sonification.

The sonification module may pass the actionable data from the data analyzer module to an arranger module . The arranger module converts the actionable data to musical commands or parameters which are independent of the sound hardware software implementation. Examples of such commands parameters include start stop loudness pitch es reverb level and stereo placement. There may be a hierarchy of such commands parameters. To play a major triad for example there may be a triad method which may in turn dispatch a number of start methods at different pitches. According to one method of operation the arranger module may convert actionable data to musical parameters according to the sonification design. The sonification module may then send the musical parameters to a gatekeeper module along with the sound configuration and data entity ID.

The gate keeper module may be used to determine e.g. based on user preferences how events are processed if multiple actionable events are generated at the same time as defined within some tolerance. Possible actions may include sonify only the high priority items and drop all others sonify all items one after the other in some user defined order and sonify all items in canonical fashion or in groups of two and three simultaneously. The gate keeper module may be configured to act differently depending on the specific sonification design and dependent on whether the sonification is discrete continuous or polyphonic. According to one method of operation upon notification from the sonification module of an actionable event the gate keeper module may query a sound HAL module for status. The gate keeper module may then dispatch an event based on user options sonification design and status of the sound HAL module . According to one implementation the gate keeper module may be a static method.

The sound HAL module provides communication between the sonification engine and one or more sound application programming interfaces APIs . A global mixer or master volume may be used for example if more than one sound API is being used at the same time. The sound HAL module may be configured with the location of the corresponding sound API s hardware limitations and control issues e.g. the need to throttle certain methods or synthesis modes which could overwhelm the CPU . The sound HAL module may read or obtain such information from the configuration database . According to one method of operation the sound HAL module sets up and initializes the corresponding sound API and translates sonification output to an external format appropriate to the chosen sound API .

The sound HAL module may also establish communication with the gate keeper module in order to report status and may manage overload conditions related to software hardware limitations of a specific sound API . According to one implementation there may be one instance of the sound HAL module for each sound API being used. Specific synthesis approaches may be defined within a given sound API within JSyn for example a sample instrument an FM instrument or a triangle oscillator may be defined. This can be handled by subclassing.

The sound API s reside outside of the sonification engine and may be pre existing applications or API s known to those skilled in the art for use with sound. The control of the level of output and providing a mixer from one or more of these API s can be implemented using techniques known by those skilled in the art. The sound API s may be configured with information from the sound HAL data in the configuration database . According to one method of operation the sound API s produce sounds based on standard parameters obtained from the sound HAL module . The sound API s may inform the sound HAL module as to when it is finished or how many sounds are currently playing.

A core module provides the main entry point for the sonification engine and sets up and manages components user interfaces and threads. The core module may obtain information from the configuration database . According to one method of operation a user starts the sonification program and the core module checks to ensure that a configuration exists and is valid. If no configuration exists the core module may launch a set up wizard module to provide the configuration or may use a default configuration. The core module may then start and instantiate the sonification module s which may start up the data analyzer module s the trainer module s and the arranger module s . The core module may then start the data source interface module and may start the sound HAL module which initializes the sound API s . During operation the core module may prioritize and manage threads.

According to one implementation the core module may also start a control GUI module . The control GUI module may then open a configure GUI module . The configure GUI module allows the user to provide configuration information depending upon industry specific information provided from the configuration database . Thus the general format or layout of the configure GUI module may not be specific to any industry or type of data. One embodiment of the configure GUI module may provide a number of tabbed panels with options and content dependent upon the information obtained from the entity configuration data in the database . The tabbed panels may be used to separate sonification behaviors or schemes that have distinctly different user parameters. A different set of user parameters may be used for example for bid ask sonification behaviors and movement sonification behaviors. Different sonification behaviors or schemes are described in greater detail above and in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 446 452 which has been incorporated by reference.

According to another implementation the data engine may be responsible for controlling and configuring the sonification engine . In this implementation the data engine may provide the control GUI and the configure GUI using techniques familiar to those skilled in the art to start stop and configure the sonification engine. According to this implementation a program menu provides menu items to start and stop the sonification engine and to perform the function of the control GUI . This control GUI may control the core module through a socket or some other notification method. Another menu item in the program menu allows the user to configure the sonification engine through a configure GUI that reads modifies and writes data in the configuration database . The configure GUI may notify the core module of changes to the configuration database by restarting the sonification engine or through a socket or other notification method.

According to one method of operation the configure GUI module may provide global sound configuration options such as enable disable simultaneous sounds maximum amount of simultaneous sounds prioritizing simultaneous sounds or queuing sounds v. playing sounds canonically. The configure GUI module may be dynamically configurable providing an instant preview of what a particular configuration will sound like. The configure GUI module may also provide sound configurations common to all sonification schemes such as tempo volume stereo position and turning data entities on and off. The configure GUI module may also provide sound configurations common to specific sonification schemes. For movement sonification schemes for example the configure GUI module may be used to configure significant movement. For distance sonification schemes the configure GUI module may be used to configure significant distance and distance granularity. For interactive trading sonification schemes the configure GUI module may be used to configure significant size subsequent trill size and spread granularity. The configure GUI module may also warn the user if a particular configuration is likely to have adverse affects e.g. on CPU utilization stacking etc. and may make suggestions for example to increase the significant movement or decrease the number of data items turned on.

The set up wizard module may include industry specific jargon and setup information and may output this setup information to the configuration database . The set up wizard module may be used to provide an initial configuration or may be used to modify an existing configuration without having to restart the application. According to one method of operation of the set up wizard module the user may choose musical preferences such as a certain number of unique sounds provided for certain indices or securities an assignment of a data entity to a specific sound or an automated assignment of a data entity to a specific sound based on listening preferences e.g. soft medium hard musical preferences e.g. Jazz Classical Rock and user defined descriptions. The set up wizard module may also be used to connect with a data source and to choose a data entity or item e.g. a security index or an attribute . The set up wizard module may further be used to configure user and I T personnel email addresses.

The set up wizard module may also be used to choose a data behavior of interest i.e. a sonification scheme such as a movement type behavior a distance type behavior and or an interactive trading behavior. For a movement type behavior the user may configure a relative movement scheme or an absolute movement. A relative movement may be configured for example with a 2 note melodic fragment sonification scheme. An absolute movement may be configured for example with respect to a user defined value using a 3 note melodic fragment and to handle an out of octave condition graciously. For a distance type behavior the user may configure a fluctuation e.g. price and analytic sonification scheme such as a 4 note melodic fragment or an analytic and analytic sonification scheme such as a continuous sonification. For an interactive trading behavior the user may configure a tremolando sonification scheme.

Embodiments of the system and method for musical sonification can be implemented as a computer program product for use with a computer system. Such implementation includes without limitation a series of computer instructions that embody all or part of the functionality previously described herein with respect to the system and method. The series of computer instructions may be stored in any machine readable medium such as semiconductor magnetic optical or other memory devices and may be transmitted using any communications technology such as optical infrared microwave or other transmission technologies. It is expected that such a computer program product may be distributed as a removable machine readable medium e.g. a diskette CD ROM preloaded with a computer system e.g. on system ROM or fixed disk or distributed from a server or electronic bulletin board over the network e.g. the Internet or World Wide Web .

Those skilled in the art should appreciate that such computer instructions can be written in a number of programming languages for use with many computer architectures or operating systems. For example preferred embodiments may be implemented in a procedural programming language e.g. C or an object oriented programming language e.g. C or Java . Alternative embodiments of the invention may be implemented as pre programmed hardware elements or as a combination of hardware and software.

Accordingly sonification systems and methods consistent with the present invention provide musical sonification of data. Consistent with one embodiment of the present invention a method of musical sonification of a data stream includes receiving the data stream including different data parameters and obtaining data values for at least two of the different data parameters in the data stream. The method of musical sonification determines pitch values corresponding to the data values obtained for the two different data parameters and the pitch values correspond to musical notes. The method of musical sonification plays the musical notes for the two different data parameters to produce a musical rendering of the data stream. Changes in the musical notes indicate changes of the data parameters in the data stream.

Consistent with another embodiment of the present invention a method of musical sonification of a data stream may be used to monitor option trading. This embodiment of the method includes receiving a data stream including a series of data elements corresponding to options trades being monitored each of the data elements including data parameters related to a respective trade. The data parameters may be mapped to pitch as the data stream is received and at least two of the data parameters are mapped to pitch values within a different pitch range. The musical notes corresponding to the pitch values are played to produce a musical rendering of the data stream and changes in the musical notes indicate changes in the data parameters.

Consistent with a further embodiment of the present invention a system for musical sonification includes a sonification engine configured to receive a data stream including a series of data elements corresponding to financial trading events being monitored. The data elements include different data parameters related to a respective financial trading event. The sonification engine is also configured to obtain data values for the data parameters and to convert the data values into sound parameters such that changes in the data values resulting from the trades correspond to changes in the sound parameters. The system also includes a sound generator for generating an audio signal output from the sound parameters. The audio signal output includes a musical rendering of the data stream using the equal tempered scale.

While the principles of the invention have been described herein it is to be understood by those skilled in the art that this description is made only by way of example and not as a limitation as to the scope of the invention. Other embodiments are contemplated within the scope of the present invention in addition to the exemplary embodiments shown and described herein. Modifications and substitutions by one of ordinary skill in the art are considered to be within the scope of the present invention which is not to be limited except by the following claims.

