---

title: Watertight door hinge support
abstract: Watertight closure of an opening within a wall, under manually controlled displacement of a door panel, is enhanced by pivotal mounting of the door panel on the wall by vertically spaced hinge assemblies each of which is more readily assembled from a minimal number of components including upper and lower hinge pads fixed to the wall, a single hinge pin supported on the upper hinge pad and extending downwardly therefrom through the lower hinge pad and an end portion of a hinge blade fixed to the door panel. Flanged bushings are inserted into the upper and lower hinge pads through which the hinge pin extends. Also positioned within the end portion of the hinge blade through which the hinge pin extends is a flanged bushing having a horizontally elongated hole formed, therein through which the hinge pin extends so as to allow limited horizontal displacement thereof relative to the wall. The bottom flange of the hinge blade bushing is spaced by a pair of washers from the flange of the lower hinge pad bushing.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07441308&OS=07441308&RS=07441308
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07441308
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050623
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

The present invention relates generally to watertight door panel hinges that are wear resistant and easy to install.

Watertight doors made of steel or aluminum utilized on U.S. Navy ships for example are pivotally supported by yoke type hinge assemblies that allow the door panels to be pulled against a door frame knife edge to compress a gasket for watertight security. Such watertight door hinge assemblies have not been able to withstand repeated open close cycling operations for extended periods of time because of relatively rapid wear of brass components associated therewith such as hinge pins yoke pins and washers causing chafing of the knife edge at opposite sides of the door panels.

In an effort to deal with the foregoing door hinge problems the brass components have been replaced with costly composite wear resistant materials for high use doors involving detailed and intricate installational problems.

It is therefore an important object of the present invention to provide for pivotal hinge support of watertight and airtight doors by use of less costly hinge assemblies that are more easy to install.

Each of the hinge assemblies through which a watertight door panel is pivotally supported on a door wall features a single hinge pin extending vertically through a hinge bushing positioned on a lower one of two hinge pads of the hinge assembly fixed to the door frame encircling an opening in the door wall to be closed by the door panel. The hinge pin extends downwardly from the upper one of the two hinge pads fixed to the door frame through a pin hole within another hinge blade bushing therein. A hinge blade fixed to the door panel also has a bushing therein which extends upwardly from a pair of spacer washers positioned therebelow on the lower one of the hinge pads by a flange portion of the lower hinge pad bushing. The pin hole within the door panel hinge blade bushing positioned between the upper and lower door frame hinge pads is horizontally elongated so as to allow horizontal displacement of the door panel hinge blade bushing relative to the hinge pin thereby allowing the knife edge at the door wall opening to engage the door panel in its closed position.

Referring now to the drawing in detail illustrates a watertight door panel made of steel or aluminum positioned on a wall over an opening formed therein surrounded by a door frame . The door panel is pivotally mounted by a plurality of hinge assemblies on the door frame an upper one of which is shown in . The hinge assemblies are vertically spaced from each other on one side portion of the door panel opposite the other side portion thereof on which a door handle is mounted.

Each of the hinge assemblies includes a pair of vertically spaced hinge pads and extending from a mount fixed to the door frame . A single hinge pin made of stainless steel extends vertically through the hinge pads and from a pin head in abutment with the upper hinge pad . The hinge pin having an axis also extends through an end portion of a hinge blade fixed to the door panel having a flange bushing therein. A pair of spacer washers is positioned on the hinge pin between the hinge blade bushing and a flange bushing within the lower hinge pad . A flange bushing is also positioned on the hinge pin below the pinhead within the upper hinge pad . In the closed position of the door panel as shown in a knife edge formed in the door frame along the handle side portion of the door panel has a gasket fixed thereto in sliding contact within a channel formation fixed to the door panel so as to establish water tightness.

Referring now to and the hinge blade bushing has a circular flange portion positioned above the lower hinge pad and a cylindrical body portion that extends upwardly from the flange within the hinge blade . An elongated slot hole is formed in the hinge blade bushing as shown in dimensioned to slidably receive the hinge pin therethrough with the hinge blade bushing slidable with respect to the hinge pin. This allows limited horizontal displacement of the hinge blade bushing with respect to the hinge pin allowing the door panel to move toward and away from the knife edge on the door frame when the door panel is being dogged and undogged.

As shown in the cylindrical body portion of the hinge blade bushing is inserted into the hinge blade while the bushing flange portion is axially spaced by the washers from the flange portion of the bushing inserted into the lower hinge pad . The washers effectively position the adjusted height of the door panel so that its horizontal axis intersects the hinge axis perpendicular thereto. The flange portion of the washer underlies the pin head which is thereby positioned on the upper hinge pad after the washer is inserted into the upper hinge pad .

As a result of the use of the hinge assemblies as hereinbefore described for pivotal support of the door panel the number of parts associated therewith is substantially reduced for easier and less costly replacement by personnel with minimal experience or training. Additionally the hinge assemblies eliminate side movement and off center positioning of the door panel as well as avoiding chafing between the door panel and the door frame knife edge .

Obviously other modifications and variations of the present invention may be possible in light of the foregoing teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described.

