---

title: Architectural design for plan-driven procurement application software
abstract: Methods, systems, and apparatus, including computer program products, for implementing a software architecture design for a software application implementing plan-driven procurement. The application is structured as multiple process components interacting with each other through service interfaces, and multiple service interface operations, each being implemented for a respective process component. The process components include an Inbound Delivery Processing process component, a Material Inspection Processing process component, a Site Logistics Processing process component, a Confirmation and Inventory process component, a Purchase Request Processing process component, a Purchase Order Processing process component, a Purchasing Contract process component, a Supplier Invoice Processing process component, a Demand Forecast Processing process component, a Supply and Demand Matching process component, an External Procurement Trigger and Response process component, and a Logistics Execution Control process component.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08380553&OS=08380553&RS=08380553
owner: SAP AG
number: 08380553
owner_city: Walldorf
owner_country: DE
publication_date: 20051230
---
The subject matter of this patent application relates to computer software architecture and more particularly to the architecture of application software for plan driven procurement.

Enterprise software systems are generally large and complex. Such systems can require many different components distributed across many different hardware platforms possibly in several different geographical locations. Thus the architecture of a large software application i.e. what its components are and how they fit together is an important aspect of its design for a successful implementation.

This specification presents a software architecture design for a software application implementing plan driven procurement.

The invention can be implemented as methods systems and apparatus including computer program products for implementing a software architecture design for a software application implementing plan driven procurement. The application is structured as multiple process components interacting with each other through service interfaces and multiple service interface operations each being implemented for a respective process component. The process components include an Inbound Delivery Processing process component a Material Inspection Processing process component a Site Logistics Processing process component a Confirmation and Inventory process component a Purchase Request Processing process component a Purchase Order Processing process component a Purchasing Contract process component a Supplier Invoice Processing process component a Demand Forecast Processing process component a Supply and Demand Matching process component an External Procurement Trigger and Response process component and a Logistics Execution Control process component.

The invention can further be implemented as methods systems and apparatus including computer program products implementing a software architecture design for a software application that is adapted to interact with external software systems through the service operations described in reference to external process components or a subcombination of them.

The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented to realize one or more of the following advantages. Effective use is made of process components as units of software reuse to provide a design that can be implemented reliably in a cost effective way. Effective use is made of deployment units each of which is deployable on a separate computer hardware platform independent of every other deployment unit to provide a scalable design. Service interfaces of the process components define a pair wise interaction between pairs of process components that are in different deployment units in a scalable way.

Details of one or more implementations of the subject matter described in this specification are set forth in the accompanying drawings and in the description below. Further features aspects and advantages of the subject matter will become apparent from the description the drawings and the claims.

As shown in the plan driven procurement design includes nine deployment units a Financial Accounting deployment unit a Logistics Execution deployment unit a Purchasing deployment unit a Supplier Invoicing deployment unit a Payment deployment unit a Request for Quote deployment unit a Due Item Management deployment unit a Supply Chain Control deployment unit an Integrated Business Planning deployment unit and a

The Financial Accounting deployment unit includes an Accounting process component that records all relevant business transactions.

The Logistics Execution deployment unit includes four process components an Inbound Delivery Processing process component a Material Inspection Processing process component a Site Logistics Processing process component and a Confirmation and Inventory process component .

The Inbound Delivery Processing process component combines tasks concerning inbound delivery processes and enables communication with a vendor and a process component within the Supplier Invoice deployment unit . For example the Inbound Delivery Processing process component may prepare and trigger execution of physical operations associated with an invoice.

The Material Inspection Processing process component provides services related to quality inspection that may be performed to check that a material fulfills its specified requirements. The process steps to perform the quality inspection include creating the inspection and documenting the inspection results and inspection decision.

The Site Logistics Processing process component supports all preparation and execution tasks concerning internal inventory movement in a warehouse type environment. The Site Logistics Processing process component may provide stock information such as special stock items. Exception and alert information may also be provided by the Site Logistics Processing process component .

The Confirmation and Inventory process component combines all tasks required to confirm inventory changes and provided activities. The Confirmation and Inventory process component may provide services to maintain current stock handling unit content logistics operating unit content and allocation content.

The Purchasing deployment unit includes three process components a Purchase Request Processing process component a Purchase Order Processing process component and a Purchasing Contract Processing process component .

The Purchase Request Processing process component provides a request or instruction to the purchasing department to purchase specified goods or services in specified quantities within a specified time.

The Purchase Order Processing process component includes a Purchase Order business object and a Purchase Order confirmation business object. The purchase order is a request from a purchaser to an external supplier to deliver a specified quantity of goods or perform a specified service within a specified time. The purchase order confirmation is a communication from a supplier to a purchaser to advise that a purchase order has been received. In particular a purchase order confirmation may advise the purchaser of the supplier accepting the purchase order or the supplier proposing changes to the purchase order or the supplier not accepting the purchase order.

A Source of Supply Determination process component uses two business objects to determine a source of supply a Supply Quota Arrangement business object and a Source of Supply business object. A supply quota arrangement is a distribution of material requirements or goods to different sources of supply business partners or organizational units within a company. An example of the use of supply quota arrangements is the distribution of material requirements between in house production and different sources for external procurement. A supply quota arrangement can also define the distribution of goods to customers in case of excess production or shortages. A source of supply is an object that describes a logical link between a possible source of products and a possible target.

The Purchasing Contract process component handles an agreement between a purchaser and a supplier that details the supply of goods or the performance of services at agreed conditions. The Purchasing Contract process component includes the Purchasing Contract business object.

The Supplier Invoicing deployment unit includes a Supplier Invoice Processing process component . The Supplier Invoice Processing process component includes a Supplier Invoice business object and a Supplier invoice Request business object. The supplier invoice is a document that states the recipient s obligation to pay the supplier for goods received or services rendered. The invoice may be created after the goods and service acknowledgment has been confirmed. The supplier invoice request is a document that is sent to invoice verification advising that an invoice for specified quantities and prices is expected and may be created through evaluation settlement. The system uses the invoice request as a basis for invoice verification as well as for the automatic creation of the invoice.

The Payment deployment unit includes a Payment Processing process component . The Payment Processing process component is used to handle all incoming and outgoing payments as well as represent the main database for a liquidity status.

The RFQ Processing deployment unit includes an RFQ Processing process component . The RFQ Processing process component handles requests for quotation and corresponding quotes. A request for quotation RFQ is a description of materials and services that purchasers use to request responses from potential suppliers. Requests for Quotation can be one of a number of types including a request for price information a request for quote that may run over a certain period of time a request for proposal in complex purchasing situation or live auctions that may be performed over a short time frame. A quote is a response to a request for quotation in which a supplier offers to sell goods and services at a certain price. The quote can be subject to complex pricing and conditions.

The Due Item Management deployment unit includes a Due Item Processing process component . The Due Item Processing process component is used to manage all payables receivables from service and supply and corresponding sales including a withholding tax.

The Supply Chain Control deployment unit includes a Demand Forecast Processing process component a Supply and Demand Matching process component an External Procurement Trigger and Response process component and a Logistics Execution Control process component . The Demand Forecast Processing process component collects all demand forecasts for further processing. For example a validation may be carried out or the requirements may be split over time. According to the results created by the demand forecast component the requirements are passed on to the supply and demand matching component as planned independent requirements.

The Supply and Demand Matching process component combines all the tasks necessary to ensure that sufficient material receipt elements exist to cover material demand while taking available capacity into account. For example the Supply and Demand Matching process component may collect all the various material demands from customer requirement processing the in house requirement processing the demand forecast processing and the sales scheduling agreement processing and attempt to assign all the existing material receipts. The Supply and Demand Matching process component may also plan the internal or external procurement of further material receipts where necessary.

The External Procurement Trigger and Response process component combines all the tasks necessary for processing planned external procurement orders and provides an interface to purchasing from a supply planning perspective. The External Procurement Trigger and Response process component may collect all due planned external procurement orders in the form of purchase requisitions and may hand the orders over to purchasing. The External Procurement Trigger and Response process component may receive purchase orders from purchasing and may return the information concerning the purchase order fulfillment.

The Logistics Execution Control process component controls and monitors the supply chain execution activities necessary for the fulfillment of an order. For example sales order activities or purchase order activities may be controlled and monitored by the logistics execution control process component. The Logistics Execution Control process component sends information to the logistics execution to trigger the necessary supply chain execution activities receives information about the supply chain execution progress and updates data relevant for both fulfillment and supply and demand planning.

The Integrated Business Planning deployment unit includes a Demand Planning process component . The Demand Planning process component combines all the tasks required to anticipate future demand. This information may then be used for supply and capacity planning.

The Source of Supply Determination process component uses two business objects to determine a source of supply a supply quota arrangement business object and a source of supply business object. A supply quota arrangement is a distribution of material requirements or goods to different sources of supply business partners or organizational units within a company. An example of the use of supply quota arrangements is the distribution of material requirements between in house production and different sources for external procurement. A supply quota arrangement can also define the distribution of goods to customers in case of excess production or shortages. A source of supply is an object that describes a logical link between a possible source of products and a possible target.

A number of external process components described below will be used to describe the architectural design. These include an Opportunity Customer Quote Processing at Supplier a Sales Order Processing at Supplier process component a Customer Invoice Processing at Supplier a Payment Processing at Business Partner process component a Bank statement create at bank process component a Payment order processing at house bank process component and an Outbound Delivery Processing process component .

The Opportunity Customer Quote Processing at Supplier process component may receive messages from the RFQ Processing process component .

The plan driven procurement design includes a Sales Order Processing at Supplier process component . The Sales Order Processing at Supplier process component handles customers requests to a company for delivery of goods or services at a certain time. The requests are received by a sales area which is then responsible for fulfilling the contract.

The Payment Processing at Business Partner process component the Bank statement create at bank process component and the Payment order processing at house bank process component may interact with the Payment Processing process component . The Payment Processing Process component may send updates to a Payment Processing at Business Partner processing component which is used to handle at business partner all incoming and outgoing payments and represent the main data base for the liquidity status. The Payment Processing Process component also receives messages from the Bank statement creates at bank process component . The message may include a bank Statement for a bank account. The Payment Processing Process component sends messages to the Payment order processing at house bank process component . The messages may include a Bank Payment Order that is a Payment Order which will be sent to a house bank. The bank payment order may contain bank transfers as well direct debits.

The Outbound Delivery Processing process component constitutes logistics execution driven by an outbound delivery request for shipping goods to a product recipient. It combines all tasks concerning the outbound delivery process preparation and triggering of execution and enables communication with the product recipient and invoicing.

Not explicitly represented in the figures is a foundation layer that contains all fundamental entities that are used in multiple deployment units. These entities can be process components business objects and reuse service components. A reuse service component is a piece of software that is reused in different transactions. A reuse service component is used by its defined interfaces which can be e.g. local APIs Application Programming Interfaces or service interfaces.

In contrast to a deployment unit the foundation layer does not define a limit for application defined transactions. Deployment units communicate directly with entities in the foundation layer which communication is typically not message based. The foundation layer is active in every system instance on which the application is deployed. Business objects in the foundation layer will generally be master data objects. In addition the foundation layer will include some business process objects that are used by multiple deployment units. Master data objects and business process objects that should be specific to a deployment unit are assigned to their respective deployment unit.

A process component of an external system is drawn as a dashed line process component drawn as icon . Such a process component may be referred to as an external process component and it is used to represent the external system in describing interactions with the external system however this should be understood to require no more of the external system that it be able to produce and receive messages as required by the process component that interacts with the external system.

Interactions between process component pairs involving their respective business objects process agents operations interfaces and messages are described as process component interactions which determine the interactions of a pair of process components across a deployment unit boundary i.e. from one deployment unit to another deployment unit. Interactions between process components are indicated in by directed lines arrows . Interactions between process components within a deployment unit need not be described except to note that they exist as these interactions are not constrained by the architectural design and can be implemented in any convenient fashion. Interactions between process components that cross a deployment unit boundary will be illustrated by the figures of this patent application these figures will show the relevant elements associated with potential interaction between two process components but interfaces process agents and business objects that are not relevant to the potential interaction will not be shown.

The architectural design is a specification of a computer software application and elements of the architectural design can be implemented to realize a software application that implements the end to end process mentioned earlier. The elements of the architecture are at times described in this specification as being contained or included in other elements for example a process component is described as being contained in a deployment unit. It should be understood however that such operational inclusion can be realized in a variety of ways and is not limited to a physical inclusion of the entirety of one element in another.

The architectural elements include the business object. A business object is a representation of a type of a uniquely identifiable business entity an object instance described by a structural model. Processes operate on business objects.

A business object represents a specific view on some well defined business content. A business object represents content which a typical business user would expect and understand with little explanation. Business objects are further categorized as business process objects and master data objects. A master data object is an object that encapsulates master data i.e. data that is valid for a period of time . A business process object which is the kind of business object generally found in a process component is an object that encapsulates transactional data i.e. data that is valid for a point in time . The term business object will be used generically to refer to a business process object and a master data object unless the context requires otherwise. Properly implemented business objects are implemented free of redundancies.

The architectural elements also include the process component. A process component is a software package that realizes a business process and generally exposes its functionality as services. The functionality contains business transactions. A process component contains one or more semantically related business objects. Any business object belongs to no more than one process component.

Process components are modular and context independent. That they are context independent means that a process component is not specific to any specific application and is reusable. The process component is the smallest most granular element of reuse in the architecture.

The architectural elements also include the operation. An operation belongs to exactly one process component. A process component generally has multiple operations. Operations can be synchronous or asynchronous corresponding to synchronous or asynchronous process agents which will be described below. An operation is the smallest separately callable function described by a set of data types used as input output and fault parameters serving as a signature.

The architectural elements also include the service interface referred to simply as the interface. An interface is a named group of operations. Each operation belongs to exactly one interface. An interface belongs to exactly one process component. A process component might contain multiple interfaces. In one implementation an interface contains only inbound or outbound operations but not a mixture of both. One interface can contain both synchronous and asynchronous operations. All operations of the same type either inbound or outbound which belong to the same message choreography will belong to the same interface. Thus generally all outbound operations to the same other process component are in one interface.

The architectural elements also include the message. Operations transmit and receive messages. Any convenient messaging infrastructure can be used. A message is information conveyed from one process component instance to another with the expectation that activity will ensue. An operation can use multiple message types for inbound outbound or error messages. When two process components are in different deployment units invocation of an operation of one process component by the other process component is accomplished by an operation on the other process component sending a message to the first process component.

The architectural elements also include the process agent. Process agents do business processing that involves the sending or receiving of messages. Each operation will generally have at least one associated process agent. A process agent can be associated with one or more operations. Process agents can be either inbound or outbound and either synchronous or asynchronous.

Asynchronous outbound process agents are called after a business object changes e.g. after a create update or delete of a business object instance.

An output process agent will generally perform some processing of the data of the business object instance whose change triggered the event. An outbound agent triggers subsequent business process steps by sending messages using well defined outbound services to another process component which generally will be in another deployment unit or to an external system. An outbound process agent is linked to the one business object that triggers the agent but it is sent not to another business object but rather to another process component. Thus the outbound process agent can be implemented without knowledge of the exact business object design of the recipient process component.

Inbound process agents are called after a message has been received. Inbound process agents are used for the inbound part of a message based communication. An inbound process agent starts the execution of the business process step requested in a message by creating or updating one or multiple business object instances. An inbound process agent is not the agent of a business object but of its process component. An inbound process agent can act on multiple business objects in a process component.

Synchronous agents are used when a process component requires a more or less immediate response from another process component and is waiting for that response to continue its work.

Operations and process components are described in this specification in terms of process agents. However in alternative implementations process components and operations can be implemented without use of agents using other conventional techniques to perform the functions described in this specification.

The architectural elements also include the deployment unit. A deployment unit includes one or more process components that are deployed together on a single computer system platform. Conversely separate deployment units can be deployed on separate physical computing systems. For this reason a deployment unit boundary defines the limits of an application defined transaction i.e. a set of actions that have the ACID properties of atomicity consistency isolation and durability. To make use of database manager facilities the architecture requires that all operations of such a transaction be performed on one physical database as a consequence the processes of such a transaction must be performed by the process components of one instance of one deployment unit.

The process components of one deployment unit interact with those of another deployment unit using messages passed through one or more data communication networks or other suitable communication channels. Thus a deployment unit deployed on a platform belonging one business can interact with a deployment unit software entity deployed on a separate platform belonging to a different and unrelated business allowing for business to business communication. More than one instance of a given deployment unit can execute at the same time on the same computing system or on separate physical computing systems. This arrangement allows the functionality offered by a deployment unit to be scaled to meet demand by creating as many instances as needed.

Since interaction between deployment units is through service operations a deployment unit can be replaced by other another deployment unit as long as the new deployment unit supports the operations depended upon by other deployment units. Thus while deployment units can depend on the external interfaces of process components in other deployment units deployment units are not dependent on process component interaction within other deployment units. Similarly process components that interact with other process components or external systems only through messages e.g. as sent and received by operations can also be replaced as long as the replacement supports the operations of the original.

The Purchase Request Processing process component includes a Purchase Request business object . The Purchase Request business object contains a request or instruction to the purchasing department to purchase goods or services in specified quantities within a particular period.

In the Purchase Request Processing process component a Request Request for Quote Execution from Purchase Request to RFQ Processing outbound process agent requests the execution of a request for quote. The outbound process agent uses a Request Request for Quote Execution operation to send an RFQ Execution Request message to the RFQ Processing process component . The Request Request for Quote Execution operation is part of a Request for Quote Out interface .

The RFQ Execution Request message is received by a Maintain Request for Quote operation in a Request for Quote In interface where the operation initiates a Maintain Request for Quote inbound process agent which creates or updates a Request For Quote business object out of business documents such as the Request for Quote business object document that are involved in the bidding process or in the negotiation process. Next the Confirm Request for Quote outbound process agent receives the request for quote and initiates a Confirm Request for Quote operation in a Request for Quote Out Interface

The Confirm Request for Quote operation sends a Request for Quote Execution Confirmation message to the Purchase Request processing component to confirm RFQ execution. The Change Purchase Request operation which is included in a Request for Quote In interface receives the message and initiates an inbound process agent Change Purchase Request based on Request for Quote . The inbound process agent updates the references of the purchase request in the Purchase Request business object .

The process components include business objects to create and update data by passing messages between the Payment Request process component and the Due Item Processing process component . Multiple operations can be carried out within the interfaces. Both inbound and outbound process agents carry the business object data to and from the interfaces.

A due payment business object may create payment requests manually or automatically for payment processing. The due payment business object is responsible for the payment and clearing of payables and receivables for goods and services. A product tax declaration business object is a declaration of the product tax liabilities receivables of a company to the responsible tax authority according to the tax declaration arrangement and country specific legal requirements that triggers the payment to the tax authority.

A Synchronous Request Payment Reservation interface from Due Payment to Payment Processing outbound process component may create a payment reservation request from Due Payment. The Payment Request Out interface includes several operations which go on to create messages and updates to business objects in the Payment Processing process component . The operations messaging and business objects are discussed in the following paragraphs.

The Payment Request Out interface includes a synchronous Request payment information and provisional Payment Reservation operation that generates a Payment Order Reservation Request message to request a payment order reservation. A synchronous Create Payment Reservation operation receives the message and uses a Sync Maintain Payment Reservation inbound process agent to update a Payment Order business object . In addition a Payment Order Reservation Confirmation synchronous message is sent back to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Payment Request Out interface also includes a Notify of provisional Payment Reservation Deletion operation that registers the change of a provisional payment to the last transactional saved state. A Payment Order Reservation Cancellation Notification message may be generated and a Cancel Payment Reservation operation may be invoked that cancels a previously sent payment reservation by reference. Next a maintain Payment Order inbound process agent sends an update to the Payment Order business object .

The Payment Request Out interface further includes a synchronous Request Payment Information and provisional Payment Reservation Change operation that requests payment information with a provisional reservation of money in payment processing. A Payment Order Reservation Change Request synchronous message is generated and a synchronous Sync Change Payment Reservation operation is invoked that changes a reservation of payment and confirms the change to the caller. Next a Payment Reservation Confirmation synchronous message may be generated and sent back to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Payment Request Out interface further includes a Notify of provisional Payment Reservation Change Deletion operation that registers the change of a provisional payment to the last transactional saved state. A Payment Order Reservation Change Deletion Cancellation Notification message may be generated and a Change Payment Reservation operation may be invoked that changes a previously sent payment reservation by reference. Upon completion of the operation the Maintain Payment Order inbound process agent updates the Payment Order business object .

A Request Payment from Due Payment to Payment Processing outbound process agent may send a payment update to the Payment Processing process component from a Due Payment business object . A Request Payment operation is then invoked that sends a request for payment to Payment Processing. Upon completion of the operation a Payment Order Request message is sent the Payment Processing process component where a Create Payment Order operation begins. Then the Maintain Payment Order inbound process agent updates the Payment Order business object to create or cancel a payment order.

A Request Payment from Product Tax Declaration to Payment Processing outbound process agent may send an update from a Product Tax Declaration business object . The update is sent into the Payment Request Out interface and a Request Payment Cancellation operation is invoked to cancel a provisional requested or ordered payment. A Payment Order Cancellation Request message is then generated and sent to the Payment Processing process component where a Cancel Payment Order operation is invoked.

The payment order business object may use a Confirm Payment Request from Payment Order to Due Item Processing outbound process agent to confirm the processing status of a payment to the sender of a payment request. A Confirm Payment Request operation may then be invoked thereby generating a Payment Order Request Confirmation message to send to the Due Item Processing process component . The message is received in a Change payment based on Payment Request Confirmation operation that uses a Change Due Payment based on Payment Request Confirmation outbound process agent to update the processing status of Due Payment based on the confirmation of a payment request.

The outbound process agent sends notification into an Order Accounting Out interface which includes a Notify of Purchase Order operation . The Notify of Purchase Order operation may occur when a purchase order has been created changed or cancelled. An Order Accounting Notification message may then be sent to the Accounting process component .

The Accounting process component receives the Order Accounting Notification message in the interface which includes a Maintain Subledger Account operation that receives order accounting notifications from the Purchase Order Processing process component . The notification is to inform Accounting Processing about the creation the change or the deletion of any kind of order business objects. The notification may then be sent to the Accounting Notification business object using an inbound process agent . The Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting that is called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in financial accounting.

The Inbound Delivery Processing process component includes logistics execution driven by an inbound delivery request for receiving goods from a vendor. It combines all tasks concerning the inbound delivery process preparation and triggering of execution and enables communication with the vendor and invoicing.

The Logistics Execution Control process component includes a Logistics Execution Requisition business object that sends data into a Fulfillment Out interface using a Request Fulfillment from Logistics Execution Request to Inbound Delivery Processing outbound process agent . The Fulfillment Out interface includes a Request Delivery Fulfillment operation in order to maintain a delivery request. The Logistics Execution Requisition business object may send instructions to logistics execution which supports the controlling triggering and monitoring of supply chain execution activities necessary for the fulfillment of an order.

A Delivery Request Fulfillment Request message is then sent to a Fulfillment In interface located in the Inbound Delivery Processing process component . The interface contains a Maintain Inbound Delivery Request operation which receives delivery fulfillment requests from logistics execution control and sends the requests into an Inbound Delivery Request business object using a Maintain Inbound Delivery Request inbound process agent . The Inbound Delivery Request business object is a document in the inbound delivery process containing all the relevant logistics data from the initiator of the inbound delivery process such as the purchase order for example . The inbound delivery request is used to validate an inbound delivery and an advanced shipping notification and to prepare inbound logistics for receiving the goods. Upon receipt of the inbound delivery request a Confirm Fulfillment of Inbound Delivery Request to Logistics Execution Control outbound process agent sends the confirmation data into a Fulfillment Out interface where a Confirm Fulfillment operation may take place. Upon completion of the Confirm Fulfillment operation a Delivery Request Fulfillment Confirmation message is created and sent back to the Logistics Execution Control process component to receive fulfillment confirmation data. Receiving the Delivery Fulfillment Confirmation message in the Logistics Execution Control process component may invoke a Change Logistics Execution Requisition based on the Delivery Fulfillment Confirmation operation . The operation which is included in a Fulfillment In interface may then send updates or changes by way of a Change Logistics Execution Requisition based on Delivery Fulfillment inbound process agent into the Logistics Execution Requisition business object .

Interactions Between Process Components Payment Processing and Payment Processing at Business Partner 

The interaction model begins in the Payment Processing process component with a Payment Order business object . The Payment Order business object creates payment media for either a bank a credit card a settlement institute or a business partner on the base of payment requests. After the payment is created the Payment Order business object sends a notification using a Notify of Payment from Payment Order to Business Partner outbound process agent . A Payment Order can create different sub items within a payment that is sent if the payment medium is subject to amount limitations. The Payment Processing process component also contains an Outgoing Payment Advicing Out interface that includes a Notify of Payment operation . The Notify of Payment operation creates a payment advice and sends a Payment Advice Notification message to the Payment Processing at Business Partner processing component .

The Purchase Order Processing process component includes a Purchase Order business object which includes a request from a purchaser. The Purchase Order business object may uses a Notify of Invoicing Due from Purchase Order to Supplier Invoice Processing outbound process agent to communicate with business objects in the Supplier Invoice Processing process component . The Notify of Invoicing Due from Purchase Order to Supplier Invoice Processing outbound process agent may invoke a Notify of Invoicing Due operation of an Invoice Verification Out interface to send an Invoicing Due Notification message that will be received by components in the Supplier Invoice Processing process component . The message is routed to an Invoice Verification In interface where a Maintain Invoice Request operation is invoked to create or update a reference object in the Supplier Invoicing deployment unit in order to perform invoice verification with reference to a purchase order without having to access other deployment units. A Maintain Supplier Invoice Request inbound process agent sends updates or changes to the invoice data into the Supplier Invoice Request business object . The system uses the Supplier Invoice Request business document as a basis for invoice verification as well as for the automatic creation of the invoice.

In this illustration the Notify of Invoiced Values from SIR to Purchase Order Processing outbound process agent includes a Notify of Invoiced Values operation of an Invoice Verification Out interface to send a Supplier Invoice Request Invoiced Values Notification message that will be received by components in the Purchase Order Processing process component . The notification message is sent to make certain that if parts of a purchase order have been previously posted the corresponding purchase order is not changed to an amount lower than the one that has already been delivered. Upon receipt of the message the Invoice Verification In interface includes a Change Purchase Order based on Invoiced Values operation which is included in an Invoice Verification In interface to change appropriate invoiced quantities in the purchase order. The updated change information is sent to the Purchase Order business object using the Change Purchase Order based on Invoiced Values inbound process agent .

As shown in the bank statement is created at a bank and a Bank Statement Notification message is created. The Payment Processing process component receives the Bank Statement Notification message into the Bank Statement Processing In interface where a Create Bank Statement operation is invoked to create a bank statement in the Payment Processing process component . A Maintain Bank Statement inbound process agent updates the Bank Statement business object with a new or modified bank statement. For example the bank statement may be a statement for a house bank account where modifications are made when bills are paid.

A Supplier Invoice Processing process component includes a Supplier Invoice business object which is a document that states the recipient s usually the purchaser s obligation to pay the supplier for goods received or services rendered. The invoice is normally created after the goods and service acknowledgment has been confirmed. The Notify of Supplier Invoice to Due Item Processing outbound process agent invokes a Notify of Invoice operation to notify the Due Item processing component about the receivables payables due for the invoice that has been paid. Alternatively a Request Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked to cancel the previously sent notification for receivables payables due. Both operations may be used in a Receivables Payables Out interface . If the Notify of Invoice operation is invoked then a Receivables Payables Notification message is sent to the Due Item Processing process component . If the Request Invoice Cancellation operation is invoked the Receivables Payables Cancellation Request message is sent to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Receivables Payables Messages are received by a Receivables Payables In interface where operations may be performed. If a notification message is received then a Create Receivables Payables operation is performed to create a trade and or tax receivable or payable. If a cancellation message is received then a Cancel Receivables Payables operation is performed to cancel a trade and or tax receivable or payable. Cancellations and updates may be sent by a Maintain Trade and Tax Receivables Payables inbound process agent to one or more of three business objects a Trade Receivables Payables business object a Tax Receivables Payables business object and a Due Clearing business object . The Trade Receivables Payables business object may register for all trade receivables and payables from goods and services of a company from to its business partners. The Tax Receivables Payables business object may register for all tax receivables and payables of a company that are due for delivered goods and rendered services between buyers and sellers the consumption of goods and the transfer of goods that are withheld from payments to vendors. The Due Clearing business object is group of receivables and payables for clearing. Clearing means that the amounts of the receivables and payables of a group balance to zero taking cash discounts and other deductions into account. The group is typically payments and invoices that belong together but it can also be credit memos and invoices or customer and vendor invoices. A group results uniquely from the invoice reference information of a payment.

The Payment Processing process component includes ten business objects a Bill of Exchange Submission business object an Incoming Check business object a Check Deposit business object a Payment Order business object a Bank Statement business object a Bill of Exchange Receivable business object a Cash Transfer business object a Payment Allocation business object a Clearing House Payment Order business object and a Cash Payment business object

The Bill of Exchange Submission business object sends incoming bill of exchange receivables to the house bank for cashing. The Incoming Check business object represents a check sent by a business partner. The incoming check will be sent to the house bank by a check deposit. The Check Deposit business object sends a collection of incoming checks to the house bank for cashing. The Payment Order business object creates payment media for either a bank a credit card a settlement institute or a business partner on the base of payment requests. The Bank Statement business object is a bank statement for a house bank account. The Bill of Exchange Receivable business object represents a Bill of Exchange received from a business partner or a Bill of Exchange Request sent to a business partner. The Cash Transfer business object is a document that shows an internal money transfer between a bank account and bank account bank transfer a cash account and bank account cash deposit a bank account and cash account cash withdrawal or a cash account and cash account cash transfer . The Payment Allocation business object documents a process step by which open payments of different types belonging to one another are indicated as confirmed or sent to other components for post processing. For example an incoming check may confirm a payment advice or a bank statement item may confirm a check deposit. The Clearing House Payment Order business object is an order document for clearing a collection of credit card payments to the clearing house. The Cash Payment business object is a document showing an incoming or outgoing cash payment from or to a business partner.

The Payment Processing process component also includes a number of outbound process agents each tied to a particular business object. A Notify of Payment from Bill of Exchange Submission to Accounting outbound process agent creates an accounting notification from the Bill of Exchange Submission business object . A Notify of Payment from Incoming Check to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a bounced or cancelled check. A Notify of Payment from Check Deposit to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a change in status of a check deposit. For example a notification may be sent stating that a deposit is ready for transfer to another account. A Notify of Payment from Payment Order to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment by payment order or a cancellation of payment. A Notify of Payment from Bank Statement to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment by bank account or a cancellation of payment. A Notify of Payment from Bill of Exchange Receivable to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by a bill of exchange or a cancellation of payment. A Notify of Payment from Cash Transfer to Accounting outbound process component may notify the Accounting process component about a transfer of money between house bank accounts and or cash accounts or a cancellation of payment. A Notify of Payment from Payment Allocation to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by a payment allocation or a cancellation of payment. A Notify of Payment from Credit Card Settlement to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by credit card or a cancellation of payment. A Notify of Payment from Cash Payment to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by cash or a cancellation of a payment.

The outbound process agents above may cause invocation of a Notify of Payment operation or a Notify of Request Payment Cancellation operation to update accounting. The operations may be included in a Payment Accounting Out interface . The Payment Accounting Out interface may send a Payment Accounting Notification message or a Payment Cancellation Accounting Request message to a Payment Accounting In interface in the Accounting process component . The Payment Accounting In interface includes a Create Accounting Document operation or a Cancel Accounting Document operation depending on the message received. A Maintain Accounting Document based on Payment inbound processing component updates the Accounting Notification business object . An accounting notification is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into financial accounting that is called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in financial accounting.

Interactions Between Process Components Purchase Order Processing and Sales Order Processing at Supplier 

As shown in the Purchase Order Processing process component includes a Purchase Order business object which is a request from a purchaser to an external supplier to deliver a specified quantity of goods or perform a specified service within a specified time. A Request Purchase Order to Supplier outbound process agent can request invocation of a Request Purchase Order Creation operation a Request Purchase Order Cancellation operation or a Request Purchase Order Change operation . All three operations are included in an Ordering Out interface .

The Request Purchase Order Cancellation operation requests a cancellation of a purchase order that was formerly ordered at a supplier which creates a Purchase Order Cancellation Request message . The Request Purchase Order Change operation requests a change of a purchase order that was formerly ordered at the supplier which creates a Purchase Order Change Request message . The Request Purchase Order Creation operation requests a purchase order from a supplier which creates a Purchase Order Change Request message .

Upon receiving a create change or cancellation message the Sales Order Processing process component a Purchase Order Confirmation message may be created to update the Purchase Order Processing process component . To complete the update a Create Purchase Order Confirmation operation which is included in a Ordering In interface that transfers the update to the Purchase Order Confirmation business object using the Create Purchase Order inbound process agent . A Purchase Order Confirmation business object is a confirmation from an external supplier to the request of a purchaser to deliver a specified quantity of material or perform a specified service at a specified price within a specified time.

Interactions Between Process Components Customer Invoice Processing at Supplier and Supplier Invoice Processing 

The Supplier Invoice Processing process component receives an Invoice Request message into an Invoicing In interface which includes a Create Invoice operation that creates a supplier invoice based on information received from the supplier or a differing invoicing party. A Create Supplier Invoice based on Invoice Request inbound process agent updates a Supplier Invoice business object . A Supplier Invoice business object is a document that states the recipient s usually the purchaser s obligation to pay the supplier for goods received or services rendered.

Upon completion of the update a Confirm Invoice to Supplier outbound process agent invokes a Confirm Invoice operation . The Confirm Invoice operation is part of an Invoicing Out interface . The Confirm Invoice operation sends an Invoice Confirmation message to notify the supplier whether the previously sent invoice is accepted or rejected depending on the outcome of invoice verification.

The Supplier Invoice business object may also send a message to the Customer Invoice Processing at Supplier using a Request Evaluated Receipt Settlement Invoice to Supplier outbound process agent . In this example an invoice Request message is also created by a Request an evaluated receipt settlement Invoice operation which is included in an Evaluated Receipt Settlement Invoicing Out interface .

The Inbound Delivery Processing process component includes a Confirmed Inbound Delivery business object which is a document containing the delivery note from the supplier which additionally records the goods that have actually been received. A Request Invoicing from Confirmed Inbound Delivery to Supplier Invoice Processing outbound process agent sends information to an Invoice Verification Out interface which includes a Notify of Invoicing Due operation . When a goods and service acknowledgment is created supplier invoice processing needs to be informed because this information is necessary in case of goods receipt based invoice verification. An Invoicing Due Notification message is generated and transmitted to the Supplier Invoice Processing process component .

Upon receiving the Invoicing Due Notification message a Maintain Invoice Request operation which is included in an Invoice Verification In interface is invoked to create or update a reference object in the Supplier Invoice Processing deployment unit in order to perform invoice verification with reference to a purchase order for example without having to access other deployment units. The reference object is used for checks against the preceding documents and to make proposals for invoice entry. A Maintain Supplier Invoice Request inbound process agent updates a Supplier Invoice Request business object . The Supplier Invoice Request is a document that is sent to invoice verification advising that an invoice for specified quantities and prices is expected or is to be created through an evaluation settlement. The system uses the invoice request as a basis for invoice verification as well as for the automatic creation of the invoice.

The Due Item Processing process component contains three business objects three outbound process agents and one interface. The three business objects include a Due Clearing business object a Due Payment business object and a Product Tax Declaration business object . The outbound process agents include a Notify of Payment from Due Clearing to Accounting outbound process agent a Notify of Payment from Due Payment to Accounting outbound process agent and a Notify of Payment from Product Tax Declaration to Accounting outbound process agent . The interface is a Payment Accounting Out interface .

The Due Clearing business object represents a group of receivables and payables for clearing. Clearing means that the amounts of the receivables and payables of a group balance to zero taking cash discounts and other deductions into account. The group is typically payments and invoices that belong together but it can also be credit memos and invoices or customer and vendor invoices. A group results uniquely from the invoice reference information of a payment.

The Due Payment business object represents payment requests for payment processing. This can be done manually or automatically. In contrast to payment requests from Human Capital Management solution or Treasury Due Payment is responsible for the payment and clearing of payables and receivables from goods and services.

The Product Tax Declaration business object represents the product tax liabilities receivables of a company to the responsible tax authority according to the tax declaration arrangement and country specific legal requirements that triggers the payment to the tax authority.

Any of the three business objects may initiate a payment notification. In one type of interaction the Due Clearing business object first sends a request for payment notification to the Notify of Payment from Due Clearing to Accounting outbound process agent . For example the request may be to send notification for a clearing of trade receivables and or payables to accounting. Here the Notify of Payment from Due Clearing to Accounting outbound process agent invokes a Notify of Payment operation provided by the Payment Accounting Out interface . Upon completion of the operation the Notify of Payment operation transmits a Payment Accounting Notification message requesting the accounting entry be made. In another type of interaction the Due Payment business object first sends a request for payment notification to the Notify of Payment from Due Payment to Accounting outbound process agent . In another type of interaction the request may be to send notification to accounting for inward or outward trade receivables and or payables payments. Here the process agent invokes the Notify of Payment operation to transmit a Payment Accounting Notification message requesting the accounting entry be made. In another type of interaction the Product Tax Declaration business object first sends a request for payment notification to the Notify of Payment from Product Tax Declaration to Accounting outbound process agent . For example the request may be to send notification for a payment of tax receivables and or payables to accounting. Here the process agent invokes a Notify of Payment operation to transmit a Payment Accounting Notification message requesting the accounting entry be made.

The Due Clearing business object and the Accounting business object may initiate a payment cancellation. In one type of interaction the Due Clearing business object first sends a request for payment cancellation to the Notify of Payment from Due Clearing to Accounting outbound process agent . For example the request may be to send cancellation for a clearing of trade receivables and or payables to accounting. Here the Notify of Payment from Due Clearing to Accounting outbound process agent invokes the Request Payment Cancellation operation provided by the Payment Accounting Out interface . Upon completion of the operation the Request Payment Cancellation operation transmits the Payment Accounting Cancellation Request message requesting the accounting entry be made. In another type of interaction the Due Payment business object first sends a request for payment cancellation to the Notify of Payment from Due Payment to Accounting outbound process agent . For example the request may be to send cancellation to accounting for inward or outward trade receivables and or payables payments. Here the process agent invokes the Request Payment Cancellation operation provided by the Payment Accounting Out interface . Upon completion of the operation the Request Payment Cancellation operation transmits a Payment Accounting Cancellation Request message requesting the accounting entry be made.

The Payment Accounting Notification message and the Payment Accounting Cancellation Request message initiate payment accounting within the Accounting process component . For payment notifications the Payment Accounting Notification message is received by a Create Accounting Document operation provided by the Payment Accounting In interface . Here the operation sends a request to the Maintain Accounting Document based on Payment inbound process agent which updates the Accounting Notification business object . For example the accounting documents are updated to show payment has been made. Similarly for payment cancellations the Payment Accounting Cancellation Request message is received by a Cancel Accounting Document operation provided by the Payment Accounting In interface . Here the operation sends a request to the Maintain Accounting Document based on Payment inbound process agent which updates the Accounting Notification business object . For example the accounting documents are updated to show payment has been cancelled.

Interactions Between Process Components RFQ Processing and Opportunity Customer Quote Processing at Supplier 

The RFQ process component includes two business objects. A Supplier Quote business object is a response to a Request for Quote in which a supplier offers to sell materials and services according to the requested criteria. A Request for Quote business object is a request from a buyer to a bidder to submit a quote for a material or a service according to specified criteria.

A Request Quote Maintenance from Supplier Quote to Supplier outbound process agent updates an interface when a Request for Quote has been changed or Supplier Quote is sent back to Supplier.

A Request Quote Processing Out interface includes a Notify of Request for Quote Cancellation operation that sends the changes of a published Request for Quote to a supplier to participate in the further request for quote processes thereby generating a Request for Quote Cancellation Request message . The Request Quote Processing Out interface may also include a Notify of Request for Quote Change operation that sends the Request for Quote to a supplier to participate in a request for quote processes thereby generating an Request for Quote Change Request message .

Additionally the Request Quote Processing Out interface includes a Request Quote Creation operation that creates the quote thereby generating a Request for Quote Request message .

The Opportunity Customer Quote Processing at Supplier process component may generate messages which continue processing events in the RFQ Processing process component .

A Quote Notification message may be received in the Supplier Quote Processing In interface and a Maintain Supplier Quote operation may update a Supplier Quote business object using a Maintain Supplier Quote inbound process agent .

The Supplier Quote business object may use a Request Quote Maintenance from Request for Quote to Supplier outbound process agent to update the status of a quote to Accepted or Rejected. A Supplier Quote Processing Out interface includes a Request Quote Change operation thereby generating an RFQ Change Request message .

Alternatively the Supplier Quote business object may use a Notify of Quote Award from Supplier Quote to Supplier outbound process agent to check if a request for quote is published re published or cancelled. The Notify of Quote Award operation may then send acceptance or final rejection of the quote to the supplier via an RFQ Result Notification message .

Interactions Between Process Components Purchase Order Processing and External Procurement Trigger and Response 

The request uses a Notify of Purchase Order to external Procurement Trigger and Response outbound process agent to send a notification about created changed or cancelled purchase orders. The notification is sent into a Purchasing Out interface that includes a Notify of Purchase Order operation that notifies from a planning system to a purchaser about posting of goods receipt fulfillment of a Purchase Order . A Purchase Order Notification message is then generated and sent to the External Procurement Trigger and Response process component .

The notification message is received in a Purchasing In interface that includes a Maintain Planning View on Purchase Order operation . The operation updates the planning relevant data of the Purchase Order. An update is sent using the Maintain Planning View on Purchase Order inbound process agent . The Planning View on Purchase Order business object is an object that represents the purchase order.

A Purchasing Out interface receives a notification form the Planning View on Purchase Order business object by means of a Notify of PO Fulfillment from Planning View on PO to PO Processing outbound process agent which sends Purchase Order Fulfillment data to purchasing when new inventories planning view are posted. A Notify of Purchase Order Fulfillment operation is invoked and a Purchase Order Fulfillment Notification message is generated. The message is received in the Purchasing In interface . The interface includes a Change Purchase Order based on Delivery Values operation that may change the Delivered Quantity of the Purchase Order.

The update is sent to the Purchase Order business object using a Change Purchase Order based on Delivery Values inbound process agent .

Interactions Between Process Components Payment Processing and Payment Order Processing at House Bank 

The Payment Processing process component includes four business objects a Bill of Exchange Receivable business object that represents a Bill of Exchange received from or a Bill of Exchange Request sent to a business partner an Outgoing Check business object that represents a check sent to a business partner that is created via payment order a Bill of Exchange Payable business object that represents a Bill of Exchange sent to a business partner that is created only via payment order and a Bank Payment Order business object which is a Payment Order that will be sent to a house bank and may contain bank transfers as well direct debits.

A Request Payment Order from BoE Receivable to House Bank outbound process agent creates an electronic Bill of Exchange Receivable Request . A Request Payment Order from Outgoing Check to House Bank outbound process agent creates an outgoing check to be printed externally. A Request Payment Order from BoE Payable to House Bank outbound process agent creates an electronic Bill of Exchange Payable. A Request Payment Order from Bank Payment Order to House Bank outbound process agent creates a Payment order to the House Bank.

A Payment Ordering out interface receives the updates from the outbound process agents . A Request Payment Order operation collects Bank Transfers or Direct Debits for payment submission to the business partner. A Collective Payment Order Request message is generated and processed by the Payment order processing at house bank process component . Upon completion of processing a Collective Payment Order Confirmation message is sent to the Payment Ordering In interface that includes a Maintain Payment Order Confirmation operation to confirm the status updates from processing a payment order. After completing the operation an update is sent to the Bank Payment Order business object using a Maintain Payment Order Confirmation from House Bank inbound process agent .

Four business objects from the Demand Matching process component are used in the Logistics execution Demand process component A Planning View on Inventory business object is a planning view on Inventory is an object that represents the inventory object from logistics execution. A Supply Planning Requirement business object is a requirement object that is used as the target for the supply planning run and the availability check. A Procurement Planning Order business object defines the requested or expected material receipt in a specific quantity and at a specific availability date. A Planned Material Flow business object defines the relationship between material receipt elements stock planned order and a production order purchase requisition purchase order etc. and material requirements elements sales order forecast demand dependent demand transfer demand of a material within a location.

A Site Logistics Requisition business object uses a Request Site Logistics Processing from Site Log Req to Site Logistics Processing outbound process agent to send an update to the Request Site Logistics Processing process component .

The Site Logistics Processing Out interface includes a Request Site Logistics operation to send a request in order to maintain the site logistics request. The Site Logistics Request message may then be generated and sent to the Site Logistics Processing process component .

A Site Logistics Processing In interface includes a Maintain Site Logistics Request operation that creates or updates a Site Logistics Processing Request. A Maintain Site Logistics Request inbound process agent may send an update into a Site Logistics Request business object . The Site Logistics Request business object performs Site Logistics operations supporting outbound inbound and site internal logistics activities at a certain time. A Confirm Site Logistics Request to Logistic Execution Control outbound process agent may send updated information into a Site Logistics Processing Out interface which includes a Confirm Site Logistics Request operation that confirms receipt of request and acknowledges quantities and delivery dates. This operation generates a Site Logistics Request Confirmation message which will be sent to update the Logistics Execution Control process component .

A Site Logistics Confirmation business object may also send updated information into the Logistics Execution Control process component . The Site Logistics Confirmation business object is a document that collects actual data posted with reference to a site logistics order or site logistics request. The site logistics confirmation updates inventory finance and planning. A Notify of Site Logistics Confirmation to Logistics Execution Control outbound process agent invokes a Notify of Site Logistics Request Progress operation to inform logistics execution control about inventory changes and fulfillment of Site Logistics Processing. A Site Logistics Request Progress Notification message may be generated to update the Logistics Execution Control process component .

Upon receiving messages and the Logistics Execution Control process component may perform the following operations 1. The Site Logistics Processing In interface includes a Change Site Log. Requisition Based On Site Log. Request Progress Notification operation which notifies Logistics execution control of inventory changes and confirmation of Site Logistics Processing. 2. The Site Logistics Processing In interface also includes a Change Site Logistics Requisition based on Site Logistics Request Confirmation operation that receives confirmation data from Site Logistics Request. A Maintain Site Logistics Requisition Based on Site Logistics inbound process agent may then update the Site Logistics Requisition business object .

The process component interaction model begins with a Demand Planning Forecast business object . The Demand Planning Forecast business object is an object that includes the forecast for a variable grouping of business items product group sales organization for example which is released for subsequent processes. A forecast notification may be sent using a Notify of Forecast from Demand Planning to Demand Forecast Processing outbound process agent . A Demand Forecast Out interface receives the notification and may include a Notify of Forecast operation that sends the current and deleted forecasts using a Product Forecast Notification message . The Demand Forecast Processing process component receives the notification and invokes a Maintain Demand Forecast operation in the Demand Forecasting In interface that creates updates and deletes the demand forecast object with the given forecast data. Then a Maintain Demand Forecast inbound process agent updates the Demand Forecast business object . A Demand Forecast business object is an object that represents the released demand planning forecasts before they are converted into planned independent requirements.

Interactions Between Process Components External Procurement Trigger and Response and Purchase Request Processing 

A Purchase Requisition business object is a request or instruction to the purchasing department to purchase specified goods or services in specified quantities within a specified time. The business object sends the request using a Request Purchasing from Purchase Requisition to Purchase Request Processing outbound process agent . The agent sends the request information into a Purchasing Out interface that includes a Request Purchasing operation . The Request Purchasing operation is a request from a supply planner asking a buyer to procure products services. The operation can be used to change a previous request. After completion of the operation a Purchase Request Request message is generated.

A Purchasing In interface in the Purchase Request Processing process component invokes a Maintain Purchase Request operation that creates or updates a request from a requestor to a purchaser to externally procure products materials services . A Maintain Purchase Request inbound process agent updates a Purchase Request business object . The Purchase Request business object is a request or instruction to Purchasing to procure a quantity of a material or service so that it is available at a certain point in time.

Upon receiving the update the business object sends a confirmation using a Confirm Purchase Request outbound process agent . A Purchasing Out interface receives the confirmation and includes a Confirm Purchase Request operation that confirms the creation change or cancellation of a Purchase Request to the requesting Business Object. A Purchase Request Confirmation message is generated and updates are sent to a Purchasing In interface in the External Procurement Trigger and Response process component . The interface includes a Change Purchase Requisition based on Purchase Request operation which is a confirmation of the buyer that informs the requester of the extent to which a requisition has been fulfilled ordered and rejected quantities . After completion of the operation a Change Purchase Requisition based on Purchase Request inbound process agent updates the Purchase Requisition business object .

A Notify of Inventory Change from Site Logistics Confirmation to Accounting outbound process agent invokes a Notify of Inventory Change and Activity Provision operation to send an Inventory Change Accounting Notification to Accounting. Alternatively a Notify of Inventory Change and Activity Provision Cancellation operation may be invoked to request inventory change and activity provision cancellation. Both operations may be used in an Inventory and Activity Accounting Out interface . If the Notify of Inventory Change and Activity Provision operation is invoked then an Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation Accounting Notification message is sent to the Accounting process component . If the Notify of Inventory Change and Activity Provision Cancellation operation is invoked an Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation Accounting Cancellation Request message is sent to the Accounting process component .

The messages and are received by an Inventory and Activity Accounting In interface where operations may be performed. If a notification message is received then a Create Accounting Document operation is performed to Receive Inventory Change Accounting Notification from Confirmation and Inventory or Site Logistics Processing or Production. If a cancellation message is received then a Cancel Accounting Document operation is performed to cancel requests received from Confirmation and Inventory or Site Logistics Processing or Production process components. Cancellations and updates may be sent by a Maintain Accounting Document based on Inventory and Activity inbound process agent to update an Accounting Notification business object .

The process component interaction model begins the RFQ Processing process component with a Supplier Quote business object having an update. The Supplier Quote business object is a response to a Request for Quote in which a supplier offers to sell materials and services according to the requested criteria. A request may be sent using a Request Purchase Order form supplier Quote to Purchase Order Processing outbound process agent . A Purchasing Out interface includes a Request Purchase Order from Winning Quote operation that creates or updates a Purchase Request Purchase Order based on accepted Supplier Quote. A Supplier Quote Award Notification message is sent to a Purchasing In interface in the Purchase Order Processing process component . A Create Purchase Order based on Winning Quote operation may be invoked to create a Purchase Order from an accepted Supplier Quote. An update to a Purchase Order business object will be sent using a Maintain Purchase Order based on Winning Quote inbound process agent .

The Demand Forecast Processing process component receives the notification and invokes a Maintain Demand Forecast operation that creates updates and deletes the demand forecast object with the given forecast data. Then a Maintain Demand Forecast inbound process agent updates the Demand Forecast business object . A Demand Forecast business object is an object that represents the released demand planning forecasts before they are converted into planned independent requirements.

As shown in the Supplier Invoice Processing process component includes a Supplier Invoice business object . The Supplier Invoice business object represents a document that states a recipient s obligation to pay a supplier for goods received or services rendered. For example the supplier invoice may be created after a goods and service acknowledgement has been confirmed. The supplier invoice is then sent into a Notify of Supplier Invoice to Accounting outbound process agent which notifies accounting of the existence of the supplier invoice. For example once the supplier invoice is posted to the system the outbound processing agent sends a notification to accounting stating the supplier invoice has been posted.

The processing agent provides an Invoice Accounting Out interface with the notification and additional data such as invoice billing numbers or a credit memo. Here the interface includes a Notify of Invoice operation and a Notify of Invoice Cancellation operation . The Notify of Invoice operation may be invoked if the Invoice Accounting Out interface receives a notification to post an invoice. Upon performing the Notify of Invoice operation the Invoice Accounting In interface sends an Invoice Accounting Notification message with the invoice accounting notification. Alternatively the Notify of Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked if the Invoice Accounting In interface receives information requesting a cancellation. For example the Notify of Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked in order to cancel an invoice. Upon performing the Notify of Invoice Cancellation operation an Invoice Cancellation Accounting Notification message is transmitted with the invoice accounting cancellation request.

The Accounting process component includes an Invoice Accounting In interface that may receive messages sent by the Supplier Invoice Processing process component . Here the Invoice Accounting In interface includes a Create Accounting Document operation that creates an accounting document for a customer invoice or supplier invoice if accounting receives the Invoice Accounting Notification message . The Invoice Accounting In interface also includes a Cancel Accounting Document operation that cancels a customer or supplier invoice.

The Accounting process component includes a Maintain Accounting Document based on Invoice inbound process agent that can maintain accounting documents. For example the inbound process agent may update the accounting document if a creation or cancellation operation is received. After updating the accounting document the inbound process agent may forward information about the updated document into an Accounting Notification business object . The Accounting Notification business object may receive input from operational business transactions such as the invoice notification above and record the business transactions in the Financial Accounting deployment unit.

The subject matter described in this specification and all of the functional operations described in this specification can be implemented in digital electronic circuitry or in computer software firmware or hardware including the structural means disclosed in this specification and structural equivalents thereof or in combinations of them. The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented as one or more computer program products i.e. one or more computer programs tangibly embodied in an information carrier e.g. in a machine readable storage device or in a propagated signal for execution by or to control the operation of data processing apparatus e.g. a programmable processor a computer or multiple computers. A computer program also known as a program software software application or code can be written in any form of programming language including compiled or interpreted languages and it can be deployed in any form including as a stand alone program or as a module component subroutine or other unit suitable for use in a computing environment. A computer program does not necessarily correspond to a file. A program can be stored in a portion of a file that holds other programs or data in a single file dedicated to the program in question or in multiple coordinated files e.g. files that store one or more modules sub programs or portions of code . A computer program can be deployed to be executed on one computer or on multiple computers at one site or distributed across multiple sites and interconnected by a communication network.

The processes and logic flows described in this specification can be performed by one or more programmable processors executing one or more computer programs to perform functions by operating on input data and generating output. The processes and logic flows can also be performed by and apparatus can also be implemented as special purpose logic circuitry e.g. an FPGA field programmable gate array or an ASIC application specific integrated circuit .

Processors suitable for the execution of a computer program include by way of example both general and special purpose microprocessors and any one or more processors of any kind of digital computer. Generally a processor will receive instructions and data from a read only memory or a random access memory or both. The essential elements of a computer are a processor for executing instructions and one or more memory devices for storing instructions and data. Generally a computer will also include or be operatively coupled to receive data from or transfer data to or both one or more mass storage devices for storing data e.g. magnetic magneto optical disks or optical disks. Information carriers suitable for embodying computer program instructions and data include all forms of non volatile memory including by way of example semiconductor memory devices e.g. EPROM EEPROM and flash memory devices magnetic disks e.g. internal hard disks or removable disks magneto optical disks and CD ROM and DVD ROM disks. The processor and the memory can be supplemented by or incorporated in special purpose logic circuitry.

To provide for interaction with a user the subject matter described in this specification can be implemented on a computer having a display device e.g. a CRT cathode ray tube or LCD liquid crystal display monitor for displaying information to the user and a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse or a trackball by which the user can provide input to the computer. Other kinds of devices can be used to provide for interaction with a user as well for example feedback provided to the user can be any form of sensory feedback e.g. visual feedback auditory feedback or tactile feedback and input from the user can be received in any form including acoustic speech or tactile input.

The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented in a computing system that includes a back end component e.g. a data server a middleware component e.g. an application server or a front end component e.g. a client computer having a graphical user interface or a Web browser through which a user can interact with an implementation of the subject matter described herein or any combination of such back end middleware and front end components. The components of the system can be interconnected by any form or medium of digital data communication e.g. a communication network. Examples of communication networks include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN e.g. the Internet.

The computing system can include clients and servers. A client and server are generally remote from each other and typically interact through a communication network. The relationship of client and server arises by virtue of computer programs running on the respective computers and having a client server relationship to each other.

While this specification contains many specifics these should not be construed as limitations on the scope of the invention or of what may be claimed but rather as an exemplification of preferred embodiments of the invention. Certain features that are described in this specification in the context of separate embodiments may also be provided in combination in a single embodiment. Conversely various features that are described in the context of a single embodiment may also be provided in multiple embodiments separately or in any suitable subcombination. Moreover although features may be described above as acting in certain combinations and even initially claimed as such one or more features from a claimed combination can in some cases be excised from the combination and the claimed combination may be directed to a subcombination or variation of a subcombination.

The subject matter has been described in terms of particular variations but other variations can be implemented and are within the scope of the following claims. For example the actions recited in the claims can be performed in a different order and still achieve desirable results. As one example the processes depicted in the accompanying figures do not necessarily require the particular order shown or sequential order to achieve desirable results. In certain implementations multitasking and parallel processing may be advantageous. Other variations are within the scope of the following claims.

