---

title: Network connectivity management
abstract: Network connectivity management can manage (e.g., harmonize) network connectivity services and network connectivity modules. By way of example only, network connectivity management is applicable to connections to a network through a network connectivity service via a network connectivity module. In a described implementation, network connectivity configuration information is scanned to locate data that corresponds to a preferred network connectivity service for a given connection scenario. The network connectivity module used in the given connection scenario is extracted. It is detected if the extracted network connectivity module is a preferred network connectivity module that is associated with the preferred network connectivity service. If not, the connection scenario can be redirected away from the non-preferred network connectivity module and toward the preferred network connectivity module. A user may optionally be given an opportunity to elect to connect via the preferred network connectivity module.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07650395&OS=07650395&RS=07650395
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07650395
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050318
---
This disclosure relates in general to network connectivity and in particular by way of example but not limitation to enhancing network connectivity by enabling network connectivity management.

Most people access the Internet through an internet service provider ISP of some kind. Many ISPs provide specialized propriety software for use when accessing the Internet through the ISP. For example a particular ISP often provides each customer with a particular software module that is to be launched when the customer is connecting to the Internet through the particular ISP. The particular software module usually includes capabilities and or features to enhance the connection experience for the user when connecting to the Internet through the particular ISP.

However users can often incidentally or intentionally begin connecting to the Internet through the particular ISP via another software module that is not produced by the particular ISP. The other software module may be produced for example by a third party. Unfortunately the other software module from the third party usually does not include any capabilities and or features to enhance the connection experience for the user. Moreover use of such third party software modules prevents the particular ISP from ensuring a consistent connection experience for all users.

Accordingly there is a need for schemes mechanisms techniques etc. that can facilitate the provisioning of a consistent user experience and or enhanced features and capabilities for users connecting to a network through a network connectivity service such as an ISP.

Network connectivity management can manage e.g. harmonize network connectivity services and network connectivity modules. By way of example only network connectivity management is applicable to connections to a network through a network connectivity service via a network connectivity module. In a described implementation network connectivity configuration information is scanned to locate data that corresponds to a preferred network connectivity service for a given connection scenario. The network connectivity module used in the given connection scenario is extracted. It is detected if the extracted network connectivity module is a preferred network connectivity module that is associated with the preferred network connectivity service. If not the connection scenario can be redirected away from the non preferred network connectivity module and toward the preferred network connectivity module. A user may optionally be given an opportunity to elect to connect via the preferred network connectivity module.

Other method system approach apparatus device media procedure API arrangement etc. implementations are described herein.

Users connecting to the internet today often use third party connectivity software that is a default connectivity module included in an operating system or one that is provided by an independent vendor. Unfortunately a third party connectivity module may not be optimized for the user and the user is frequently reluctant to switch to and or skeptical of new connectivity software.

In a described implementation a user s system is scanned to detect connectivity points. For each relevant connectivity point that is detected a redirect to a different connectivity software module that is enhanced for the user is injected. In a specific example a component scans the system searching for remote access application programming interfaces APIs of a specific type e.g. those of a previous version of a connectivity module a third party connectivity module etc. . For each specific type of remote API that is found the component injects a redirection link to the connectivity point to enable the user to select a preferred connectivity module especially when connecting to a network through an associated preferred network connectivity service NCS .

To facilitate understanding this description is separated into three sections. A first section references and is entitled General Example Implementations for Network Connectivity Management . A second section references and is entitled Specific Example Implementations for Network Connectivity Management . There is also a third section that references and is entitled Example Operating Environment for Computer or Other Device .

As illustrated computing device includes a network connectivity manager component network connectivity configuration information network interface hardware NIH and one or more network connectivity modules NCMs and . An example of network connectivity configuration information is described further herein below with particular reference to .

Network connectivity manager includes a network connectivity determiner and a network connectivity redirector . Network connectivity manager and the components thereof may be considered executable logic comprising hardware software firmware or some combination thereof. Network connectivity manager is adapted to manage network connectivity by for example harmonizing e.g. effectuating agreement accord and or consonance between an NCM and an NCS. When network connectivity manager is acting to enhance the network connectivity experience computing device includes at least a preferred NCM and a non preferred NCM .

Network may be any network or combination of networks that is operating in accordance with one or more protocols. Examples of network include an internet a virtual private network VPN a wireless and or wired network a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN some other public or private network s some combination thereof and so forth. An NCS provides and enables a connection to network . Preferred NCS is associated with a preferred NCM . By way of example only when network comprises an internet preferred NCS may comprise an ISP. Also if user is connecting to network with a dial up connection preferred NCM may comprise dial up networking DUN connectivity software.

Network is accessed through preferred NCS over one or more network media . Network media may be any kind of wireless or wired media or a combination thereof. Consequently NIH may be capable of interacting with preferred NCS over any kind of wireless or wired media or a combination of both. NIH may thus be a network interface card or adapter a modem a configurable or dedicated device some combination thereof and so forth. Also NIH may be capable of communicating over a wired and or wireless network media .

When a user wishes to connect to network through preferred NCS user activates or launches an NCM. For example user might launch non preferred NCM . Non preferred NCM may be i a third party NCM that is included with an operating system of computing device or that is produced by an independent vendor or ii an older version of an NCM that was previously produced by preferred NCS .

Preferred NCM on the other hand comprises an NCM that is currently preferred by preferred NCS . Preferred NCM typically includes the latest features capabilities tunings etc. to enhance the connection experience for user . Hence the owners operators of preferred NCS often prefer that user connect to network through preferred NCS via preferred NCM instead of non preferred NCM .

In a described implementation network connectivity manager manages e.g. harmonizes network connectivity by attempting to ensure that preferred NCS is accessed via preferred NCM . In operation network connectivity determiner determines if user and or computing device is connecting to network through preferred NCS via non preferred NCM . If so then an NCM NCS mismatch has been determined to exist e.g. has been detected .

To attempt to eliminate the detected mismatch network connectivity redirector redirects connection attempts with preferred NCS that are initiated via non preferred NCM . The redirection is effectuated to be away from non preferred NCM and toward preferred NCM . This redirection may be automatic or may be at the option of user . When the redirection is fully realized access to network through preferred NCS is accomplished via preferred NCM instead of non preferred NCM . Additional general examples of mismatch determination and network connectivity redirection are described herein below with particular reference to .

Connection scenario entry includes an NIH used field a footprint of the NCM used field and a data field . Data field includes a general data field and possibly another field that contains data corresponding to the NCS through which a connection is established for the connection scenario of entry . If present the data corresponding to the NCS of the connection scenario of connection scenario entry may comprise data corresponding to the preferred NCS. In this context the preferred NCS comprises a preferred NCS that is the predetermined focus of network connectivity determiner .

Generally network connectivity mismatch determiner determines when the NCM used as indicated by NCM footprint field fails to match with the data corresponding to the NCS that is being accessed as indicated by field . Specifically network connectivity determiner determines if the connection scenario of entry targets preferred NCS by inspecting the data corresponding to NCS and if the NCM used to access the NCS is not the preferred NCM .

Examples of data corresponding to a given NCS are credential data such as login identification ID which is typically accompanied by a password an email address or moniker a name of an NCS realm network access numbers e.g. telephone dial up or network address that are links to the given NCS. Other examples of data corresponding to a given NCS are telephony technology e.g. tone versus pulse dialing rules that accompany phone numbers a network device name type e.g. a specific piece of hardware such as a modem or network card IP configuration properties e.g. DNS IP primary and secondary WINS IP primary and secondary static local IP etc. client media access control MAC address server IP address es DNS entries communications protocol type access point identifier e.g. a service set identifier SSID a network name and or NCS identifier some combination thereof and so forth. However data corresponding to a given NCS may exist may be stored and or may be realized in other alternative manners.

In a described implementation network connectivity determiner includes a network connectivity configuration scanner and an inharmonious network connectivity module detector . Network connectivity configuration scanner is adapted to scan connection scenario entries of network connectivity configuration information to detect data that corresponds to the preferred NCS . If data corresponding to the preferred NCS is discovered e.g. located found etc. at connection scenario entry then inharmonious network connectivity module detector operates.

Inharmonious network connectivity module detector is adapted to extract from connection scenario entry the footprint of the NCM used in conjunction with the preferred NCS . It detects if the NCM used of field matches the preferred NCS . In other words inharmonious network connectivity module detector detects if the NCM used is the preferred NCM . If the NCM used matches the preferred NCM no additional action s need be taken. If on the other hand the NCM used is detected to not match the preferred NCM network connectivity redirector operates.

In response to the mismatched or inharmonious network connectivity detection network connectivity redirector injects e.g. inserts adds etc. a redirection initiator into connection scenario entry . Redirection initiator causes the connection scenario of entry to be redirected e.g. diverted detoured etc. away from the mismatched non preferred NCM . In fact redirection initiator can cause the connection scenario of entry to be redirected toward the preferred NCM . It should be noted that network connectivity redirector can alternatively operate so as to redirect the NCM that is used to a different NCS e.g. an NCS that matches the NCM used when a mismatch is detected in a connection scenario entry . 

The redirection of redirection initiator may be implemented in many possible manners. For example the redirection to preferred NCM may occur automatically without input or control by user . Alternatively the redirection to preferred NCM may occur only if user opts into or fails to opt out of the enhanced connection experience provided by the preferred NCM .

When user is given a choice the option may be presented with an appropriate user interface UI mechanism when user next attempts to connect to a network through preferred NCS via the non preferred NCM . However the scanning and detecting as well as the injection of redirection initiator may occur as a background process that is repetitively operating at a predetermined interval.

Generally network connectivity configuration information is created and maintained by the operating system of computing device . It may however be formed in another manner. For example the multiple NCMs present on computing device may jointly create and maintain network connectivity configuration information .

As illustrated network connectivity configuration information is organized or separated by individual connection scenarios. However network connectivity configuration information may be organized in many different alternative manners. For example connection scenarios may be grouped by NCM used by NIH used by NCS accessed some combination thereof and so forth.

At block a network connectivity manager is installed and or activated. For example when a computing device is turned on network connectivity manager may be activated as a background process that proactively repeatedly performs the scanning at predetermined intervals. Alternatively it may be activated whenever network connectivity configuration information is accessed by an operating system to establish a new connection when a connection through preferred NCS is being established and so forth.

At block network connectivity configuration information is scanned. For example network connectivity configuration information may be scanned by a network connectivity configuration scanner of a network connectivity determiner .

At block data corresponding to a preferred NCS is searched for. For example network connectivity configuration scanner inspects data corresponding to a targeted NCS for each connection scenario entry that is encountered in network connectivity configuration information to ascertain if the targeted NCS is the preferred NCS .

When data corresponding to the preferred NCS is discovered based on the searching at block at block the footprint of the NCM used is extracted. For example inharmonious network connectivity module detector may extract the NCM used from the footprint of the NCM used field of the connection scenario entry being analyzed.

The NCM used is compared to the preferred NCS to detect a mismatch or match . Thus at block it is detected if there is a mismatch between the targeted NCS which has been ascertained to be the preferred NCS and the NCM being used to access the targeted NCS. If there is no mismatch the method of flow diagram repeats from block . If on the other hand the NCM used to access the preferred NCS is not the preferred NCM then a mismatch is detected by inharmonious network connectivity module detector and the method continues at block .

At block the connection scenario is redirected away from the mismatched non preferred NCM. For example network connectivity redirector may inject a redirection initiator into the connection scenario entry having the detected inharmonious network connection scenario.

The redirection of block may be implemented in multiple different manners. Two example alternatives are illustrated. At alternative block A the redirection causes the connection scenario to be rerouted through the preferred NCM. For example redirection initiator may cause the connection to network through preferred NCS to be routed via preferred NCM . At alternative block B the redirection causes an option to be presented to the user so that the user can elect to have the connection scenario rerouted via the enhanced preferred NCM. An example implementation including a UI that provides such an option to user is described further herein below with particular reference to .

The terminology used in the specific examples provided in this section pertain especially to a computing device that is functioning with a Microsoft Windows Operating System. However the principles disclosed in this section and the referenced are applicable to general network connectivity management implementations.

Flow diagrams and include eight 8 blocks and seven 7 blocks respectively. Although the actions of flow diagrams and may be performed in other environments and with a variety of hardware and software combinations are used in particular to illustrate certain aspects and examples of the method. Furthermore terminology that pertains especially to the Microsoft Windows Operating System e.g. API names is used by way of example only.

At block a RasEnumEntries API is called. In other words an API that causes remote access entries to be enumerated is called. At block it is checked whether any entries are found by the API. If not then at block the method of flow diagram pauses for a sleep time. For example the network connectivity manager may sleep for a predetermined interval. Afterwards the network connectivity manager again calls the RasEnumEntries API at block .

If on the other hand entries are found at block the network connectivity manager iterates through the entries at block . For example the network connectivity manager may iterate through connection scenario entries of network connectivity configuration information . At block a RasGetEntryProperties API is called on the connectoid of each entry. In other words an API that returns at least a portion of the remote access connection properties is called on each entry. In an example implementation these connection properties include a username property such as Name ISP Realm e.g. John.Smith msn or John.Smith msn.com for the MSN network of Internet services .

At block it is determined if a username property matches a preferred credential format. For example it may be determined if the realm name of a usemame property matches the name of a preferred network connectivity service. If not then the method of flow diagram continues at block and another entry is analyzed.

If on the other hand it is determined that the usemame property does match the preferred credential format data corresponding to a preferred network connectivity service has been discovered at a connection scenario entry of network connectivity configuration information . Although not illustrated in this example assumes that the network connectivity module being used is non preferred. Thus at block the connectoid having the matching usemame property is hooked into a preferred network connectivity module via a custom dialing option in the connectoid. Hence in this example implementation a redirection initiator that is injected into a connection scenario entry comprises a directive for the custom dialing option. An example of this hooked or redirecting state is described below with reference to .

At block a custom dialer dynamic link library DLL is called. For example a customer dialer DLL may be called prior to using the non preferred network connectivity module as identified in the connectoid e.g. by a software footprint .

At block it is determined if a rerouting option UI has been previously rendered. If not then at block the rerouting option UI is rendered. The rerouting option UI provides a user an opportunity to elect to use a preferred network connectivity module for an enhanced connection experience instead of a non preferred network connectivity module.

At block it is confirmed if the user has opted into the enhanced experience of the preferred network connectivity module. In other words it is confirmed whether the user has previously either in response to block or at another earlier time elected to access the preferred network connectivity service via the preferred network connectivity module.

If the user has opted into the enhanced connection experience as confirmed at block at block the connection is established to a network through the preferred network connectivity service via the preferred network connectivity module. If on the other hand the user has not opted into the enhanced connection experience at block the connection is established to a network through the preferred network connectivity service via the non preferred network connectivity module.

The devices actions aspects features functions procedures modules data structures components etc. of are illustrated in diagrams that are divided into multiple blocks. However the order interconnections interrelationships layout etc. in which are described and or shown is not intended to be construed as a limitation and any number of the blocks can be modified combined rearranged augmented omitted etc. in any manner to implement one or more systems methods devices procedures media apparatuses APIs arrangements etc. for network connectivity management. Furthermore although the description herein includes references to specific implementations including a general device of the illustrated and or described implementations can be implemented in any suitable hardware software firmware or combination thereof and using any network connectivity module type s network interface technology ies organization s for network connectivity configuration information API s and so forth.

Example operating environment is only one example of an environment and is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the applicable device including computer network node entertainment device mobile appliance general electronic device etc. architectures. Neither should operating environment or the devices thereof be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or to any combination of components as illustrated in .

Additionally implementations for network connectivity management may be realized with numerous other general purpose or special purpose device including computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known devices systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use include but are not limited to personal computers server computers thin clients thick clients personal digital assistants PDAs or mobile telephones watches hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics video game machines game consoles portable or handheld gaming units network PCs videoconferencing equipment minicomputers mainframe computers network nodes distributed or multi processing computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices some combination thereof and so forth.

Implementations for network connectivity management may be described in the general context of processor executable instructions. Generally processor executable instructions include routines programs protocols objects functions interfaces components data structures etc. that perform and or enable particular tasks and or implement particular abstract data types. Realizations of network connectivity management as described in certain implementations herein may also be practiced in distributed processing environments where tasks are performed by remotely linked processing devices that are connected through a communications link and or network. Especially but not exclusively in a distributed computing environment processor executable instructions may be located in separate storage media and executed by different processors.

Example operating environment includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer which may comprise any e.g. electronic device with computing processing capabilities. The components of computer may include but are not limited to one or more processors or processing units a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including processor to system memory .

Processors are not limited by the materials from which they are formed or the processing mechanisms employed therein. For example processors may be comprised of semiconductor s and or transistors e.g. electronic integrated circuits ICs . In such a context processor executable instructions may be electronically executable instructions. Alternatively the mechanisms of or for processors and thus of or for computer may include but are not limited to quantum computing optical computing mechanical computing e.g. using nanotechnology and so forth.

System bus represents one or more of any of many types of wired or wireless bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a point to point connection a switching fabric a peripheral bus an accelerated graphics port and a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example such architectures may include an Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus a Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus an Enhanced ISA EISA bus a Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus a Peripheral Component Interconnects PCI bus also known as a Mezzanine bus some combination thereof and so forth.

Computer typically includes a variety of processor accessible media. Such media may be any available media that is accessible by computer or another e.g. electronic device and it includes both volatile and non volatile media removable and non removable media and storage media.

System memory includes processor accessible storage media in the form of volatile memory such as random access memory RAM and or non volatile memory such as read only memory ROM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules instructions that are immediately accessible to and or being presently operated on by processing unit .

Computer may also include other removable non removable and or volatile non volatile storage media. By way of example illustrates a hard disk drive or disk drive array for reading from and writing to a typically non removable non volatile magnetic media not separately shown a magnetic disk drive for reading from and writing to a typically removable non volatile magnetic disk e.g. a floppy disk and an optical disk drive for reading from and or writing to a typically removable non volatile optical disk such as a CD DVD or other optical media. Hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are each connected to system bus by one or more storage media interfaces . Alternatively hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive may be connected to system bus by one or more other separate or combined interfaces not shown .

The disk drives and their associated processor accessible media provide non volatile storage of processor executable instructions such as data structures program modules and other data for computer . Although example computer illustrates a hard disk a removable magnetic disk and a removable optical disk it is to be appreciated that other types of processor accessible media may store instructions that are accessible by a device such as magnetic cassettes or other magnetic storage devices flash memory compact disks CDs digital versatile disks DVDs or other optical storage RAM ROM electrically erasable programmable read only memories EEPROM and so forth. Such media may also include so called special purpose or hard wired IC chips. In other words any processor accessible media may be utilized to realize the storage media of the example operating environment .

Any number of program modules or other units or sets of processor executable instructions may be stored on hard disk magnetic disk optical disk ROM and or RAM including by way of general example an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . These processor executable instructions may include for example one or more of a network connectivity manager a network connectivity determiner a network connectivity redirector a network connectivity configuration scanner an inharmonious connectivity module detector a network connectivity module network connectivity configuration information and connection scenario entries thereof some combination thereof and so forth.

A user may enter commands and or information into computer via input devices such as a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse . Other input devices not shown specifically may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish serial port video camera scanner and or the like. These and other input devices are connected to processing unit via input output interfaces that are coupled to system bus . However input devices and or output devices may instead be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port a game port a universal serial bus USB port an infrared port an IEEE 1394 Firewire interface an IEEE 802.11 wireless interface a Bluetooth wireless interface and so forth.

A monitor view screen or other type of display device may also be connected to system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . Video adapter or another component may be or may include a graphics card for processing graphics intensive calculations and for handling demanding display requirements. Typically a graphics card includes a graphics processing unit GPU video RAM VRAM etc. to facilitate the expeditious display of graphics and performance of graphics operations. In addition to monitor other output peripheral devices may include components such as speakers not shown and a printer which may be connected to computer via input output interfaces .

Computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computing device . By way of example remote computing device may be a peripheral device a personal computer a portable computer e.g. laptop computer tablet computer PDA mobile station etc. a palm or pocket sized computer a watch a gaming device a server a router a network computer a peer device another network node or another device type as listed above and so forth. However remote computing device is illustrated as a portable computer that may include many or all of the elements and features described herein with respect to computer .

Logical connections between computer and remote computer are depicted as a local area network LAN and a general wide area network WAN . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets the Internet fixed and mobile telephone networks ad hoc and infrastructure wireless networks mesh networks other wireless networks gaming networks some combination thereon and so forth.

When implemented in a LAN networking environment computer is usually connected to LAN via a network interface or adapter . When implemented in a WAN networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other component for establishing communications over WAN . Modem which may be internal or external to computer may be connected to system bus via input output interfaces or any other appropriate mechanism s . It is to be appreciated that the illustrated network connections are examples and that other manners for establishing communication link s between computers and may be employed.

In a networked environment such as that illustrated with operating environment program modules or other instructions that are depicted relative to computer or portions thereof may be fully or partially stored in a remote media storage device. By way of example remote application programs reside on a memory component of remote computer but may be usable or otherwise accessible via computer . Also for purposes of illustration application programs and other processor executable instructions such as operating system are illustrated herein as discrete blocks but it is recognized that such programs components and other instructions reside at various times in different storage components of computing device and or remote computing device and are executed by processor s of computer and or those of remote computing device .

Although systems media devices methods procedures apparatuses techniques schemes approaches procedures arrangements and other implementations have been described in language specific to structural logical algorithmic and functional features and or diagrams it is to be understood that the invention defined in the appended claims is not necessarily limited to the specific features or diagrams described. Rather the specific features and diagrams are disclosed as exemplary forms of implementing the claimed invention.

