---

title: System and method for indicating interest of online content
abstract: Systems and methods for displaying interest levels of online content. In one embodiment, a system may include a web browser. A badge code module may execute within an execution environment provided by the web browser and may display an indication of content interest associated with a content source, where the indication is dependent upon a time rate of change of content request traffic directed to the content source. In another embodiment, a system may include a web browser configured to generate a web browser window. A plugin module may be integrated with the web browser for execution, may generate a display interface integrated within the browser window, and may display an indication of content interest associated with a content source via the display interface, where the indication is dependent upon a time rate of change of content request traffic directed to the content source.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07966395&OS=07966395&RS=07966395
owner: Amazon Technologies, Inc.
number: 07966395
owner_city: Reno
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050928
---
This application claims benefit of priority to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 710 549 entitled Method and System for Determining Interest Levels of Online Content Based on Rates of Change of Content Access and filed Aug. 23 2005 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

This invention relates to computing systems and more particularly to identifying the level of interest in computer accessed content according to access characteristics associated with that content.

As the reach and accessibility of computer networks such as the Internet increase the amount of information accessible via such networks has grown exponentially. For example as commercial enterprises increasingly embrace electronic commerce techniques numerous websites offering information and purchasing opportunities for various products and services have appeared. Major media outlets commonly provide web based versions of content previously available only through print or broadcast channels and in some instances generate considerable volumes of content exclusively for web based distribution. The reduction of cost complexity and other barriers to entry into web based content publishing has also facilitated the generation and dissemination of content by individual creators. This phenomenon is perhaps best illustrated by the increasing number and popularity of individually authored web logs or blogs which offer content in a wide range of topics styles and perspectives ranging from objective journalism to near real time autobiography.

As the amount of online content increases the difficulty of locating content that is of general or specific interest also increases. Unlike libraries which may employ standardized systems of content classification such as the Library of Congress System or the Dewey Decimal System no standard for organizing and representing web based content exists. Numerous search engines have evolved to attempt to index web pages according to the page contents e.g. as given by the textual content actually displayed by the page when loaded into a browser or client or by concealed metadata such as tags associated with or embedded within the page . Such search engines have further attempted to qualify the relevance of a given indexed page using other features of the page such as its age and or the number of links to the given indexed page from other indexed pages. For example for a given keyword search a page that satisfies the search criteria and is linked to from many sources may be considered a more relevant search result than a page having fewer external references.

Conventional index based approaches to organizing online content suffer from a number of limitations. For example such approaches are relatively static. Typical search engines gather information for indexing by crawling through web pages over periods of days or weeks which may be insufficient to capture fast moving or transient content. Further numerous sources of content may be excluded from the indexing process rendering the excluded content inaccessible to users of that search engine. For example content hosts may deliberately refuse access to web crawling tools or a host may simply be too new or insufficiently relevant e.g. according to absolute number of visitors or number of inbound links to content to warrant indexing according to a search engine s indexing policy or strategy. Thus users unaware of how to directly access excluded content e.g. via a specific Uniform Resource Locator or URL may never be able to locate it.

Additionally conventional approaches for determining the relevance of content may not correlate well with the actual usage of content. As described above a given web page that is conventionally indexed may be assigned a high degree of relevance if there are a large number of links to that page from other pages. However if few users actually navigate those links to reach the given page the significance of the links in determining relevance is questionable. In fact it is a commonplace tactic to distort the overall relevance of a particular web page by widely distributing specious links to that page across the Internet thus elevating the ranking of the page within search results despite content that might not otherwise justify such a ranking.

Various embodiments of a systems and methods for displaying interest levels of online content determined based on rates of change of content access traffic are disclosed. According to one embodiment a system may include a web browser and a badge code module configured to execute within an execution environment provided by the web browser. The badge code module may be further configured to display an indication of content interest associated with a content source where the indication is dependent upon a time rate of change of content request traffic directed to the content source.

In one particular implementation of the system the web browser may be configured to download the badge code module from the content source for execution. In another particular implementation of the system the content source may include a web page where the web browser is configured to retrieve the web page from a host and where a reference to the badge code module is embedded within the web page such that the web browser is configured to download the badge code module in response to retrieving the web page from the host.

In another embodiment a system may include a web browser configured to generate a web browser window and a plugin module configured to integrate with the web browser for execution and to generate a display interface integrated within the browser window. The plugin module may be further configured to display an indication of content interest associated with a content source via the display interface where the indication is dependent upon a time rate of change of content request traffic directed to the content source.

In one particular implementation of this system the display interface may include a toolbar. In another particular implementation of this system the plugin module may be further configured to determine whether the indication of content interest satisfies a threshold notification criterion associated with the content source and in response to determining that the indication satisfies the threshold notification criterion to notify a user.

While the invention is susceptible to various modifications and alternative forms specific embodiments thereof are shown by way of example in the drawings and will herein be described in detail. It should be understood however that the drawings and detailed description thereto are not intended to limit the invention to the particular form disclosed but on the contrary the intention is to cover all modifications equivalents and alternatives falling within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

As noted above conventional schemes for indexing online content e.g. by exhaustively crawling through such content and statically ranking content relevance e.g. by noting the degree of connectivity to content may both overlook certain content and inaccurately represent its real interest to users. As an alternative approach the interest level of online content may be determined on the basis of actual user access to such content. For example content that is frequently requested by users e.g. via a web browser or other type of device or interface may be considered more interesting than content that that has many inbound links but few actual user requests. By associating a measure of content interest with actual user behavior relative to content content interest may be determined dynamically. Indicated content interest may then rise and fall according to content access patterns that may reflect emergent properties of a networked community of users. It is noted that in some instances the interest level of content may be a factor in or a proxy for the relevance of such content to a given user.

In some embodiments content interest associated with online content may be determined according to the behavior of users or consumers of that content as distinct from an owner or generator of the content or an agent that may attempt to access online content with no interest or intent grounded in the content itself. For example content interest may be associated with the general interest of a broad or narrow community of users for whom at least some degree of initial or continuing desire or curiosity for making use of online content is implicit in their acts of accessing such content. By contrast the actions of an owner or generator of content may not be indicative of interest in the owned or generated content per se but rather in the availability of such content for users. For example the attempts of a web site owner to access his own site s content for debugging purposes may not indicate interest in the content itself but rather some aspect of how the content appears or is conveyed. Similarly a bad actor may maliciously attempt to access online content with the intention not of using the content but of creating a deleterious effect such as a denial of service attack or a distortion of content usage metrics e.g. click fraud .

Sheer volume of user access requests to a given source of online content may not be the best indicator of interest however. For example the websites of major online retailers media outlets etc. process consistently large numbers of content requests through their home pages every day with relatively minor and or predictable fluctuations in request traffic relative to overall traffic volume. By contrast a little known website might suddenly see its traffic grow tenfold perhaps due to media coverage word of mouth etc. If content interest were purely a function of the number of content access requests the high volume site with relatively consistent request traffic would continually be ranked as more interesting than the little known site that exhibits considerable variance in request traffic. This may act to impair the discovery of new and potentially interesting sources of content. That is determining content interest solely from access request volume e.g. number of requests per hour day etc. may be biased in favor of preserving the level of interest of already highly ranked content sources at the expense of obscuring the level of interest of less requested sources.

In some cases such a bias may be overcome by defining a measure of content interest to account for a time rate of change of content request traffic rather than simply the magnitude of the content request traffic. Such a measure may be referred to interchangeably herein as a level or indication of interest as content interest or simply as interest. Considering the previous example the overall rate of change of request traffic for high volume sites may be relatively small at any given time. By contrast traffic to a little known website may exhibit a large rate of change relative to its overall traffic volume in a short period of time during a spike in traffic. By highlighting the rate of change of content request traffic the burgeoning interest in the little known website may be brought to the attention of users who otherwise may have never become aware of the content available at that site.

In the following sections the behavior of an exemplary network based system for requesting and conveying online content is discussed. Various methods for determining the level of interest of online content based on rate of change behavior of content request traffic are explored. Additionally techniques for collecting and reporting request traffic as well as displaying the resulting interest analysis of such traffic are considered and an exemplary computer system that may be configured to implement content request traffic data collection analysis and or reporting functions is discussed.

One embodiment of a system configured to facilitate the distribution of online content is illustrated in . In the illustrated embodiment a number of hosts are configured to receive requests for online content from a number of content requestors via a network . Additionally an interest analysis IA system including a web services WS interface and a traffic analysis TA engine is configured to communicate with hosts via network . As noted below in conjunction with the description of in some embodiments some or all of the components illustrated in may be partially or entirely implemented as computer executable instructions and data stored via a computer accessible medium.

Generally speaking hosts may be instances of online content sources where a content source may encompass any suitable type of data that may be conveyed over a network including but not limited to text documents still image data audio data video data metadata such as markup language tags communication protocol data such as content preambles epilogues and so forth. In many embodiments hosts may be configured to provide online content to requestors via web based data request and transport protocols. For example hosts may be configured to host web sites implementing Uniform Resource Locators URLs corresponding to web pages documents or other online content and to receive requests for access to particular URLs formatted in a version of the Hypertext Transport Protocol HTTP data transport protocol. In response to such requests hosts may be configured to access the content corresponding to the requested URL and to provide it to the requestor in accordance with the HTTP protocol. It is contemplated that in some embodiments application layer data transport protocols other than or in addition to HTTP may be used to convey requests for content and the resulting content to and from hosts . For example a secure authenticated version of HTTP may be employed as may a version of File Transfer Protocol FTP or any other suitable protocol.

In some embodiments a given host may be configured as a self contained standalone web server that both stores online content and receives and processes requests for stored content. In other embodiments a given host may be included within a complex content server architecture. For example host may be configured as an application or content server that does not actually store content but is instead configured to retrieve requested content from a database or other repository not shown that may not be directly connected to network .

Content requestors in general may encompass any device system or software application that may be configured to request online content. For example a requestor may include a general purpose computing system configured to implement a web browser such as a version of Microsoft Internet Explorer Firefox Opera or another suitable web browser or client application. Requestor may also include functionality defined by scripts such as JavaScript modules configured to execute in a standalone environment or an execution environment provided by a web browser. Requestor may alternatively be configured to host a syndicated content aggregator that may use a publish subscribe protocol such as RSS to notify users of the existence of new or updated online content. In some embodiments a requestor may include mobile devices such as cellular phone or wireless devices configured to request online content via embedded clients. A requestor may further encompass other types of network attached devices such as television set top boxes digital video recorders etc.

Network s may include any suitable data network or combination of networks configured for communicating content requests and online content between requestors and hosts . For example network may include one or more Local Area Networks LANs such as Ethernet networks as well as Wide Area Networks WANs Metropolitan Area Networks MANs or other data or telecommunication networks implemented over any suitable medium such as electrical or optical cable or via any suitable wireless standard such as IEEE 802.11 Wi Fi IEEE 802.16 WiMax etc. In various embodiments all or a portion of network may encompass the network infrastructure commonly referred to as the Internet. In other embodiments network may be entirely contained within an enterprise and not directly accessible from the Internet. For example network may be configured as an enterprise intranet where hosts and requestors are local to an enterprise.

While online content hosted by hosts may often conform to a web based model in which content may be requested via URLs and delivered to a web browser or other web client this is not a requirement for the methods and techniques described below. Broadly speaking hosts may host any type of online content and may interact with requestors according to any suitable request response model to provide the hosted content. For example in some embodiments hosts may be configured as databases file systems or other types of data repositories accessible by protocols other than web based protocols.

As described above a host may receive content request traffic from various requestors that is directed to online content hosted by host . For example a host may receive HTTP GET requests directed to a particular URL or a different type of content request according to a different data transport protocol. In the illustrated embodiment hosts may be instrumented with traffic reporting logic which in various embodiments may include scripts code or hardwired logic configured to report content request traffic to interest analysis system .

In one embodiment traffic reporting logic may be configured to invoke one or more web services WS calls targeting the WS interface of IA system as the service endpoint. One embodiment of a method of operation of traffic reporting logic is illustrated in . Referring collectively to operation begins in block where content request traffic directed to online content sourced by host is detected. For example host may detect an incoming HTTP GET request specifying a given URL. In response IA system may be notified of the content request traffic via a web services call block and the reported request traffic may be stored block . For example traffic reporting logic may be configured to issue a web services call according to the following format 

where corresponds to the Internet address of WS interface in name or numeric form and where denotes the requested or targeted URL. In the illustrated embodiment two referrer URLs may also be supplied. The first referrer URL may correspond to the URL from which the request for the targeted URL originated. For example the request may have been generated by a user selecting e.g. clicking a link or otherwise executing a navigation operation on some other web page in which case the first referrer URL may include the URL of that other web page. Similarly the second referrer URL may include the URL of the site page or other resource that referred to the first referrer URL e.g. the URL that is two links previous to the targeted URL in the navigation history of the requestor . More or fewer referrers may be provided in various embodiments. Also additional or different parameters may be used in the web services call in various embodiments. For example date and or time information associated with the occurrence of the content request may be embedded within the web services call used to report the content request. Alternatively such information may be recorded by IA system when it receives such a report.

It is noted that in some embodiments when a user navigates away from content on a particular host to a different content source e.g. a URL hosted by a different host the particular host may be configured to detect the outgoing transition. In some such embodiments hosts may be configured to report such outgoing content request traffic via traffic reporting logic in addition to incoming content request traffic. Since navigation away from one content source typically implies navigation towards another even if the target host is not instrumented to report content request traffic data e.g. with an instance of traffic reporting logic in some circumstances content request traffic data may still be captured by the host that is navigated away from.

In the example web services call shown above the specified operation AddPheromone may indicate to IA system that the supplied content request traffic information should be recorded and processed as described in greater detail below. Generally speaking recording information regarding the navigational path taken by a user to a content source e.g. the target URL as well as its referrers may be conceptually similar to an insect marking its path with a pheromone. If a sufficient number of users navigate to a particular content source through a certain set of paths those paths may be distinguished from other paths e.g. random paths via the accumulation of pheromone e.g. recorded traffic information . It is noted however that the use of the term pheromone in this context is purely illustrative or metaphorical and that some characteristics of biological pheromones may not be directly applicable to analysis of content request traffic as described herein.

The additional parameter ResponseType may be used in some embodiments to return data to host from IA system . For example different values for the ResponseType may cause IA system to return data such as the top URLs referring to or from the target URL or the top URLs of all URLs known to IA system e.g. ranked according to content request traffic analysis as described below . Other ResponseType values may cause the original web services request to be echoed back to host or may cause a different response or no response at all to be returned. If URL data is returned it may be processed by host as described below in conjunction with the description of .

It is noted that in various embodiments traffic reporting logic may be configured to invoke WS interface in any of a number of suitable ways. The example just given may be representative of a web services invocation in a Representational State Transfer REST style web services architecture. Alternatively host may communicate with WS interface using a document or message oriented architecture for example by formatting the web services request as an eXtensible Markup Language XML document encapsulating such a document using a version of the Simple Object Access Protocol SOAP and conveying the resulting encapsulated document to WS interface for processing. In either case different numbers or types of parameters for communicating information about content request traffic targeting host may be employed in various embodiments. It is also contemplated that in some embodiments hosts may communicate with interface using protocols other than web services related protocols. For example such communication may take place using protocols such as Telnet Remote Procedure Call RPC or other standard or proprietary protocols. Also in some embodiments it is contemplated that a host may combine and report information for multiple distinct content requests as part of a single web services transaction with WS interface .

An administrator of a host may integrate traffic reporting logic directly within the other functionality of host that is configured to process content requests and provide content. However in some embodiments traffic reporting logic may be configured as a self contained platform independent software module that may be downloaded remotely invoked or otherwise obtained from a third party e.g. the party providing IA system and implemented by an administrator of a host with minimal alteration to the configuration of host . For example traffic reporting logic may be implemented as a JavaScript module or a software module coded in another suitable language. Upon activation traffic reporting logic may be configured to generate the appropriate web services calls to report content request traffic to IA system in a manner that is generally transparent to the other operations performed by host . Traffic reporting logic may be implemented to have minimal impact on content request throughput. For example if traffic reporting logic cannot contact WS interface to report a particular content request the request may still be allowed to complete.

Although in some embodiments traffic reporting logic may execute on host in other embodiments it may be implemented as a module such as a JavaScript module that is delivered by host to a requestor along with the requested content. Traffic reporting logic may then be executed by the requesting client rather than the host in order to report the request. In other embodiments traffic reporting logic may be implemented on a proxy server that may be located between requestor and host . The general function of traffic reporting logic may be similar regardless of whether the logic is implemented for host side client side or proxy server execution.

Through the reporting of instances of content request traffic by hosts IA system may gather data indicative of both the global traffic behavior among hosts as well as traffic behavior relative to a subset of hosts or within an individual host e.g. among the different URLs hosted by a particular host . In some embodiments IA system may store each traffic report received from a host as an individual data record while in other embodiments IA system may be configured to aggregate or consolidate traffic records in various ways. For example IA system may aggregate content request traffic data into time slots according to intervals of time such as seconds minutes hours days or other suitable intervals. Those data points falling within a given time slot may be aggregated for the purposes of analysis.

Similarly in various embodiments IA system may manipulate the received URLs within content request traffic data in various ways. For example IA system may be configured to strip query parameters session information or any other potentially personally identifying information such as cookies passwords etc. from a target URL or a referrer URL e.g. by stripping any information following the first occurrence of within the URL . IA system may also be configured to transform URLs into a canonical format for example by truncating them or eliminating internal levels of hierarchy. Additionally IA system may be configured to perform unification of different URLs. In one embodiment certain different URLs may refer to content that is sufficiently similar to warrant tracking as a single content source. For example a host may be configured to dynamically generate content by augmenting existing content with personalization information before delivering the content to the requestor . Alternatively a URL may reflect session or state information associated with a particular requestor that may be transparent with respect to the content actually delivered to the requestor. Unification of distinct URLs may include determining that the URLs refer to the same underlying content or subset of content and subsequently tracking the URLs as common rather than distinct. It is contemplated that in some embodiments some or all aggregation unification or other manipulation of reported URLs may be performed by traffic reporting logic within a host rather than by IA system . Further it is contemplated that content request traffic reporting aggregation and analysis may be performed at any suitable level of content granularity. For example where content sources corresponding to various URLs reporting and or analysis may be performed on the level of individual web page URLs site URLs or any other suitable portion of a URL obtainable by extraction truncation unification or any other type of transformation.

In some embodiments reports of content request traffic may be filtered according to various criteria before further analysis occurs e.g. a rate of change analysis as described below . For example in some circumstances a requestor may attempt to deliberately manipulate the traffic associated with a given content source by issuing spurious requests to that source. Such manipulation may be detected in a number of ways. For example a unique identifier associated with a requestor such as its Internet Protocol IP addresses or another suitable identifier e.g. an irreversible hash of an IP address browser key or other suitable combination of requestor information may be tracked and requests to a content source in excess of a given threshold or pattern may be considered questionable and subsequently filtered. Alternatively collected traffic data may be filtered to remove traffic received from or directed to potentially objectionable sources such as sources of pornographic content phishing sites spamming sites or other sources complicit or implicit in the delivery of malicious or undesirable software e.g. spyware or adware . Other motivations for filtering content request traffic are possible and contemplated.

Criteria for determining when filtering should be performed may vary in various embodiments. For example as mentioned above a substantial number of content requests originating from a single requestor during a given period of time may be indicative that such requests are possibly being automatically generated. If such requests are directed to one or a small number of content sources this behavior may be suggestive of an attempt to manipulate content interest indications of those sources. More generally certain patterns of content request traffic may be identified to be suspicious or manipulative. For example if content request traffic directed to a content source from one or more requestors is highly cyclical or exhibits other predictable behavior with less variation than would be expected from a stochastic process the traffic may be considered to exhibit a manipulative pattern and therefore be a candidate for filtering. It is noted that filtering may be implemented as a heuristic process rather than a deterministic process. Accordingly in some embodiments filtering may include flagging marking or otherwise indicating suspicious data instead of permanently removing the data. In such embodiments whether or not to use suspicious data may be selected as an operating parameter e.g. by specifying a desired confidence level in the content interest weights .

The actual filtering of content request traffic may occur at a number of different points between requestor and IA system . For example IA system may be configured to store all content request traffic reports received from hosts as such reports arrive and to subsequently remove records of reports deemed to be spurious or from undesirable sources. Alternatively IA system may be configured to perform filtering as reports are received and to discard or flag questionable reports. In other embodiments traffic reporting logic may be configured to evaluate content requests for filtering and may either discard a questionable request without reporting it to IA system or may report it with prejudice e.g. by explicitly indicating that it may be questionable. In some embodiments different criteria for filtering content request traffic may be applied to different content sources according to parameters specified by users of content request traffic data including the interest analysis procedures described below . In such embodiments raw content request traffic may be filtered at the time it is retrieved or analyzed rather than when it is initially received or stored.

In one embodiment IA system may be configured to perform load shedding under certain circumstances. For example if the combination of incoming reports of content request traffic data from hosts and outgoing content interest data e.g. to badges plugins or other users of content interest data as described below exceeds a threshold volume of processing activity the performance e.g. response time of IA system may degrade. In such circumstances IA system may be configured to reduce its processing load by discarding incoming reports in order to preserve performance with respect to outgoing data or vice versa. In other embodiments other load management schemes are possible and contemplated. For example IA system may be configured to offload some of its processing tasks to other systems or may employ flow control protocols to negotiate the frequency or quantity of reporting it receives from hosts .

IA system may be configured to store received content request traffic data using any suitable format or methodology. For example IA system may store such data in arrays tables trees databases hashed structures or other suitable data structures either internal to IA system or distributed among one or several external systems not shown such as database systems file systems etc. In some embodiments IA system may store historical content request traffic data for arbitrary periods of time while in other embodiments data older than a threshold age e.g. days months etc. may be automatically purged or moved to secondary storage.

The content request traffic data collected by IA system for URLs hosted by a given host may be generally representative of request traffic behavior over time for the given host . For example the collected data may form a time series of data points corresponding to content request traffic at discrete points in time or during various intervals of time. In some embodiments IA system may be configured to use curve fitting techniques to develop an analytical function that is generally descriptive of the collected data within a certain level of error e.g. by determining coefficients of a power series or Fourier series or applying any other suitable curve fitting technique . In such embodiments parameters characterizing the analytical function e.g. polynomial coefficients may be stored in place of the collected data points themselves.

As mentioned previously in some circumstances the magnitude of content request traffic corresponding to a particular URL may not be an optimal indication of the interest level of that URL. Rather the rate of change in content request traffic may be a more effective measure for detecting emerging or developing trends in actual online content usage behavior from which changes in content interest may be inferred. Particular examples of content request traffic data illustrating this phenomenon are shown in .

In content request traffic over a period of time is illustrated for an exemplary content source having a relatively high volume of requests. For example the illustration may apply to a content source corresponding to a large popular website such as a retail website. As shown by the heavy solid line content request traffic R for the high volume source ranges between approximately 350 and 550 requests during any given interval of measurement. also illustrates the first time derivative of content request traffic dR dt. As shown by the dotted line the time rate of change of content request traffic generally falls within a range of 100 to 100 requests per unit of time.

In content request traffic R is illustrated for an exemplary content source having a relatively low volume of requests. For example this case may apply to a personal website such as a blog or personal home page. In this graph the heavy solid line indicates content request traffic. Read along the left axis content request traffic falls between 1 and 8 requests during any given interval. The first derivative of content request traffic shown by the dotted line and read along the right axis falls within a range of 7 to 7 requests per unit of time.

It is noted that in the low volume case the rate of change of content request traffic is much larger relative to overall traffic than in the high volume case. This is explicitly illustrated in where the ratio of the first derivative of content request traffic to overall content request traffic and multiplied by 100 is shown for both the low and high volume cases. As shown in the normalized rate of change of traffic of the high volume source illustrated by the solid line falls within a fairly narrow range of approximately 25 of traffic volume whereas for the low volume source illustrated by the dotted line the normalized rate of change ranges from approximately 100 to 700 of traffic volume. Thus in this example even though the high volume source experiences orders of magnitude more traffic than the low volume source the variability of traffic for the low volume source is orders of magnitude larger than the high volume case. In some circumstances this variability may be indicative of changes in interest with respect to the low volume content source that may be more significant than changes in interest for the high volume content source.

In one embodiment traffic analysis engine may be configured to perform a time rate of change analysis of content request traffic data and to determine the interest of content dependent upon such an analysis. One embodiment of a method of operation of TA engine is illustrated in . Referring collectively to operation begins in block where content request traffic directed to a content source is detected. It is noted that in one embodiment detection of content request traffic may be considered to occur when a report of content request traffic is received for analysis by IA system . For example such a detection may occur when IA system receives a report of content request traffic to a URL hosted by a host such as via WS interface as described above. In other embodiments detection of content request traffic may be considered to occur when host detects a content request or when host submits a report of a request to IA system .

A first order time rate of change of content request traffic may then be determined block . For example TA engine may be configured to numerically compute the first derivative or first order difference function with respect to time of the time series of data representative of the content request traffic data. In embodiments in which traffic data is modeled using analytic curve fitting techniques determination of the time rate of change of request traffic may be performed using analytic differentiation of the continuous or discrete analytic functions comprising the data model. In some embodiments the time rate of change of content request traffic may be determined only with respect to newly received traffic data which may then be appended to historical time rate of change data that may be stored in a manner similar to the content request traffic data itself. It is noted that in various embodiments time rate of change information may be determined whenever content request traffic is detected at points in time independent of traffic detection e.g. according to a schedule or in response to other events.

In addition to or instead of determining a first order rate of change as in block higher order rates of change may be determined with respect to content request traffic data block . For example a second order derivative or difference function indicative of the time rate of change of the first order time rate of change computed in the previous step may also be determined in a similar manner. This process may be extended to generate an arbitrary number of higher order derivatives or difference functions with respect to content request traffic data. Generally speaking any rate of change of content request traffic determined with respect to time may be considered a time rate of change regardless of the mathematical order of the rate of change with respect to content request traffic.

Subsequently an indication of content interest associated with the content source may be determined where the indication is dependent upon the time rate of change of content request traffic directed to the content source block . The indication of content interest associated with a given content source may also be referred to herein as a weight or interest weight associated with the given content source. As described in greater detail below in different embodiments a weight associated with a content source may be determined dependent upon a time rate of change of content request traffic directed to that source in a number of different ways employing techniques such as normalization damping hysteresis or other types of transformations influenced by the time rate of change of content request traffic. In some embodiments multiple different weights may be determined that may be associated with different interest contexts as described below. Additionally it is noted that IA system may be configured to perform the method of for the respective content request traffic corresponding to numerous different content sources. For example IA system may implement multiple processing threads configured to concurrently process traffic data for different content sources or may process such data sequentially or in a time multiplexed fashion.

In one embodiment the first order time rate of change of content request traffic associated with a content source may be used directly as the weight of the content source. Thus for example when traffic to a content source is increasing at a rate of 1 request per second or decreasing at a rate of 0.5 requests per second its weight may be 1.0 or 0.5 respectively. In variations of such an embodiment the rate of change may be normalized to fall within a particular range e.g. between 1 and 1 according to a fixed standard of normalization or relative to rates of traffic change exhibited by other content sources. In some instances distinguishing positive rates of change may be considered more significant than distinguishing negative rates of change. For example if a limited number of content sources are selected to be highlighted or displayed in some fashion on the basis of rate of change related weighting as described in greater detail below few if any sources with negative rates of change may typically be selected. In some such cases rates of change that are less than zero may be represented with a weight of zero rather than a negative weight.

As described above with respect to in some embodiments a rate of change of content request traffic may be normalized relative to the request traffic volume from which the rate of change was determined for example by computing a ratio of the rate of change of request traffic to request traffic volume. The resulting ratio or normalized rate of change may then be used as the interest weight associated with the content source. In circumstances where there is a substantial disparity between content request traffic volume for two different content sources such as illustrated in such a ratio may more effectively highlight the magnitude of a rate of change in content request traffic relative to the volume of traffic. For example as discussed above ordinary fluctuation of traffic directed to a high volume content source may be larger in absolute terms than an unusual spike in traffic directed to a low volume content source. However relative to underlying traffic volume the ordinary traffic fluctuation of the high volume source may represent only a small fraction of its total volume whereas the spike in traffic directed to the low volume source may represent a large multiple of its total volume signaling a possibly interesting change in the content interest of the low volume source.

The rate of change of content traffic either in absolute terms or normalized relative to traffic volume may be mapped to a interest weight using any desired function such as a linear polynomial sigmoidal or other type of function. A direct mapping of the rate of change or normalized rate of change to the interest weight may be viewed as a mapping using the identity function. In some embodiments this mapping may be a stateless mapping that does not take into account a previous value of the rate of change or another variable such that a change in value of the rate of change yields some corresponding change in the corresponding weight. One embodiment of a general method of such a mapping is illustrated in . Beginning in block a time rate of change of content request traffic directed to a content source is determined for example as described above. A mapping function may then be evaluated to determine an indication of interest or weight corresponding to the content source dependent upon the rate of change of content request traffic block . For example the mapping function may be the identity function or a more complex function. The resulting weight may then be stored block . For example a weight corresponding to a given URL may be stored in a table record or other data structure associated with that URL.

In stateless embodiments where positive and negative rates of change directly and immediately influence weights of content sources the resulting weights may reflect changes in request traffic to content sources in near real time. That is the weights may nearly simultaneously reflect actual changes in request traffic as they occur subject to delays in request traffic being reported from hosts to IA system and then processed. Depending on communication latencies across network in some embodiments weights indicative of request traffic rates of change may lag actual request traffic events by times on the order of seconds or fractions of seconds. Thus weights may be highly responsive to the state of request traffic.

In other embodiments a content source weight may be determined on the basis of a rate of change of content request traffic in a manner that preserves some degree of state or history associated with the weight. For example a host may exhibit a one time change in content request traffic from a lower constant level to a substantially higher constant level over a brief period of time. Before and after the transition between the initial and final levels in this example the rate of change of content request traffic may be zero while during the transition it may be a positive large quantity. In a stateless implementation a corresponding interest weight might change e.g. to zero following completion of the transition tracking the rate of change. However the transition in traffic may hold significance for users for some time after the transition has occurred. For example the transition may be indicative of an interesting change or development in the information available at the content source such as breaking news a new product announcement etc. and this development may continue to be interesting for some time after it commences.

Generally speaking a rate of change analysis of content request traffic may detect edges or transitions in such traffic that may be indicative of events that impact content interest. It may be desirable to preserve such events with some degree of persistence beyond the transitions themselves for example in order to communicate or display the events to other interested parties. For example a transition in content request traffic may signal a change in content interest that is still pertinent to an observer some time after the change occurs.

Correspondingly in one embodiment traffic analysis engine may be configured to determine an interest weight of a content source using the current state of the weight in addition to a rate of change of content request traffic. For example in response to detecting a positive rate of change of content request traffic directed to a content source TA engine may be configured to correspondingly increase a weight of the content source as a function of the rate of change as described above. However if the rate of change should become zero or negative TA engine may be configured to apply a negative gain or decay function such as a linear polynomial exponential or other function to the weight such that the weight decreases over time by the decay function of the current weight rather than the rate of change of content request traffic.

One embodiment of a method of determining interest weights for a content source dependent upon a time rate of change of content request traffic data as well as a gain function is illustrated in . Beginning in block a time rate of change of content request traffic directed to a content source is determined for example as described above. A gain function that takes into account the current state of an interest weight associated with the content source is then selected according to the rate of change block . In some embodiments TA engine may implement different gain functions according to whether the rate of change is positive zero or negative or whether the rate of change assumes certain specific values. For example a linear or identity function may be selected if the rate of change is positive while an exponential or a different linear function may be selected if the rate of change is zero or negative. It is noted that in general a gain function may operate to either increase or decrease the interest weight to which it is applied taking into account the current state of the weight.

The selected gain function is then evaluated to determine the next state of the weight block . In some embodiments the next state of the weight may be selected from either the result of the gain function or the actual value of the content request traffic rate of change. For example whichever value minimizes the change to the weight may be selected in one embodiment. The resulting weight may then be stored for example in a table database etc. such as described above block .

A particular example showing content interest weights derived using a gain function applied to historical content request traffic rate of change data is illustrated in the data plotted in . In the illustration the normalized rate of change data shown in for the high volume and low volume content sources has been transformed into content interest weight data through the application of the function 

It is noted that by applying different gain functions and parameters to rising and falling edges detected in content request traffic e.g. as indicated by first order or higher order rates of change of content request traffic the responsiveness of an interest weight to different types of fluctuations in request traffic may be selectively tuned to be reactive or twitchy in some cases and damped or delayed in others. For example a weight may be tuned to respond very quickly to increases e.g. positive edges in request traffic but to have a much more gradual decay in response to decreases e.g. negative edges in traffic or vice versa. In particular it is noted that regardless of how the weight is tuned it may generally respond to actual fluctuations in content request traffic as they occur with minimal reporting and processing delays. This behavior stands in contrast to conventional approaches to indexing online content which generally function independently of actual request traffic e.g. using web crawling mechanisms and thus do not reflect the information implicit in that traffic. That is conventional indexing approaches may be generally characterized as pull models in which content to be indexed is identified and retrieved regardless of whether the content is actually interesting as measured by user behavior. As a consequence conventional approaches may gather and index uninteresting content and overlook potentially interesting content. By contrast the rate of change based content interest model described herein may be generally characterized as a push or demand driven model in which the interest level of a given content source need not be determined if in fact there is no interest in the given source as indicated by e.g. an absence of content request traffic data. That is rather than unconditionally gathering an arbitrary set of data and subsequently determining what part of the gathered data may be interesting as in the pull model the push model may first determine a level of content interest and then perform other functions such as those described below for content that is interesting.

Although the interest weight of a content source has been described above as being determined on the basis of a rate of change of content request traffic optionally also depending on the current weight through a gain function in some embodiments other factors may also contribute to the interest weight of the content source. For example a weight determined on the basis of rate of change information as described above may be combined e.g. in a weighted average with other measures of interest or relevance such as the volume of request traffic directed to the content source the number of static links or references to the content source from other sources or other suitable factors.

Additionally it is contemplated that other types of time based analysis of content request traffic data may be performed in some embodiments instead of or in addition to a differential analysis of a rate or rates of change of content request traffic. For example content request traffic may be integrated over a period of time to determine the basis for normalizing rates of change of content request traffic. Other techniques such as time frequency transform techniques e.g. using an appropriate version of a fast Fourier transform algorithm or discrete Fourier transform algorithm may also be applied to time series content request traffic data to transform such time series data into a frequency domain and thus facilitate extraction of frequency components of the data. Such frequency components may be amplified filtered or otherwise transformed using frequency domain techniques. The results may be used to influence the determination of interest weights for the corresponding content source.

Although the foregoing discussion describes embodiments in which interest weights may be determined with respect to individual content sources it is contemplated that similar techniques may be used to determine interest weights with respect to navigation paths among various content sources. For example one requestor may generate content access requests directed to a set of content sources A B and C in that order while another requestor may generate content access requests to these sources in the order B A C. In some embodiments such navigation paths may be detected through an analysis of the referral and destination information submitted to IA system in a report of a content access request. For example considering the exemplary AddPheromone web services call discussed above when the first requestor navigates from content source B to content source C the AddPheromone call may reflect that the first referrer is content source B and the second referrer is content source A allowing the path to be reconstructed. In one embodiment IA system may be configured to detect longer paths by examining reported traffic for instances in which a destination first referrer combination of one report matches a first referrer second referrer combination of another report or vice versa.

In some embodiments once a navigation path is identified it may be treated as a locus of interest weight analysis in a manner analogous to that of individual content sources. For example a navigation path may be treated as a content source in itself in that request traffic volume along the path as well as rates of change in that traffic volume may be identified. Correspondingly interest weights may be generated for paths dependent upon determined rates of change of traffic volume along those paths.

A rate of change based interest weight of a particular content source determined as described above may be generally indicative of the interest of that content source in the context of all content sources for which weights have been obtained. That is the computed weight may be considered a global indication of interest or a global weight. However in some embodiments it may be useful to determine more than one weight for a given content source where the different weights are normalized relative to different contexts. For example a global weight of a given URL that reflects all request traffic to that URL may be useful in ranking the interest of the given URL in the broad context of all known URLs. However the interest of the given URL may also be considered within a narrower context such as those URLs falling within the same top level domain e.g. www.domainname.com or those URLs belonging to some community of interest as described below.

In some instances a content source that has one weight reflecting interest within a global context may have a considerably different weight reflecting interest within a local context. For example rate of change data for a given URL may not be particularly noteworthy on a global scale but might be maximal relative to other URLs within the same domain or other local context. Thus in some embodiments TA engine may be configured to determine both a global weight and one or more local weights for a given content source.

Local weights may be determined in different ways according to different embodiments. In the method embodiment illustrated in a local weight of a content source may be determined relative to a specific requestor or a set of requestors . That is the local weight may reflect a rate of change of content request traffic originating from one or several particular requestors rather than considering traffic from all requestors in the aggregate. In block a specific requestor or set of requestors corresponding to the local weight of the content source is defined. For example a particular originating URL or domain may be specified. Subsequently content request traffic directed to the content source from the specified requestor s is detected block for example by TA engine via traffic reporting received via WS interface as described above.

A time rate of change of content request traffic originating from the specified requestor s is then determined block and a local weight may be determined based on the rate of change of content request traffic block . Both rate of change and weight determination may be performed by TA engine in a fashion similar to that of global weights described above. For example local weights may track the rate of change in content request traffic in a stateless fashion or one or more gain functions may be used to shape the response of the local weight to changes in the request traffic behavior. In particular it is noted that different gain functions may be applied to local weights versus global weights. For example a global weight of a content source may decay at a different rate than a local weight of that source. Subsequently the local weight may be stored block for example as part of a record or table along with a global weight for the content source.

As just described a local weight of a content source may be determined on the basis of a subset of content request traffic data restricted to specified requestors. In an alternative embodiment a local weight may also be determined by normalizing global weight information relative to a specified subset of content sources. For example the global weight of a given content source may be only a fraction of the maximum global weight when all content sources are considered in the aggregate. However within a particular subset of content sources such as local context or community of interest comprising a selected number of content sources the given content source s global weight might be maximal. For example a global weight of a particular blog may fall well below the median or average global weight of all content sources for which global weights have been determined e.g. including news sources retail web sites etc. . However considered within a subset of all content sources that includes all blogs or perhaps all blogs on a particular theme e.g. politics parenting technology law etc. the global weight of the particular blog may rank within the top few content sources of the subset. Deliberately normalizing weights within a specified context may simplify the comparison or ranking of content sources within that context.

One embodiment of a method of determining local weights by normalizing global weights relative to a subset of content sources is illustrated in . Beginning in block the subset of content sources is identified. For example the subset may be defined to TA engine to include all or a portion of the URLs included within a single domain or a number of URLs across different domains that fall within a community of interest. Subsequently global weights are determined for each content source according to respective rates of change of content request traffic data block . For example content request traffic reports may be collected and analyzed to determine global weight information using any of the techniques or methods described above.

Global weight information is then normalized within the specified subset of content sources to determine respective local weights for each source block . For example the global weights of the subset of content sources may be normalized relative to the maximum global weight or weights within the subset. While such normalization may be linear in some embodiments the relationships among the resulting local weights may be nonlinear with respect to the original global weights. Subsequently the resulting local weights may be stored block as described above.

Different considerations may serve to interrelate different content sources within a particular local context or community of interest for which local weights may be defined. As mentioned above in one embodiment a local context may correspond to a particular domain and some or all URLs residing within that domain may be members of the local context with corresponding local weights. In other embodiments a local context may be defined more generally in terms of content source topography. For example two URLs may reside within the same local context if they are related by a link or explicit reference from one to the other. More loosely two URLs may reside within the same local context if their domains are related at any level by a link from one to the other. A local context may be defined more broadly by extending membership to content sources that are related by intermediate links or references as opposed to direct links.

In other embodiments membership by content sources in a local context may be determined on the basis of content relationships among the content sources as opposed to topological relationships. For example the information content of a given textual content source may be characterized in some embodiments by performing a statistical analysis of words or phrases included within the source and to identify so called statistically improbable phrases that may be indicative of salient information content. For example a phrase that occurs frequently in one content source in comparison to others may be indicative of some significant or unique aspect of that content source as opposed to a generic phrase that may be common to many sources. That is it may be statistically likely to find common phrases in many content sources but statistically improbable to find phrases unique to a particular source in many content sources. In one embodiment two different content sources may be determined to be members of the same local context if their content overlaps to a specified degree even if they do not explicitly reference or link to one another. For example two content sources that have a specified absolute number or fraction of statistically improbable phrases in common may have related content and may consequently be identified as members of a common local context or community of interest.

Other suitable techniques or algorithms may be employed to determine content relationships among content sources including other types of content such as image data audio data metadata or embedded tags etc. and to identify related content sources as members of a community of interest. For example metadata tags descriptive of the type and content of different content sources may be compared to determine whether the sources are of similar types e.g. text images etc. and have similar content where a measure of similarity between two sources may be proportional to the number of tags those sources have in common for example. In other embodiments hashing or other reductive techniques may be used to generate content dependent signatures of content sources. Depending on the properties of the algorithm used to create the signature signatures of different content sources may be compared to determine a qualitative or quantitative indication of similarity among the sources.

Additionally in some embodiments the extent of a local context with respect to content sources may be defined manually. In one embodiment a user may be provided with a graphical user interface configured to display a topology of interests. For example the topology may reflect different interests by keywords or phrases and may illustrate relationships among such interests such as hierarchical or set membership relationships degrees of similarity etc. Alternatively the topology may reflect different content sources illustrating similar relationships. The user may then interact with the interface to specify the categories of interest or the particular content sources to be treated as a local context with respect to content interest weight determination. For example a user may select individual entities within the topology or may specify groups based on particular relationships e.g. all entities hierarchically beneath a given entity all entities removed from a given entity by degree N etc. . Content sources related to the user s selections may then be associated with a local context for content weight determination as described above. Regardless of the technique used to define a community of interest among content sources e.g. topological or content based techniques a hypothetical content seeker having interest in one content source generally may have a better than random chance of having interest in another content source within the same community of interest.

It is contemplated that in some embodiments an arbitrary number of local weights may be determined for a given content source using combinations of the techniques described above. For example a given content source may be a member of multiple different local contexts with a respective local weight associated with each one.

Using the various techniques described above interest analysis system may operate to generate a wealth of interest information e.g. interest weights and related data for various content sources based on content request traffic directed to those sources from requestors and reported by hosts . Interest weight information corresponding to content sources may be used in a number of different ways. For example in some embodiments a conventional search engine may be configured to use a global or local interest weight of a content source to rank the position of that content source in a listing of search results either instead of or in addition to other methods of ranking search results e.g. according to the number of static links or references to a given content source as determined by an indexing process . Specifically in one embodiment a search operation may be performed over a number of content sources for which corresponding content interest weights have been determined e.g. by evaluating a set of keywords or a formal query against the content sources. Such a search operation may be performed by a search engine application that is integrated into IA system or separate from it. Those content sources that satisfy the search criteria specified by the search operation may then be ranked according to their respective content interest weights for example in ascending or descending order according to the values of the weights. However as described above in some embodiments interest weight information may be indicative of near real time content request traffic activity and may be frequently updated to reflect changes in such activity. Correspondingly in some embodiments the use or display of interest weights may be configured to take advantage of their near real time properties.

Generated content source interest data may be retrieved from IA system according to any suitable technique. For example in embodiments where IA system is configured to store records tables or other data structures including interest data various applications may query IA system via WS interface to retrieve interest data for a particular content source or a number of sources. Such data may include for example and without limitation the URLs or other identifiers of the content sources having the highest ranking by global interest weights the highest ranking requestors submitting requests to the host the highest ranking content sources as destinations for navigation away from host or the highest ranking content sources ranked by local weights within any local context or community of interest that may be defined as described above. Lowest ranking or intermediate ranking content sources in any of these categories may also be the subjects of interest data queries. In various embodiments the number of content sources for which interest data is returned in response to a request may be fixed or user selectable. In one embodiment WS interface may support a limited number of predefined types of interest data queries while in another embodiment a general purpose query interface may be provided for processing any desired well formed query of interest data.

While in some embodiments retrieval of interest data may be performed by applications or processes that are independent of requestors and hosts in other embodiments such retrieval may occur by a host as part of the process of reporting content request traffic data. In some cases retrieving current content source interest data in response to submitting a report of content request traffic data may enable a host to refresh a set of locally pertinent interest data without issuing a separate web services call. For example in one embodiment a host may be configured to submit a report of a content access request by invoking a web services call such as the AddPheromone call described above. Depending on the configuration of the web services call e.g. the argument provided to the ResponseType parameter of the AddPheromone call shown above when a host submits a report of a content request WS interface may be configured to return different types of content source interest data.

One embodiment of a general method of using a single web services call to report content request traffic and retrieve content source interest data is illustrated in . Operation begins in block where content request traffic is detected. For example a host may detect an HTTP GET or other type of content request from a requestor . Subsequently a web services call to report the content request traffic is formatted block . For example in a REST style web services architecture parameters needed to report the traffic may be specified in the form of parameters of an HTTP request to WS interface may be specified whereas in a document based web services architecture a text document including the parameters may be assembled. In this step the desired content source interest data to be retrieved may be specified. For example one of a number of arguments to a parameter e.g. the ResponseType parameter shown above may be specified in order to identify a particular predefined set of interest data to be returned e.g. a fixed number of top ranked content sources according to global weights . In other embodiments a free form query for selecting the desired set of interest data may be specified.

The web services call may then be posted to WS interface block and recorded and analyzed by TA engine as described above. In response IA system may be configured to retrieve the requested interest data block performing any necessary query processing or other data selection or filtering specified by the web services call. For example IA system may select records of content source interest data according to global weights or local weights for a particular local context. Subsequently the requested interest data may be returned as a result of the web services call block . For example a formatted document or stream of text containing the requested interest data may be returned to host .

Regardless of whether interest data is returned to a host in response to a content request reporting web services call or returned to a requesting third party application that is wholly independent of hosts and or requestors the interest data may be used or displayed in a number of fashions. In one embodiment as illustrated in a requestor may be configured to display retrieved interest data to users via a web browser or client. In the illustrated embodiment requestor is shown to include a web browser as well as a plugin configured to interact with browser . Generally speaking browser and plugin may be respective code modules or collections of code modules executable by requestor to provide various functions. In one embodiment browser may be any suitable type of browser software capable of retrieving and displaying online content such as web pages or other content retrieve form a host via a web based protocol. For example as mentioned above browser may correspond to an instance of Internet Explorer or another specific type of browser.

Plugin may be a software module that is configured to integrate with and augment the functionality of browser . For example plugin may interface with an application programming interface API provided by browser such that plugin operates as an extension of browser . In some embodiments plugin may be selectively downloaded and installed within browser by a user in order to obtain functionality that may not be natively supported by browser . For example plugin may be downloaded by a user from a host from IA system or from another source. As described in greater detail below in some embodiments plugin may be executable to display a toolbar or other type of user interface within a display environment managed by browser .

In the illustrated embodiment browser additionally includes badge code . As described in greater detail below badge code may be executable to display aspects of content interest data within a display environment managed by browser and or to perform other functions. In various embodiments badge code may be implemented as a JavaScript module as another type of executable code or script based module or as a static image e.g. represented in Hypertext Markup Language HTML or another type of markup language .

As mentioned above browser may be generally executable or operable to generate a display or interface with which a user may interact to request view and perform other operations with respect to online content. Likewise badge code and plugin may be executable to generate specific displays or interfaces of their own or to implement other functions not directly associated with the display of content interest data. One example of a collection of displays that may be presented to a user through the collective operation of browser badge code and plugin is illustrated in . In the illustrated embodiment a browser window that may be generated and managed by browser is shown displaying a variety of content that may include text images links to other content sources or any other suitable content arranged in any fashion within window . Additionally a content interest data display or badge is illustrated within the display area of window . Badge may be generated through the operation of badge code . Similarly window includes a toolbar which may be generated through the operation of plugin . In the following discussion a general correspondence between the executable components shown in and respective display elements shown in is assumed. However as noted below in some embodiments plugin may partially or completely subsume the functionality of badge code or vice versa and in some embodiments the functionality of either or both of plugin or badge code may be implemented separately from and without dependence on browser .

Generally speaking individual instances of badge code may be associated with respective hosts or content served by hosts and may be displayed in some fashion whenever a user accesses a host for which badge code has been implemented. Badge code may be integrated within the code or content of a particular web page served by a host or implemented such that it is downloaded activated and displayed whenever a user requests any content served by a host . In some embodiments it is contemplated that badge code may be configured to implement the functions of traffic reporting logic described above while in other embodiments traffic reporting logic may be implemented as a module distinct from badge code .

Additionally in some embodiments badge code may be configured to implement functions for locating or recruiting new sources of content for potential instrumentation with traffic reporting logic and inclusion in content request traffic data collection. In one embodiment badge code may be configured to provide a user selectable interface option such as a menu item a clickable link or banner or another suitable interface through which a user may obtain install and configure those components e.g. traffic reporting logic and or badge code needed to begin participating in content request traffic reporting. For example badge code may be configured to present e.g. via badge a selectable banner or menu item displaying a message to the effect of click here to install me on your site Upon selecting this item a user may be directed to a site offering instructions and downloadable software that may be used to instrument a host .

In another embodiment badge code may be configured to examine content request traffic arriving at and departing from its respective host in order to identify a host or domain associated with such traffic. In response to detecting arriving or departing traffic badge code may be configured to notify an administrator of the source or destination of such traffic to solicit participation in content request traffic reporting. For example badge code may extract a domain name e.g. domainname.com from a content access request and may then send an email notification to webmaster domainname.com admin domainname.com or any other typical or well known administrative address that may be included in a default list of such addresses where the notification may include instructions regarding how to participate in content request traffic reporting and or links directing the recipient to a content source including such information. In other embodiments badge code may identify candidate content sources for recruitment using other techniques. For example badge code may create lists of potential content sources derived from content request traffic directed to its respective host . Subsequently badge code or other software may be configured to examine or mine prospective content sources to determine administrative contact information e.g. a preferred contact listed on a web page the type of content available from the content source whether the content source is already instrumented with an instance of badge code and or traffic reporting logic or other relevant information regarding the prospective source.

In the illustrated embodiment badge code is configured to display via badge interest weight information and related data associated with its respective host that may be retrieved from IA system as described above. In one embodiment badge code may be executable to simply display an ordered list of content sources ranked according to the request that yielded the interest weight information. For example if the interest data for the most popular global content sources or local content sources within some local context was requested badge code may be executable to display all or a given number of those sources ranked from highest to lowest. In badge a given content source may be identified by a display of its URL an icon or a tag alias or other source name that may be assigned by the content source or specified by the user viewing the display. In some embodiments badge code may be executable to provide a user interface that allows a user to customize aspects of the display for example by specifying the type of query used to retrieve the interest data to display the amount of data to display such as the number of content sources the frequency with which the display data is updated or other display characteristics such as fonts colors styles etc.

In one embodiment badge code may be executable to retrieve and display content interest weight information that is relevant to content request traffic associated with a respective host without taking into account user specific information such as navigation history or content preferences of a user interacting with browser window on a requestor . For example badge code associated with a given host may be executable to indicate the top content sources among all hosts according to global weight the top content sources hosted by given host in particular e.g. specific URLs hosted by given host the top referrers to given host or the top content sources navigated to from given host . In some embodiments it may be desirable to keep the functionality of badge code relatively lightweight and host specific. For example the functionality of badge code may be confined to a limited feature set of display and analysis options centered on content interest data that is pertinent to a given associated host . In some such embodiments limiting the features and scope of analysis in this way may reduce the code size of badge code and consequently the time required to load content from given host as well as dependence on client specific aspects of the browser . For example minimizing the complexity and user interface requirements of badge code may facilitate the display of badge within the display environments generated by different types and versions of browsers and underlying platforms.

In contrast to one embodiment of badge code plugin may be configured to perform user specific personalization of content interest information. In one embodiment plugin may be configured as a software module that may be obtained by a user and persistently integrated within browser or as a standalone software module. As described above and shown in plugin may be executable to generate a toolbar that may be displayed within browser window for example in a reserved portion of the display area within a browser window or via a browser tab. Alternatively toolbar may be displayed separately from window as a detachable or standalone window. Plugin may be invoked as an extension to browser . Alternatively the functionality of plugin may be implemented as a separate standalone application that may execute independently of browser and may generate any suitable type of user interface including interfaces other than toolbars. In one embodiment once installed plugin may remain active throughout a user s session with a browser . By contrast in one embodiment badge code may remain active only so long as a user is viewing content associated with its respective host via browser window and may be deactivated if the user navigates away from that host.

Plugin may be configured to perform a variety of functions related to content interest data on behalf of a user. In one embodiment plugin may provide an interface through which a user may specify arbitrarily complex queries of content interest data generated by IA system . Such queries may allow a user to track the relative interest of content sources ranked within global or local contexts. As a non limiting example plugin may allow a user to receive visual or textual feedback e.g. via toolbar that is indicative of the top five globally ranked content sources as well as the top five news media stories e.g. stories from any media site and the top five sources having any relation to a specified topic e.g. patent law. As described above a user may also track relative interest of paths among sources ranked within either global or local contexts. Plugin may be executable to provide an interface that enables a user to specify how a given local context is defined for example by entering various types of metadata or keywords indicative of the local context.

As noted above interest data may be collected and updated by IA system in near real time as changes in content request traffic occur among various hosts . For example plugin may cause the data displayed via toolbar to be refreshed at regular intervals e.g. at intervals of five or ten seconds or upon the request of a user. In some embodiments plugin may be configured to highlight the evolution of interest data over time. For example rather than simply display an ordered list of content sources according to interest data plugin may be configured to cause the content sources to be displayed in display formats that are directly influenced by interest data. In one embodiment the size or color of the text or icon used to display a particular content source within toolbar may vary as its corresponding interest data changes. For example if the global weight of a displayed content source increases or decreases over time the size of the font used to display the name of the content source may correspondingly increase or decrease. In some embodiments different display characteristics may be used to simultaneously display different aspects of interest data for a given content source. For example font size may correlate to changes in global interest weights while font color may correlate to changes in local interest weights. Other uses of display characteristics to convey evolving content source interest data are possible and contemplated. Further detail regarding such uses may be found in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 186 357 filed Jul. 21 2005 and entitled Displaying Links at Varying Levels of Prominence to Reveal Emergent Paths Based on User Interaction the entirety of which is incorporated herein by reference.

One example of a type of content interest data display and its evolution over time is illustrated in . Such a display may variously be generated by plugin or badge code and displayed via toolbar or badge respectively. In other embodiments such a display may be generated and displayed by other components. For example content interest data may be dynamically displayed by a host as a web page directly accessible by a user via browser without need of badge code or plugin .

In one embodiment the components and techniques described hereinabove may be implemented within a large enterprise that creates and manages a substantial degree of online content in to track content interest weight information for example as part of an enterprise resource management or knowledge management process. illustrate the top destinations within the enterprise ranked according to interest weights determined as described above at three points in time separated by several minutes. For example the top ranked content source varies over this relatively short period of time between several phone directory entries and the Wiki Wiki Home content source which may correspond to e.g. an online repository of documentation that may be collaboratively maintained by users. As shown the display may include an indication of the interest weight of a particular content source as well as a link or URL associated with the content source. In some embodiments each link may be an active link such that a user selecting the link may thereby navigate to the indicated content source. In the illustrated embodiment two weights are illustrated for each URL. The first weight indicates a total weight which may be determined as a function of a most recently calculated rate of change of content access request traffic as well as earlier calculated rates of change e.g. using a decay model as described above with respect to . The second weight indicates a weight during a most recent interval of time such as may be determined from a most recently calculated rate of change without accounting for earlier calculated rates of change. In the illustrated embodiment URLs are ranked according to the total weight. In other embodiments however content interest weights may be determined according to different functions of rates of change of content request traffic and more or fewer weights may be displayed. Further URLs may be ranked differently e.g. according to most recent weight instead of total weight .

Additionally in the illustrated embodiment each indicated content source includes a drilldown link that a user may select to obtain more information regarding the content request traffic associated with a particular content source. One embodiment of a display of such traffic data is illustrated in . In the illustrated embodiment content request traffic information is shown for the content source Wiki Wiki Home that appears as the top ranked destination in the display of . The drilldown display shows content source and corresponding interest weight information for those content sources that are destinations from the Wiki Wiki Home content source and those content sources that are referrers to the Wiki Wiki Home content source. As shown users may arrive at this content source from a number of different referral paths and may proceed to a number of distinct destinations from this content source.

In addition to or instead of generating a graphical or textual display that responds to events relating to content interest data plugin may also be configured to support various other types of user notification in response to such events. For example a user may specify one or more notification criteria such as a threshold weight of a content source with respect to a global or local context or some other criteria. If a content source satisfies the notification criteria plugin may be configured to notify a user by displaying an alert on a display device e.g. displaying a dialog box or other type of interface on a computer monitor or other graphical interface that displays browser window or sending an electronic mail email or an instant message IM to an email or IM address specified by the user. In other embodiments plugin may be configured to place a telephone call or send a text message or numeric page to a device specified by the user. Plugin may also be configured to generate notifications using a publish subscribe or syndication protocol such as a version of the RSS Really Simple Syndication or Rich Site Summary and to convey such notifications to a browser news aggregator or other RSS application which may generally include any application capable of receiving such RSS notifications and acting in response to them e.g. to display content or convey its own notifications to users.

Plugin may support other types of user personalization or customization with respect to content interest data. In one embodiment plugin may be configured to provide notifications or recommendations of potentially interesting content on the basis of a user s expressed interests the user s navigation history among content sources or extrapolation of interest from content sources themselves. For example a user may provide a list of keywords e.g. by manually entering keywords by selecting keywords from a predefined list etc. indicative of content types or topics in which the user is particularly interested. Plugin may use such keywords as a basis for creating local contexts or otherwise filtering content interest data in ways that are likely to detect content of specific interest to the user. Plugin may also be configured to analyze a navigation path among content sources traversed by a user and as described above to identify other possibly interesting content sources that may fall in or along such a path according to collected content request traffic data. Additionally plugin may be configured to extract content identifying information such as keywords content metadata statistically improbable phrases or other such information from a content source a user has previously requested e.g. a web page currently or previously viewed by the user . Plugin may use such extracted information or any other information gathered from user navigation or otherwise collected from a user in conjunction with content interest data to identify and suggest content sources of potential interest to a user. Plugin may be further configured to display notifications or recommendations regarding potentially interesting content via toolbar or via any of the notification techniques described above.

As noted above in some embodiments content interest data may be available for use or display by badge code plugin or other software or hardware with minimal delay following content request traffic events that may influence content interest data. That is content interest data may be available for processing in near real time relative to the actual occurrence of content request traffic. However in some embodiments historical content interest data may also be processed and or displayed. For example a user may not be able to view near real time content interest data for a period of time e.g. hours or days owing to other activities. When the user is once again available to view content interest data he or she may be interested in learning not only what content is currently of possible interest but what changes in content interest may have transpired during the previous period of time.

In one embodiment plugin may include an interface that allows a user to access historical content interest data in various ways. For example a user may interact with plugin e.g. via toolbar to query historical content interest data e.g. as stored by IA system for any content sources that would have satisfied interest notification criteria over a period of time. In other words a user may effective apply a set of current notification criteria intended to notify the user in near real time as described above should a content source satisfy the criteria against historical content interest data. In applying such criteria against historical data plugin may generate a highlighted display of interesting content for which notification would have occurred had the user been available to receive it. In another embodiment rather than retrieve and retroactively analyze historical content interest data from IA system plugin may be configured to store a history of content interest data notifications etc. as they occur over a period of time. For example in addition to or instead of conveying a notification to a user plugin may store a notification and possibly other data such as timestamp information for later review by the user. Plugin may implement various interface options through which a user may interact with historical content interest data. For example via toolbar plugin may enable a user to scroll the contents of a graphical display e.g. a plot of a content interest weight backwards and forwards through historical time to illustrate changes in the data over time. Plugin may alternatively store a list of content sources e.g. URLs identified as interesting which may be displayed in historical order in ranked order according to relative level of interest alphabetically etc.

It is also contemplated that historical analysis of content interest data may be employed over longer timeframes. In one embodiment plugin or other software or hardware may be configured to analyze content interest data over arbitrary periods of days weeks months etc. in order to detect patterns or trends in the data. For example content interest data may be mined for correlations between changes in interest of a given content source and other factors such as the type of content of the content source access behavior of similar or competing content sources or other emergent trends.

Although embodiments of plugin and badge code have been described as having distinct functionality it is contemplated that in some embodiments badge code may be configured to implement some or all of the features of plugin or vice versa. It is further contemplated that functionality for processing and display of content interest data may be implemented using a different partitioning or architecture. For example various display and notification functions may be divided among different components rather than implemented as a single plugin or badge. In one embodiment processing and display functionality for content interest data may be built into a website for direct viewing and interaction via browser without need of plugin or badge code .

Some applications may process content interest data independently of browser . For example some of the data mining or other post processing activities mentioned above may be implemented by one or more standalone applications configured to directly retrieve content interest data from IA system using appropriate web services calls database queries or other interface approaches. In one embodiment a search engine may be configured to employ content interest data to rank search results analogous to the manner in which conventional indications of relevance may be used. For example a content source having a higher global or local weight may be ranked higher within a set of search results than another content source having a lower global or local weight. As mentioned above it is contemplated that in some embodiments content interest data may be used in conjunction with other data e.g. relevance data to perform such a ranking.

In one embodiment an application may be configured to place advertisements within online content dependent upon content interest data. For example conventional placement of an advertisement within online content may depend upon whether the content matches a keyword profile associated with the advertisement. However like a conventional measure of relevance described above such a conventional placement does not take into account rates of change of content request traffic associated with the content in which the advertisement is placed. By contrast in a system configured to determine content interest weights as described hereinabove more sophisticated advertising placement may be possible. For example rather than being statically bound to a given content source an advertisement may be selectively associated with different content sources as their relative interest changes such that the advertisement is persistently associated with a content source having at least a threshold level of interest. Additionally the cost charged for advertising placement may be associated with the desired interest level of the content sources targeted for placement. For example the highest rates may be charged for placement on content sources having the highest interest weights either globally or in a local context.

In embodiments where content interest data is computed for navigation paths among content sources instead of or in addition to traffic directed to a single content source advertising placement may also be performed dependent upon the interest level of a path navigated by a user. For example as described above user navigation among sources may be used to suggest or recommend other content sources of potential interest to the user. Similarly such navigation path information may be used to determine advertisements that may be particularly compatible with a user s interests. In some embodiments it is contemplated that content interest data may be used in conjunction with keywords or other content data or metadata to perform advertising placement.

It is contemplated that in some embodiments any of the methods techniques or components described above may be implemented as instructions and data capable of being stored or conveyed via a computer accessible medium. Such methods or techniques may include for example and without limitation the various methods of detecting content request traffic providing content reporting traffic requests analyzing content request traffic data to determine global and or local interest weights and requesting and displaying interest data as performed by the elements shown in and the methods illustrated in FIGS. and . Such instructions may be executed to perform a particular computational function such as processing web services traffic implementing mathematical functions such as integration differentiation convolution etc. as well as higher order functions such as operating system functionality network communications functionality application functionality and or any other suitable functions.

One exemplary embodiment of a computer system including computer accessible media is illustrated in . In the illustrated embodiment computer system includes one or more processors coupled to a system memory via an input output I O interface . Computer system further includes a network interface coupled to I O interface . Computer system may be illustrative of one embodiment of a host system as well as a system hosting a requestor although the specific configuration of computer system may vary for different embodiments of these systems. For example system may be variously configured as a server system a desktop or notebook system an embedded system a handheld or portable client system etc.

In various embodiments computer system may be a uniprocessor system including one processor or a multiprocessor system including several processors e.g. two four eight or another suitable number . Processors may be any suitable processor capable of executing instructions. For example in various embodiments processors may be a general purpose or embedded processor implementing any of a variety of instruction set architectures ISAs such as the x86 PowerPC SPARC or MIPS ISAs or any other suitable ISA. In multiprocessor systems each of processors may commonly but not necessarily implement the same ISA.

System memory may be configured to store instructions and data accessible by processor . In various embodiments system memory may be implemented using any suitable memory technology such as static random access memory SRAM synchronous dynamic RAM SDRAM nonvolatile Flash type memory or any other type of memory. In the illustrated embodiment instructions and data implementing desired functions such as those described above are shown stored within system memory as code . It is noted that in some embodiments code may include instructions and data implementing desired functions that are not directly executable by processor but are represented or encoded in an abstract form that is translatable to instructions that are directly executable by processor . For example code may include instructions specified in an ISA that may be emulated by processor or by other code executable on processor . Alternatively code may include instructions procedures or statements implemented in an abstract programming language that may be compiled or interpreted in the course of execution. As non limiting examples code may include code specified in a procedural or object oriented programming language such as C or C a scripting language such as perl a markup language such as HTML or XML or any other suitable language.

In one embodiment I O interface may be configured to coordinate I O traffic between processor system memory and any peripheral devices in the device including network interface or other peripheral interfaces. In some embodiments I O interface may perform any necessary protocol timing or other data transformations to convert data signals from one component e.g. system memory into a format suitable for use by another component e.g. processor . In some embodiments I O interface may include support for devices attached through various types of peripheral buses such as a variant of the Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus standard or the Universal Serial Bus USB standard for example. In some embodiments the function of I O interface may be split into two or more separate components such as a north bridge and a south bridge for example. Also in some embodiments some or all of the functionality of I O interface such as an interface to system memory may be incorporated directly into processor .

Network interface may be configured to allow data to be exchanged between computer system and other devices attached to network such as other computer systems for example. In various embodiments network interface may support communication via wired or wireless general data networks such as any suitable type of Ethernet network for example via telecommunications telephony networks such as analog voice networks or digital fiber communications networks via storage area networks such as Fibre Channel SANs or via any other suitable type of network and or protocol.

In some embodiments system memory may be one embodiment of a computer accessible medium configured to store instructions and data as described above. However in other embodiments instructions and or data may be received sent or stored upon different types of computer accessible media. Generally speaking a computer accessible medium may include storage media or memory media such as magnetic or optical media e.g. disk or CD DVD ROM coupled to computer system via I O interface . A computer accessible medium may also include any volatile or non volatile media such as RAM e.g. SDRAM DDR SDRAM RDRAM SRAM etc. ROM etc that may be included in some embodiments of computer system as system memory or another type of memory. A computer accessible medium may generally be accessible via transmission media or signals such as electrical electromagnetic or digital signals conveyed via a communication medium such as a network and or a wireless link such as may be implemented via network interface .

Although the embodiments above have been described in considerable detail numerous variations and modifications will become apparent to those skilled in the art once the above disclosure is fully appreciated. It is intended that the following claims be interpreted to embrace all such variations and modifications.

