---

title: Mobile friendly internet searches
abstract: Mobile friendly internet searches are enabled by determining if individual internet sites are mobile friendly. In a described implementation, a mobile-friendliness indication is determined for an internet site. The determined mobile-friendliness indication is stored in association with the internet site in an index that may be used for internet searching. In another described implementation, a data structure comprises an internet index with multiple internet site entries having one or more associated mobile-friendliness indications. The mobile-friendliness indications may be general affirmative indications of mobile friendliness or specific indications of mobile-friendliness that identify a specific user agent type. In yet another described implementation, a search request having search terms is received, and a search is performed based thereon to produce a search results set. If the search requestor is a mobile device, the search results are ordered responsive to mobile-friendliness indications associated with the internet sites of the search results set.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08219567&OS=08219567&RS=08219567
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 08219567
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050315
---
This disclosure relates in general to computer searches and in particular by way of example but not limitation to accommodating mobile devices in the context of internet searches.

The wealth of information available over the internet has increased significantly since its creation. Moreover an incredible amount of information is being added on a daily basis. In fact the total amount of information that is available via the internet makes it practically impossible to locate desired information that may be present at unknown location s without relying on the services of an internet search engine.

Search engines typically employ a so called web crawler and indexer that crawls across the internet from one website to another. Each website is searched and the terms that are discovered are added to an index of the search engine. When a search request having search terms is received from a search requester the search engine applies the search terms to the index and produces a set of search results. The search results are then sent to the requester.

Each search result of the search results set usually includes a link to a website along with additional information indicating the possible relevance of the search result. Such additional information may include the title of a webpage words found around the search terms a relevancy score and so forth. The search requestor can elect to view the website of one or more of the search results.

Unfortunately many websites have pages that are not accommodating to mobile devices. Accordingly there is a need for schemes mechanisms techniques etc. that can accommodate mobile devices in the arena of internet searches and or the field of search services.

Mobile friendly internet searches are enabled by determining if individual internet sites are mobile friendly. In a described implementation a mobile friendliness indication is determined for an internet site. The determined mobile friendliness indication is stored in association with the internet site in an index that may be used for internet searching. Mobile friendliness determinations may be effectuated using for example a site comparator a markup language comparator a mobile specific response examiner a site content analyzer and so forth. The implementations described herein are not limited to an internet for they are applicable generally to network and or device resources.

In another described implementation a data structure comprises an internet index with multiple internet site entries having one or more associated mobile friendliness indications. The mobile friendliness indications may be general affirmative indications of mobile friendliness or specific indications of mobile friendliness that identify a specific user agent type. In yet another described implementation a search request having search terms is received and a search is performed based thereon to produce a search results set. If the search requestor is a mobile device the search results are ordered responsive to mobile friendliness indications associated with the internet sites of the search results set.

Other method system approach apparatus device media procedure arrangement etc. implementations are described herein.

As described herein above traditional search services do not accommodate the special features of mobile devices. For example traditional search engines return an identical set of search results for a given search request regardless of whether the search requestor is a standard device or a mobile device.

After a set of search results are received at a mobile device the requestor can elect to view the website of one or more of the search results. The selected websites are then displayed on a screen of the requesting mobile device. Unfortunately many websites have pages that do not display well on the relatively smaller screens of mobile devices. Consequently users of mobile devices may select search results corresponding to websites that cannot be displayed well or maybe cannot be displayed at all on their relatively smaller screens. Moreover mobile devices are frequently connected to the internet via a network that offers a relatively lower bandwidth and that causes relatively higher latencies.

Hence the internet searching experience of users of mobile devices can be streamlined and made more productive if the search results that they are sent correspond to internet sites that are targeted toward or at least appropriate for mobile devices. In an example described implementation a search service annotates a search engine database with mobile friendliness indications. A mobile friendliness determiner inspects uniform resource locators URLs of the search engine database to determine a mobile friendliness level.

In other words one or more mobile friendliness indications are stored in association with each URL of multiple URLs of the search engine database. When a search request having search terms is received from a mobile device those URLs that comport with the search terms and that are associated with at least one mobile friendliness indication are prioritized relatively higher than those URLs that only comport with the search terms. The mobile friendly prioritized set of search results are then provided to the requesting mobile device.

Multiple example schemes for determining mobile friendliness are described herein. Accordingly an example realization for a mobile friendliness determiner includes one or more of the following a site comparator a markup language comparator a mobile specific response examiner a site content analyzer and so forth. Additionally scores from multiple implemented schemes may be combined to form a combined mobile friendliness indication.

To facilitate understanding this description is separated into three sections. A first section references and is entitled Example Implementations for Mobile Friendly Internet Searches . A second section references and is entitled Example Determinations of Mobile Friendliness Indications . There is also a third section that references and is entitled Example Operating Environment for Computer or Other Device .

Three websites A B and C are shown. Each website includes standard content and or mobile friendly content . Website A includes standard content . Website B includes both standard content and mobile friendly content . Website C includes mobile friendly content .

In a described implementation search service includes an internet crawler and indexer and an internet index . The internet crawler and indexer program may optionally be separated into two or more programs. Internet index includes multiple respective internet sites that are associated with multiple respective mobile friendliness indications . Internet sites are represented by the broader terminology of uniform resource locators URLs which can comprise a location on any network and or device. Generally internet index can be configured as having multiple entries with each entry including one or more fields for URLs and mobile friendliness indications .

Search service also includes a mobile friendliness determiner . Mobile friendliness determiner may optionally be part of internet crawler and indexer . Mobile friendliness determiner is adapted to determine mobile friendliness of websites including individual pages thereof. In a described implementation mobile friendliness is expressed in terms of mobile friendliness indications .

Standard content is content that is designed and or intended for experiencing e.g. viewing with a traditional device such as a personal computer. Mobile friendly content is content that is designed and or intended for mobile devices . For example mobile friendly content may be adapted for display on the relatively smaller screens of mobile devices . For instance mobile phones personal digital assistants PDAs etc. generally have smaller screens. Additionally mobile friendly content may be adapted for display by one or more user agents e.g. web browsers that are targeted for mobile devices .

In operation of search scenario internet crawler and indexer crawls across internet to search websites and index the contents and of the searched websites . Mobile friendliness determiner is applied to each searched website . Mobile friendliness determiner is adapted to detect if all or part of the content of a website comprises mobile friendly content . Example approaches to such mobile friendliness determinations of mobile friendliness determiner are described herein below with particular reference to .

Each searched URL of the n URLs . . . n is stored into internet index as an internet site . If a particular URL is determined to include mobile friendly content a particular mobile friendliness indication is stored into internet index in association with the particular URL . Associations between URLs and mobile friendliness indications are indicated in with thick lines terminated with small solid circles.

As illustrated generally internet index includes multiple respective internet sites that are associated with respective one s of multiple possible mobile friendliness indications . Specifically URL is associated with an affirmative general mobile friendliness indication . URL is associated with a third mobile type of mobile friendliness indication . URL is associated with both a first mobile type and a third mobile type of mobile friendliness indications and . URL is associated with a second mobile type of mobile friendliness indication .

Although not all possible permutations are shown URLs of internet sites that are stored into internet index may be associated with no mobile friendliness indication with one mobile friendliness indication or with two or more mobile friendliness indications . Also mobile friendliness indications may alternatively be stored in a mobile related internet index with or without URLs instead of a primary internet index of search service .

Mobile friendliness determiner may determine that a given URL is affirmatively mobile friendly in a general sense as indicated by general mobile friendliness indication . General mobile friendliness indications may be determined only for individual URLs that appear friendly to mobile devices generally but not necessarily to any specific mobile type. Alternatively general mobile friendliness indications may be determined as a rule in implementations that focus on a yes or no decision with respect to mobile friendliness without regard to any specific user agent types.

When specific mobile friendliness indications are determined such specific mobile friendliness indications correspond to specific mobile device user agent types including specific mobile device types. For example PDAs that utilize a browser that is intended to interpret standard Hyper Text Markup Language HTML e.g. Pocket IE from Microsoft browsers for some other palm or pocket sized devices etc. can provide users a better experience if the displayed web pages are targeted to a typical size of display screens for mobile devices .

There are also multiple browser user agents that are used primarily by mobile devices . Examples of such mobile device targeted user agent types include a wireless application protocol WAP enabled browser an information internet mode I MODE enabled browser a WAP 2.0 WAP2 enabled browser and so forth. WAP browsers are designed to interpret wireless markup language WML website pages. I MODE browsers which are especially popular in Japan are designed to interpret compact hypertext markup language cHTML website pages. WAP2 browsers are designed to interpret extensible hypertext markup language XHTML website pages.

Thus by way of example a WAP enabled user agent may correspond to a first type of mobile friendliness indication . An I MODE enabled user agent may correspond to a second type of mobile friendliness indication and a WAP2 enabled user agent may correspond to a third type of mobile friendliness indication . Also one or more browsers that are designed for use on mobile devices may correspond to a fourth type of mobile friendliness indication not explicitly illustrated . These browsers for e.g. palm or pocket sized devices may alternatively be separated into individual mobile friendliness indication types . Furthermore although only three specific mobile friendliness indications are shown in fewer or more than the three illustrated indication types may be employed in an actual implementation.

At block a URL of an internet is discovered. For example an internet crawler and indexer may discover a URL of a website that is a part of and or accessible via internet . Usually internet crawler and indexer is given a seed set of URLs to search and index. During the searching and indexing process internet crawler and indexer adds new URLs to the seed set in order to expand the total number of URLs and therefore crawl across internet .

At block a mobile friendliness indication for the URL is determined. For example mobile friendliness determiner may determine a particular mobile friendliness indication for a particular URL of a particular website . Example determinations of mobile friendliness indications are described further herein below with particular reference to . For instance mobile friendliness determiner may determine that the particular URL warrants a general mobile friendliness indication and or one or more specific mobile friendliness indications . Also mobile friendliness determiner may determine that the particular URL warrants no mobile friendliness indication or a general negative mobile friendliness indication .

At block the determined mobile friendliness indication is stored in association with the URL e.g. in a search index . For example the determined mobile friendliness indication may be stored in association with the URL under investigation in internet index of search service .

At block the actions of blocks are repeated for multiple URLs by discovering another URL at block . In this manner websites with mobile friendly content such as websites B and C can be determined by mobile friendliness determiner and identified within internet index . The stored mobile friendliness indications can be used to the benefit of users that request searches from mobile devices as is described below with particular reference to .

At block a search request is received. For example a search request having one or more search terms may be received at search service from a mobile device . At block a search is performed responsive to the received search request and based on the one or more search terms. For example a search may be performed by search service that is based on the search terms of the received search request and using internet index . The search produces a set of search results.

At block it is determined if the search requestor is a mobile device. For example it may be determined if the search request originates from a mobile device targeted user agent and or a mobile device . For instance a user agent string that accompanies the search request can be examined to determine if the originator is a user agent that normally executes on a mobile device.

Other alternative techniques include but are not limited to i a requesting mobile device may affirmatively indicate that it is such a mobile device ii a user agent header may be examined iii an accepts header may be examined e.g. it may be examined to determine if the device does not accept a desktop markup iv an IP address of the requestor may be examined e.g. the IP address may be examined to determine if it is part of a block of IP addresses that are known to belong to a mobile carrier and so forth. Additionally a separate URL may be established to handle e.g. be dedicated to mobile oriented searches. Search requests made to the mobile dedicated URL site may be assumed to originate from a mobile device. Optionally search requests to a standard site may be redirected to the mobile dedicated site if the search request is otherwise determined to be from a mobile device. 

If the search requestor is not a mobile device as determined at block then at block the produced search results are provided to the requestor using a standard relevance ranking. If on the other hand the search requestor is determined to be a mobile device then at block the search results are ordered responsive to mobile friendliness indications that are associated with the URLs in the search results. For example search results may be ordered including reordered if already ordered once before responsive to respective mobile friendliness indications that are associated with respective URLs included within the set of search results. For instance those URLs in an initial search results set that are associated with at least one mobile friendliness indication can be moved upward toward the top of a new mobile friendly ordered set of search results.

Generally search results are ordered using well known and or proprietary factors. Such factors may include for example the frequency of appearance of search terms the popularity of a given URL the location of the search terms and so forth. In a described implementation a new factor is introduced and applied pertaining to mobile friendliness as represented by mobile friendliness indications when a search requestor is a mobile device .

By way of example only URLs without an affirmative mobile friendliness indication of any type may be automatically moved to the bottom of a mobile friendly ordered search results list. Alternatively a URL that is not especially mobile friendly may be kept at the top of the search results list if it otherwise receives a high ranking score due to other e.g. traditional standard factors. Regardless ordering may also include moving at least one URL of the set of search results to a higher ranking position if the at least one URL is associated with one or more mobile friendliness indications. Such a movement effectively concomitantly lowers the ranking of other URLs . Additionally URLs that are associated with mobile friendliness indications or of a specific type may be especially prioritized highly when a user agent search requestor matches the specific type of determined mobile friendliness indication or .

At block the search results as ordered responsive to the mobile friendliness indications are provided to the mobile requestor. For example a mobile friendly search results set that is ordered responsive to mobile friendliness indications as associated with the retrieved URLs may be provided to mobile device .

Multiple other approaches may alternatively be implemented. For example if search service checks if a search requestor is a mobile device prior to conducting the search search service can elect to narrow the search to those URLs in internet index that are associated with at least one mobile friendliness indication . Also search service may elect to focus the search on those URLs associated with at least one mobile friendliness indication having a score value higher than a predetermined threshold. In either case the search results can still be ranked using traditional factors and or mobile friendliness indications .

Most implementations described herein pertain to an internet index having URLs that correspond to websites having standard content or mobile friendly content or both . However internet index may alternatively comprise a bifurcated search engine database e.g. two fully or partially separate databases with one database directed to those websites having at least some standard content and another directed to those websites having at least some mobile friendly content .

Also the requesting mobile device may be given one or more options relating to a desired format of a returned set of search results. For example search service may provide the option to receive a standard set of search results e.g. with no mobile friendliness prioritization a mobile friendly ordered set of search results e.g. one that does prioritize URLs associated with mobile friendliness indications and or a mobile friendly limited set of search results e.g. one that excludes those URLs that are not associated with any mobile friendliness indications . The option may be presented at any time during the search request process including prior to a search or after one e.g. default type of search results set has been provided.

This section relates to . The actions of flowcharts A B C D and X of and respectively illustrate example implementations for the action s of block of .

As noted herein above multiple example schemes for determining mobile friendliness are described herein. A site comparator example is described herein below with particular reference to . A markup language comparator example is described below with particular reference to . A mobile specific response examiner example is described with particular reference to . And a site content analyzer example is described with particular reference to . Additionally a combined mobile friendliness indication determiner example is described with particular reference to .

Although the actions of the flow diagrams of may be performed in other environments and with a variety of hardware and software combinations is used in particular to illustrate certain aspects and examples of the method. By way of example only the actions of flow diagrams A B C D and X may be performed by a mobile friendliness determiner of a search service having an internet index that includes respective mobile friendliness indications associated with respective internet sites corresponding to URLs . Although the terminology website is primarily used in the context of for the sake of clarity broader terminology there for includes internet site and still broader terminology includes URL .

At block a response from a website is requested while impersonating a mobile friendly user agent. For example a web page may be requested using an internet browser that targets a palm or pocket sized device e.g. Microsoft Pocket IE a Palm based browser etc. . For instance the impersonations may be effectuated by constructing a user agent string that connotes that the originating user agent is the user agent to be impersonated. At block a traditional response is received from the website. At block an unknown response is received from the website.

At block the traditional response is compared to the unknown response. At block at least one mobile friendliness indication is determined based on the comparison. The at least one mobile friendliness indication may comprise a general negative indication a general affirmative indication a specific user agent type indication and so forth. The action s of block are described further below with particular reference to the three 3 secondary blocks . At block an overall mobile friendliness determination procedure may be continued by determining a combined mobile friendliness indication by performing the actions of flowchart X of .

At block it is determined if the traditional response differs from the unknown response. If not then at block the website being investigated is determined to not be mobile friendly for the impersonated user agent. If on the other hand the traditional response is determined to differ from the unknown response then at block the website being investigated is determined to be mobile friendly at least with respect to the impersonated user agent.

The technique of flowchart A is especially applicable to those mobile targeted user agents that interpret the same type of markup language e.g. HTML as traditional user agents. Hence the actions of flowchart A may be repeated for multiple mobile targeted user agents of interest.

At block a response from a website is requested while impersonating the selected mobile friendly user agent type. After receiving a response from the website at block a markup language type of the response is ascertained. For example a page header of the response may be inspected to extract the markup language type used in the response.

At block the ascertained markup language type is compared to the selected mobile friendly user agent type. At block at least one mobile friendliness indication is determined based on the comparison. The action s of block are described further below with particular reference to the three 3 secondary blocks .

At block it is checked if there is another mobile friendly user agent type to select. If so then at block another mobile friendly user agent type is selected and the method is repeated. Otherwise at block an overall mobile friendliness determination procedure may be continued by determining a combined mobile friendliness indication by performing the actions of flowchart X of .

At block it is determined if the markup language type of the received response matches the selected mobile friendly user agent type. If not then at block the website being investigated is determined to not be mobile friendly for the selected mobile friendly user agent type. If on the other hand the markup language type of the received response is determined to match the selected mobile friendly user agent type then at block the website being investigated is determined to be mobile friendly for the selected mobile friendly user agent type. By way of example only a WAP user agent type matches WML website pages an I MODE user agent type matches cHTML website pages and a WAP2 user agent type matches XHTML website pages.

At block a URL relevant term that is applicable to the selected mobile friendly user agent type is injected into a targeted URL to form a modified URL. For example wml pda pocketpc may be appended to the end of the targeted URL to form the modified URL. However other URL relevant terms may be injected into the targeted URL at other locations e.g. the beginning the middle etc. . At block a response from a website corresponding to the targeted URL is requested with the modified URL.

After a response is received as a result of requesting a response from the website as performed at block at block this response is examined. This response may be a general network response or a response originating from the targeted URL. For example the response may be examined to attempt to detect the presence of substantive content. At block at least one mobile friendliness indication is determined based on the examination. The action s of block are described further below with particular reference to the three 3 secondary blocks .

At block it is checked if there is another mobile friendly user agent type to select. If so then at block another mobile friendly user agent type is selected and the method is repeated. Otherwise at block an overall mobile friendliness determination procedure may be continued by determining a combined mobile friendliness indication by performing the actions of flowchart X of .

At block it is determined if the response represents an error e.g. if it implicitly or explicitly communicates an error status result . For example the response may be a general error e.g. Internet Error or a specific error generated by the targeted URL e.g. a page not found on this website error . If the response is determined to represent an error then at block the website being investigated is determined to not be mobile friendly for the selected mobile friendly user agent type. If on the other hand the received response is not determined to represent an error then at block the website being investigated is determined to be mobile friendly for the selected mobile friendly user agent type.

The illustrated method of flowchart C may be modified so that multiple URL relevant terms may be injected into multiple locations of each targeted URL. To handle these permutations the actions of blocks may be repeated for each such URL relevant term and targeted URL location possibility. Repeating these actions is especially pertinent until a mobile friendly modified URL for a selected mobile friendly user agent type is determined e.g. at block .

At block a response is received from the targeted website. At block one or more content characteristics are extracted from the received response. For example one or more frames scripts or images if present a total memory size the presence of animation and or sound if any etc. may be extracted. Other example content characteristics that may be extracted include but are not limited to style sheets meta tags object tags applet tags and so forth.

At block the extracted content characteristics are individually analyzed for mobile friendliness. At block at least one mobile friendliness indication is determined based on the analysis. The action s of block are described further below with particular reference to the three 3 secondary blocks . At block an overall mobile friendliness determination procedure may be continued by determining a combined mobile friendliness indication by performing the actions of flowchart X of .

At block it is determined if each extracted content characteristic is appropriate for a mobile device. If not then at block the website being investigated is determined to not be mobile friendly hence a relatively lower score is assigned. If on the other hand each extracted content characteristic is determined to be appropriate for a mobile device then at block the website being investigated is determined to be mobile friendly hence a relatively higher score is assigned.

By way of example only for a described implementation scripts and frames are considered inappropriate for mobile devices. Images of a size that exceeds a predetermined image size threshold e.g. in pixels are considered inappropriate for mobile devices. The image size threshold may be set in dependence on the mobile devices to be serviced with searches and or on the mobile device currently being serviced with one or more searches. The image size threshold as well as the mobile device appropriateness of other content characteristics may be tailored for each search depending on the capabilities of the requesting mobile device. For instance full fledged PDAs typically have a slightly larger screen as compared to mobile devices that are intended primarily for voice communications. Similarly web pages of a size that exceeds a predetermined total memory size threshold e.g. in bytes are considered inappropriate for mobile devices. Finally websites that include animation either of a sufficient complexity or any level of animation and or extensive aural components may be considered inappropriate for mobile devices.

Additional examples of both positive and negative indications of mobile friendliness or appropriateness are as follows. A positive indication is the presence of a style sheet designed for mobile devices. For example on a given website styles or links to styles that target mobile related media indicate mobile friendliness. For instance style types and or media may reference handheld . Another positive indication is the presence of meta tags that are intended to connote mobile friendliness. For example Pocket IE and or Internet Explorer Mobile from Microsoft Corporation may have websites created for them that include the following . A negative indication of mobile friendliness is the presence of object tags because many mobile device targeted user agents do not support ActiveX controls. Another negative indication is the presence of applet tags because many mobile device targeted user agents do not at least by default include an installed Java virtual machine.

Thus mobile friendliness scores may result from one or more of the following mobile friendliness indication determination mechanisms a site comparator a markup language comparator a mobile specific response examiner a site content analyzer and so forth. As illustrated generally at blocks the resulting scores are weighted. They may be weighted for example in accordance with importance and or a likelihood of correct mobile friendliness determination. At block generally the weighted scores are averaged to determine a combined mobile friendliness score or indication.

In a described implementation the scores range from 0 to 100. For some of the mechanisms the resulting score is either 0 or 100. In other words it is clear that a given website under investigation is not mobile friendly e.g. a 0 score or it is clear that the given website is or at least is intended to be mobile friendly e.g. a score of 100 . For example the site comparator the markup language comparator and the mobile specific response examiner mechanisms usually return a score of 0 or 100. However they might also return a score of 50 to indicate that the result is indeterminate.

The site content analyzer mechanism on the other hand can return a range of scores depending on the content characteristics extracted and possibly on the threshold s met or exceeded by images total memory sizes and so forth. In general a combined mobile friendliness indication or score that exceeds 50 is considered mobile friendly and a combined mobile friendliness indication or score that is below 50 is considered not mobile friendly. Separate scores may be determined for different user agent types.

With reference to flowchart X at block a first mobile friendliness score from a first mobile friendliness determination technique is weighted. At block a second mobile friendliness score from a second mobile friendliness determination technique is weighted. At block to block N 1 a third through a N 1 mobile friendliness score from a respective third through N 1 mobile friendliness determination technique is weighted.

At block N an Nmobile friendliness score from an Nmobile friendliness determination technique is weighted. At block the N weighted mobile friendliness scores are averaged to determine a combined mobile friendliness score or indication. It should be noted that other algorithms can alternatively be employed to produce a combined mobile friendliness indication or score from multiple individual mobile friendliness indications or scores.

The devices actions aspects features functions procedures modules data structures components etc. of are illustrated in diagrams that are divided into multiple blocks. However the order interconnections interrelationships layout etc. in which are described and or shown is not intended to be construed as a limitation and any number of the blocks can be modified combined rearranged augmented omitted etc. in any manner to implement one or more systems methods devices procedures media apparatuses arrangements etc. for mobile friendly internet searches. Furthermore although the description herein includes references to specific implementations including a general device of the illustrated and or described implementations can be implemented in any suitable hardware software firmware or combination thereof and using any suitable internet crawling and indexing approach es internet index search engine database organization s mobile friendliness determination technique s mobile friendliness indication s user agent type s and or scoring mechanism s and so forth.

Example operating environment is only one example of an environment and is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the applicable device including computer network node entertainment device mobile appliance general electronic device etc. architectures. Neither should operating environment or the devices thereof be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or to any combination of components as illustrated in .

Additionally implementations for mobile friendly internet searches may be realized with numerous other general purpose or special purpose device including computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known devices systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use include but are not limited to personal computers server computers thin clients thick clients personal digital assistants PDAs or mobile telephones watches hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics video game machines game consoles portable or handheld gaming units network PCs videoconferencing equipment minicomputers mainframe computers network nodes distributed or multi processing computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices some combination thereof and so forth.

Implementations for mobile friendly internet searches may be described in the general context of processor executable instructions. Generally processor executable instructions include routines programs protocols objects functions interfaces components data structures etc. that perform and or enable particular tasks and or implement particular abstract data types. Realizations of mobile friendly internet searches as described in certain implementations herein may also be practiced in distributed processing environments where tasks are performed by remotely linked processing devices that are connected through a communications link and or network. Especially but not exclusively in a distributed computing environment processor executable instructions may be located in separate storage media executed by different processors and or propagated over transmission media.

Example operating environment includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer which may comprise any e.g. electronic device with computing processing capabilities. The components of computer may include but are not limited to one or more processors or processing units a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including processor to system memory .

Processors are not limited by the materials from which they are formed or the processing mechanisms employed therein. For example processors may be comprised of semiconductor s and or transistors e.g. electronic integrated circuits ICs . In such a context processor executable instructions may be electronically executable instructions. Alternatively the mechanisms of or for processors and thus of or for computer may include but are not limited to quantum computing optical computing mechanical computing e.g. using nanotechnology and so forth.

System bus represents one or more of any of many types of wired or wireless bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a point to point connection a switching fabric a peripheral bus an accelerated graphics port and a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example such architectures may include an Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus a Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus an Enhanced ISA EISA bus a Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus a Peripheral Component Interconnects PCI bus also known as a Mezzanine bus some combination thereof and so forth.

Computer typically includes a variety of processor accessible media. Such media may be any available media that is accessible by computer or another e.g. electronic device and it includes both volatile and non volatile media removable and non removable media and storage and transmission media.

System memory includes processor accessible storage media in the form of volatile memory such as random access memory RAM and or non volatile memory such as read only memory ROM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules instructions that are immediately accessible to and or being presently operated on by processing unit .

Computer may also include other removable non removable and or volatile non volatile storage media. By way of example illustrates a hard disk drive or disk drive array for reading from and writing to a typically non removable non volatile magnetic media not separately shown a magnetic disk drive for reading from and writing to a typically removable non volatile magnetic disk e.g. a floppy disk and an optical disk drive for reading from and or writing to a typically removable non volatile optical disk such as a CD DVD or other optical media. Hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are each connected to system bus by one or more storage media interfaces . Alternatively hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive may be connected to system bus by one or more other separate or combined interfaces not shown .

The disk drives and their associated processor accessible media provide non volatile storage of processor executable instructions such as data structures program modules and other data for computer . Although example computer illustrates a hard disk a removable magnetic disk and a removable optical disk it is to be appreciated that other types of processor accessible media may store instructions that are accessible by a device such as magnetic cassettes or other magnetic storage devices flash memory compact disks CDs digital versatile disks DVDs or other optical storage RAM ROM electrically erasable programmable read only memories EEPROM and so forth. Such media may also include so called special purpose or hard wired IC chips. In other words any processor accessible media may be utilized to realize the storage media of the example operating environment .

Any number of program modules or other units or sets of processor executable instructions may be stored on hard disk magnetic disk optical disk ROM and or RAM including by way of general example an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . These processor executable instructions may include for example one or more of a search service an internet crawler and indexer a mobile friendliness determiner an internet index some combination thereof and so forth.

A user may enter commands and or information into computer via input devices such as a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse . Other input devices not shown specifically may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish serial port video camera scanner and or the like. These and other input devices are connected to processing unit via input output interfaces that are coupled to system bus . However input devices and or output devices may instead be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port a game port a universal serial bus USB port an infrared port an IEEE 1394 Firewire interface an IEEE 802.11 wireless interface a Bluetooth wireless interface and so forth.

A monitor view screen or other type of display device may also be connected to system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . Video adapter or another component may be or may include a graphics card for processing graphics intensive calculations and for handling demanding display requirements. Typically a graphics card includes a graphics processing unit GPU video RAM VRAM etc. to facilitate the expeditious display of graphics and performance of graphics operations. In addition to monitor other output peripheral devices may include components such as speakers not shown and a printer which may be connected to computer via input output interfaces .

Computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computing device . By way of example remote computing device may be a peripheral device a personal computer a portable computer e.g. laptop computer tablet computer PDA mobile station etc. a palm or pocket sized computer a watch a gaming device a server a router a network computer a peer device another network node or another device type as listed above and so forth. However remote computing device is illustrated as a portable computer that may include many or all of the elements and features described herein with respect to computer .

Logical connections between computer and remote computer are depicted as a local area network LAN and a general wide area network WAN . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets the Internet fixed and mobile telephone networks ad hoc and infrastructure wireless networks mesh networks other wireless networks gaming networks some combination thereof and so forth. Such networks and logical and physical communications connections are additional examples of transmission media.

When implemented in a LAN networking environment computer is usually connected to LAN via a network interface or adapter . When implemented in a WAN networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other component for establishing communications over WAN . Modem which may be internal or external to computer may be connected to system bus via input output interfaces or any other appropriate mechanism s . It is to be appreciated that the illustrated network connections are examples and that other manners for establishing communication link s between computers and may be employed.

In a networked environment such as that illustrated with operating environment program modules or other instructions that are depicted relative to computer or portions thereof may be fully or partially stored in a remote media storage device. By way of example remote application programs reside on a memory component of remote computer but may be usable or otherwise accessible via computer . Also for purposes of illustration application programs and other processor executable instructions such as operating system are illustrated herein as discrete blocks but it is recognized that such programs components and other instructions reside at various times in different storage components of computing device and or remote computing device and are executed by processor s of computer and or those of remote computing device .

Although systems media devices methods procedures apparatuses techniques schemes approaches procedures arrangements and other implementations have been described in language specific to structural logical algorithmic and functional features and or diagrams it is to be understood that the invention defined in the appended claims is not necessarily limited to the specific features or diagrams described. Rather the specific features and diagrams are disclosed as exemplary forms of implementing the claimed invention.

