---

title: Alkali-hydroxide modified poly-vinylidene fluoride/polyethylene oxide lithium-air battery
abstract: A metal-air battery includes a housing having an aperture for the passage of air and a pair of electrodes that extend from the housing. An air cathode may be interconnected with one of the electrodes and an anode may include a metal foil that is interconnected with another of the electrodes. A separator may be interposed between the air cathode and the metal foil and a barrier layer may surround the metal foil. The barrier layer may function to substantially reduce the passage of moisture to the metal foil. A method of making a metal-air battery is also presented.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07670724&OS=07670724&RS=07670724
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07670724
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050105
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used imported sold and licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America without the payment of any royalty thereon or there for.

The present invention relates generally to electrochemical power sources and more particularly to metal air batteries.

Metal air batteries may provide a very desirable power source for many small portable electronic devices. For example lithium air batteries may have a relatively large specific capacity of 3 861 Ah kg and energy density of 13 kW h kg while also having relatively small spatial requirements. However a problem that arises in the use of metal air batteries involves e.g. the non compatibility of the metal with the moisture in the air. In particular lithium may be oxidized violently in the presence of the moisture or water whereby safety concerns may be raised.

Currently no suitable means of substantially reducing the effects of moisture in metal air batteries is available.

In accordance with an embodiment of the present invention a metal air battery comprises a housing including an aperture for the passage of air and a pair of electrodes which extend from the housing. An air cathode may be interconnected with one of the electrodes and an anode may comprise a metal foil that is interconnected with another of the electrodes. A separator may be interposed between the air cathode and the metal foil and a barrier layer may surround the metal foil and the barrier layer may function to substantially reduce the passage of moisture to the metal foil.

In another embodiment of the present invention a method of making a metal air battery comprises preparing a barrier layer comprising hydrolyzing polyvinylidene fluoride pVdF in an alkali hydroxide solution to form a mixture separating hydrolyzed pVdF from the pVdF and the alkali hydroxide solution dissolving hydrolyzed pVdF polyethylene oxide PEO and lithium hexafluorophosphate in a solvent and removing the solvent to thereby leave a polymer blend for use as a barrier layer. The method also comprises providing an anode comprising a metal foil surrounding the metal foil with the barrier layer providing an air cathode and a separator immersing the metal foil and the barrier layer the air cathode and the separator in an electrolyte and providing a housing and hermetically sealing the metal foil and barrier layer the air cathode and the separator in the housing.

One embodiment of the present invention concerns a metal air battery that is configured to reduce a reaction between the metal and moisture in the air. In one particular embodiment of the invention the stability of a lithium air battery in a humid environment is enhanced by providing a barrier layer that surrounds the lithium metal. The barrier layer may comprise a modified polyvinylidene fluoride and a polyethylene oxide blend.

Referring now to the exploded view of a metal air battery that is in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention is illustrated generally at . In this embodiment the metal air battery comprises positive and negative terminals and a pouch or housing having an aperture not shown for air that may be covered by an adhesive tape prior to use. The terminals extend from the housing and preferably comprise a highly conductive substance such as a metal. The terminals may be configured in any geometric shape that is suitable for mating with a device not shown to be energized. The housing may comprise a moldable substance such as that having a polymeric composition. The adhesive tape may include a Teflon composition and functions to hermetically seal the aperture of the metal air battery and may be removed when it is desired to operate the metal air battery.

Disposed within the housing is an operative layered assembly that may comprise wire mesh layers and an air cathode a separator a metal foil and barrier layers . The wire mesh layers may comprise a metallic substance such as nickel and are provided to enhance electrical contact across a surface not numbered of the air cathode and the metal foil . The air cathode may be electrically interconnected with one terminal may comprise manganese dioxide and is reduced in known manner during operation of the metal air battery . The separator may comprise glass wool and may also function in a known manner. The metal foil may function as an anode and may comprise a readily oxidizable substance such as lithium and is electrically interconnected with one terminal via wire mesh layer .

In accordance with a feature of the present invention the barrier layers are provided for substantially reducing contact between the metal foil and moisture in the air. The barrier layers may be joined together during fabrication of the metal air battery to surround and cover the metal foil . It will be understood that while multiple barrier layers are shown these layers are referred to herein for illustrative purposes and instead of multiple barrier layers a coating or encapsulating material may be employed to cover the metal foil .

As exemplified below it has been found that the barrier layers may comprise a polymer blend of polyvinylidene fluoride and polyethylene oxide. Also an alkali hydroxide solution may be employed in order to modify the chemical and physical characteristics of polyvinylidene fluoride prior to blending with the polyethylene oxide. Further lithium hexafluorophosphate may be combined with the polymer blend of polyvinylidene fluoride and polyethylene oxide in order to conduct ions from the cathode and anode current collectors. Preferably each barrier layer comprises polyvinylidene fluoride that is greater than approximately 75 percent by weight and more preferably ranges between approximately 75 percent and 80 percent by weight. Polyethylene oxide preferably ranges between approximately 10 percent and 15 percent by weight and lithium hexafluorophosphate preferably ranges between approximately 10 percent and 15 percent by weight.

It is believed that during operation of the metal air battery the barrier layers allow passage of lithium and oxygen ions in order to facilitate the oxidation and reduction reactions necessary for generation of electrical power. Lithium is oxidized to lithium carbonate and lithium oxide within the barrier.

In accordance with another feature of the present invention a method of making a barrier layer comprises reacting polyvinylidene fluoride pVdF in an excess lithium hydroxide solution. The reaction is continued until a dark brown paste settles to the bottom that may be 90 by weight efficient of initial pVdF. After centrifuging the brown paste may be removed rinsed with distilled water and then dried. The dried brown paste comprising lithiated or hydrolyzed pVdF may then be formed into a solid polymer blend film that may be used as a barrier layer.

In one particular embodiment the polymer blend or barrier layer may be prepared by dissolving hydrolyzed pVdF in 1 methyl 2 pyrrolidione nMP and then adding polyethylene oxide PEO and lithium hexafluorophosphate to form a polymer blend mixture. The polymer blend mixture may then be heated until all three components are dissolved. The mixture may then be allowed to cool to room temperature and formed into a thin layer by coating onto a flat sheet of Teflon or glass.

In accordance with another feature of the present invention a method of making the metal air battery comprises providing an anode not numbered comprising the metal foil and pressing the metal foil together with the wire mesh layer . Excess nickel may be removed from the edges of the metal foil . The barrier layers previously prepared of hydrolyzed pVdF PEO as described above may then be located on opposing sides of the metal foil and then pressed together e.g. under 5000 pounds per square inch of pressure. Next the separator may be provided along with the air cathode that is pressed onto a nickel wire mesh layer and then coated on one side with a polymeric coating e.g. Teflon to a thickness of approximately 0.003 inch. Thereafter the anode e.g. wire mesh layer metal foil and barrier layers and the separator may be soaked in an electrolyte. When the anode and the separator is saturated the separator may be located on top of the air cathode with the polymeric coating facing away from the air cathode. The anode is then placed on top of the separator . Next the assembled anode separator may be sealed in the housing and an aperture may be cut therein to expose the polymeric coated side of the air cathode . Finally adhesive tape may be applied to cover the aperture of the housing and to thereby hermetically seal the metal air battery for storage.

A polyvinylidene fluoride pVdF was obtained from the Polyscience Corporation of Warrington Pa. and Lithium hydroxide a 98 solution was obtained from Alfa Aesar Corporation of Ward Hill Mass. Five grams of pVdF was placed into a 50 mL centrifuge tube. Thereafter a three molar solution of lithium hydroxide was poured into the centrifuge tube until it reached the 50 mL line. The mixture was shaken and left for at least 24 hours. After 24 hours the mixture turned from a white color to a pinkish color. More solid lithium hydroxide was put into the mixture to increase the degree of reaction. The mixture was shaken and left alone for another 24 hours. This process was repeated until a dark brown paste settled to the bottom of the centrifuge tube. At this point the mixture was placed in a centrifuge for 10 minutes at 8000 rpm to separate the brown paste from the pinkish pVdF that floated on the top of the mixture. The brown paste was then removed and placed into an extraction thimble used in a Soxhlet apparatus. Distilled water was used to wash the brown paste of any traces of lithium hydroxide thirty to forty washes . After the brown paste was removed it was put into a vacuum dryer for about 24 hours at 100 C. The brown paste now a powder lithiated pVdF was removed.

A polymer blend was prepared by dissolving 3.058 g of hydrolyzed pVdF in 1 methyl 2 pyrrolidione nMP . After the hydrolyzed pVdF dissolved 0.410 g of polyethylene oxide PEO with an average molecular weight of 100K obtained from the Aldrich Corporation of Milwaukee Wis. and 0.450 g lithium hexafluorophosphate was added to the dissolved hydrolyzed pVdF solution. Altogether the hydrolyzed pVdF comprised a weight percent of 78 PEO comprised a weight percent of 10.5 and lithium hexafluorophosphate comprised a weight percent of 11.5 . The mixture was then heated until all three components were dissolved in nMP. The mixture was then cooled to room temperature and then applied at a thickness of 0.002 inches to a clean glass plate using a coating bar to form a barrier layer. The barrier layer or film was dried at 50 C. until the liquid evaporated and then placed into a vacuum oven for 24 hours at 50 C.

Lithium foil was obtained from the Foote Corporation of Exton Pa. with a thickness of 0.006 inches for use as an anode. In a dry room a press available from the Carver Corporation of Wabash Ind. was employed to press under 12 tons of pressure the lithium foil onto a nickel wire mesh. Excess nickel was removed from the edges of the lithium foil. The polymer blend of hydrolyzed pVdF PEO or barrier layer was then disposed about the lithium foil and wire mesh and pressed under 12 tons of pressure. Excess polymer blend was then removed.

A 1.2M solution of lithium hexafluorophosphate in propylene carbonate was provided for use as an electrolyte as its advantages include low toxicity readily biodegradable high boiling point low evaporation rate high flash point and is not damaging to the atmosphere.

An air cathode was obtained from the Electric Fuel Corporation of Auburn Ala. The air cathode has twenty four mg cmof active material about seven of which is gamma manganese dioxide some or all of which may be reduced to a lower oxidation state. It was pressed onto a nickel wire mesh under 25 pounds of pressure and then coated on one side with Teflon.

A metal air battery was then assembled by placing the coated lithium metal and glass wool into the electrolyte. When the polymer coating and glass wool was saturated the glass wool was placed on top of the air cathode with the Teflon coated side facing away. The polymer coated lithium was then placed on top of the glass wool. The whole assembly was then placed into a polymer pouch or housing and vacuum sealed. After sealing a hole was cut in the polymer pouch to expose the Teflon side of the air cathode. Teflon tape was then adhered to the outer border of the polymer pouch and Teflon coated side of the air cathode to prevent air from entering the housing and contacting the air cathode prior to desired operation of the metal air battery.

The metal air battery according to Example I was discharged at 1 mA to 1.5 volts and was found to have a capacity of 9.2 mA.

A metal air battery A was prepared according to Example I excepting that a barrier layer to protect a lithium foil instead comprised in weight percent 81 modified pVdF 9 PEO and 10 lithium hexafluorophosphate. The lithium foil had a weight of 0.0214 g an area of 3.27 cm. The metal air battery A as prepared was discharged at 2 mA to 1.5 volts and was found to have a capacity of 15 mA.

Referring now to a plot showing the results of testing of the metal air battery A of Example II for AC impedance is provided. In this example the metal air battery had an overall real impedance of 90 ohms which as is known is an important measure of the rate capability of the metal air battery A .

Referring now to a plot showing the results of testing of the metal air battery A for both discharge current and voltage as related to time. This metal air battery maintained a discharge voltage of 2.6 volts over approximately 7.5 hours while providing approximately 2 mA of current.

A metal air battery B was prepared according to Example I excepting that a barrier layer to protect a lithium foil instead comprised in weight percent 78 modified pVdF 10 PEO and 12 lithium hexafluorophosphate. The lithium foil had a weight of 0.0227 g an area of 3.17 cm. The metal air battery B was discharged at 3 mA to 1.5 volts and was found to have a capacity of 16.8 mA.

Referring now to a plot showing the results of testing of the metal air battery B of Example III for AC impedance is provided. In this example the metal air battery had an overall real impedance of 37 ohms.

Referring now to a plot showing the results of testing of the metal air battery of Example III for both discharge current and voltage as related to time. This metal air battery maintained a discharge voltage of 2.5 volts over approximately 5.6 hours while providing approximately 3 mA of current.

While the present invention has been described in connection with what are presently considered to be the most practical and preferred embodiments it is to be understood that the present invention is not limited to these herein disclosed embodiments. Rather the present invention is intended to cover all of the various modifications and equivalent arrangements included within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

