---

title: Selective serotonin receptor inverse agonists as therapeutics for disease
abstract: Disclosed herein are pharmaceutical compositions comprising an inverse serotonin receptor agonist or a serotonin receptor antagonist and an anti-insomnia agent. Disclosed herein are also methods of treating insomnia using the disclosed pharmaceutical compositions.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07863296&OS=07863296&RS=07863296
owner: ACADIA Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
number: 07863296
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050520
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 854 035 filed 24 May 2005 now abandoned which in turn is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 850 819 filed 21 May 2005 each of which is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.

The present invention relates to novel combinations of compounds that are effective as therapeutic agents in the treatment of depression mania or social phobia and other psychotic disorders. The combinations include inverse serotonin agonists and another antidepressant anti maniac anti phobia or antipsychotic agent.

Serotonin or 5 hydroxytryptamine 5 HT plays a significant role in the functioning of the mammalian body. In the central nervous system 5 HT is an important neurotransmitter and neuromodulator that is implicated in such diverse behaviors and responses as sleeping eating locomotion perceiving pain learning and memory sexual behavior controlling body temperature and blood pressure. In the spinal column serotonin plays an important role in the control systems of the afferent peripheral nociceptors Moulignier 150 3 15 1994 . Peripheral functions in the cardiovascular hematological and gastrointestinal systems have also been ascribed to 5 HT. 5 HT has been found to mediate a variety of contractile secretory and electrophysiologic effects including vascular and nonvascular smooth muscle contraction and platelet aggregation. Fuller 1982 Boullin 1 316 1978 Barchas et al. 1973 . The 5 HT2A receptor subtype also referred to as subclass is widely yet discretely expressed in the human brain including many cortical limbic and forebrain regions postulated to be involved in the modulation of higher cognitive and affective functions. This receptor subtype is also expressed on mature platelets where it mediates in part platelet aggregation one of the initial steps in the process of vascular thrombosis.

Given the broad distribution of serotonin within the body it is understandable that tremendous interest in drugs that affect serotonergic systems exists Gershon et al. 5 246 1989 Saxena et al. 15 Supp. 7 1990 . Serotonin receptors are members of a large human gene family of membrane spanning proteins that function as transducers of intercellular communication. They exist on the surface of various cell types including neurons and platelets where upon their activation by either their endogenous ligand serotonin or exogenously administered drugs they change their conformational structure and subsequently interact with downstream mediators of cellular signaling. Many of these receptors including the 5 HT2A subclass are G protein coupled receptors GPCRs that signal by activating guanine nucleotide binding proteins G proteins resulting in the generation or inhibition of second messenger molecules such as cyclic AMP inositol phosphates and diacylglycerol. These second messengers then modulate the function of a variety of intracellular enzymes including kinases and ion channels which ultimately affect cellular excitability and function.

At least 15 genetically distinct 5 HT receptor subtypes have been identified and assigned to one of seven families 5 HT1 7 . Each subtype displays a unique distribution preference for various ligands and functional correlate s .

Serotonin may be an important component in various types of pathological conditions such as certain psychiatric disorders depression aggressiveness panic attacks obsessive compulsive disorders psychosis schizophrenia suicidal tendency certain neurodegenerative disorders Alzheimer type dementia Parkinsonism Huntington s chorea anorexia bulimia disorders associated with alcoholism cerebral vascular accidents and migraine Meltzer 21 106S 115S 1999 Barnes Sharp 38 1083 1152 1999 Glennon 14 35 1990 . Recent evidence strongly implicates the 5 HT2 receptor subtype in the etiology of such medical conditions as hypertension thrombosis migraine vasospasm ischemia depression anxiety psychosis schizophrenia sleep disorders and appetite disorders.

Schizophrenia is a particularly devastating neuropsychiatric disorder that affects approximately 1 of the human population. It has been estimated that the total financial cost for the diagnosis treatment and lost societal productivity of individuals affected by this disease exceeds 2 of the gross national product GNP of the United States. Current treatment primarily involves pharmacotherapy with a class of drugs known as antipsychotics. Antipsychotics are effective in ameliorating positive symptoms e.g. hallucinations and delusions yet they frequently do not improve negative symptoms e.g. social and emotional withdrawal apathy and poverty of speech .

Currently nine major classes of antipsychotics are prescribed to treat psychotic symptoms. Use of these compounds is limited however by their side effect profiles. Nearly all of the typical or older generation compounds have significant adverse effects on human motor function. These extrapyramidal side effects so termed due to their effects on modulatory human motor systems can be both acute e.g. dystonic reactions a potentially life threatening but rare neuroleptic malignant syndrome and chronic e.g. akathisias tremors and tardive dyskinesia . Drug development efforts have therefore focused on newer atypical agents free of these adverse effects.

Antipsychotic drugs have been shown to interact with a large number of central monoaminergic neurotransmitter receptors including dopaminergic serotonergic adrenergic muscarinic and histaminergic receptors. It is likely that the therapeutic and adverse effects of these drugs are mediated by distinct receptor subtypes. The high degree of genetic and pharmacological homology between these receptor subtypes has hampered the development of subtype selective compounds as well as the determination of the normal physiologic or pathophysiologic role of any particular receptor subtype. Thus there is a need to develop drugs that are selective for individual receptor classes and subclasses amongst monoaminergic neurotransmitter receptors.

The prevailing theory for the mechanism of action of antipsychotic drugs involves antagonism of dopamine D2 receptors. Unfortunately it is likely that antagonism of dopamine D2 receptors also mediates the extrapyramidal side effects. Antagonism of 5 HT2A is an alternate molecular mechanism for drugs with antipsychotic efficacy possibly through antagonism of heightened or exaggerated signal transduction through serotonergic systems. 5 HT2A antagonists are therefore good candidates for treating psychosis without extrapyramidal side effects.

Traditionally these receptors have been assumed to exist in a quiescent state unless activated by the binding of an agonist a drug that activates a receptor . It is now appreciated that many if not most of the GPCR monoamine receptors including serotonin receptors can exist in a partially activated state in the absence of their endogenous agonists. This increased basal activity constitutive activity can be inhibited by compounds called inverse agonists. Both agonists and inverse agonists possess intrinsic activity at a receptor in that they alone can activate or inactivate these molecules respectively. In contrast classic or neutral antagonists compete against agonists and inverse agonists for access to the receptor but do not possess the intrinsic ability to inhibit elevated basal or constitutive receptor responses.

Recently an important aspect of 5 HT2A receptor function was elucidated by applying the Receptor Selection and Amplification Technology U.S. Pat. No. 5 707 798 1998128 111548 1998 and citations therein to the study of the 5 HT2 subclass of serotonin receptors. R SAT is a phenotypic assay of receptor function that involves the heterologous expression of receptors in mammalian fibroblasts. Using this technology it was demonstrated that native 5 HT2A receptors possess significant constitutive or agonist independent receptor activity U.S. Pat. No. 6 358 698 herein incorporated by reference . Furthermore by directly testing a large number of centrally acting medicinal compounds with known clinical activity in neuropsychiatric disease it was determined that compounds with antipsychotic efficacy all shared a common molecular property. Nearly all of these compounds which are used by psychiatrists to treat psychosis were found to be potent 5 HT2A inverse agonists. This unique clinico pharmacologic correlation at a single receptor subtype is compelling evidence that 5 HT2A receptor inverse agonism is a molecular mechanism of antipsychotic efficacy in humans.

Detailed pharmacological characterization of a large number of antipsychotic compounds revealed that they possess broad activity at multiple related receptor subtypes. Most of these compounds display agonist competitive antagonist or inverse agonist activity at multiple monoaminergic receptor subtypes including serotoninergic dopaminergic adrenergic muscarinic and histaminergic receptors. This broad activity is likely responsible for the sedating hypotensive and motor side effects of these compounds. It would therefore be of great advantage to develop compounds that are selective inverse agonists of the 5 HT2A receptor but which have little or no activity on other monamine receptors subtypes especially dopamine D2 receptors. Such compounds may be useful in the treatment of human disease e.g. as anti psychotics and may avoid the adverse side effects associated with non selective receptor interactions.

Disclosed herein is a pharmaceutical composition comprising a first compound selected from the group consisting of an inverse agonist of a serotonin receptor an antagonist of a serotonin receptor and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof and a second compound selected from the group consisting of a SSRI a SNRI a MAO I a TCA an antipsychotic agent a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor a dopamine agonist an anti insomnia drug an anti manic drug an anti phobia drug the compound of Formula II 

Also disclosed herein is a method of treating a disorder in a patient the disorder selected from the group consisting of depression mania social phobia psychosis insomnia and a neuropsychiatric disorder the method comprising identifying a patient in need of the treatment and administering to the patient a therapeutically effective amount of a combination of a first compound and a second compound the first compound selected from the group consisting of an inverse agonist of a serotonin receptor an antagonist of a serotonin receptor and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof as described above and the second compound selected from the group consisting of a SSRI a SNRI a MAO I a TCA an antipsychotic agent a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor a dopamine agonist an anti insomnia drug an anti manic drug an anti phobia drug the compound of Formula II 

Also disclosed herein is use of a first compound and a second compound for the preparation of a medicament for treating a disorder selected from the group consiting of depression mania social phobia psychosis insomnia and a neuropsychiatric disorder wherein the first compound and second compound are as described above.

For the purpose of the current disclosure the following definitions shall in their entireties be used to define technical terms and shall also in their entireties be used to define the scope of the composition of matter for which protection is sought in the claims.

 Constitutive activity is defined as the elevated basal activity of a receptor that is independent of the presence of an agonist. Constitutive activity of a receptor may be measured using a number of different methods including cellular e.g. membrane preparations see e.g. Barr . Manning 272 32979 87 1997 purified reconstituted receptors with or without the associated G protein in phospholipid vesicles Cerione et al. 23 4519 25 1984 and functional cellular assays U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 103 317 or any other method known in the art.

 Agonist is defined as a compound that increases the basal activity of a receptor when it contacts the receptor.

An antagonist is defined as a compound that competes with an agonist or inverse agonist for binding to a receptor thereby blocking the action of an agonist or inverse agonist on the receptor. However an antagonist also known as a neutral antagonist has no effect on constitutive receptor activity.

An inverse agonist is defined as a compound that decreases the basal activity of a receptor i.e. signaling mediated by the receptor . Such compounds are also known as negative antagonists. An inverse agonist is a ligand for a receptor that causes the receptor to adopt an inactive state relative to a basal state occurring in the absence of any ligand. Thus while an antagonist can inhibit the activity of an agonist an inverse agonist is a ligand that can alter the conformation of the receptor in the absence of an agonist. The concept of an inverse agonist has been explored by Bond et al. in 374 272 1995 . More specifically Bond et al. have proposed that unliganded adrenoceptor exists in an equilibrium between an inactive conformation and a spontaneously active conformation. Agonists are proposed to stabilize the receptor in an active conformation. Conversely inverse agonists are believed to stabilize an inactive receptor conformation. Thus while an antagonist manifests its activity by virtue of inhibiting an agonist an inverse agonist can additionally manifest its activity in the absence of an agonist by inhibiting the spontaneous conversion of an unliganded receptor to an active conformation.

The 5 HT2A receptor is defined as a receptor having an activity corresponding to the activity of the human serotonin receptor subtype which was characterized through molecular cloning and pharmacology as detailed in Saltzman et al. 181 1469 78 and Julius et al. 87 928 932 the disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties.

The term subject refers to an animal preferably a mammal most preferably a human who is the object of treatment observation or experiment.

 Selective is defined as a property of a compound whereby an amount of the compound sufficient to effect a desired response from a particular receptor type subtype class or subclass with significantly less or substantially little or no effect upon the activity other receptor types. For example a selective compound may have at least a 10 fold greater effect on activity of the desired receptor than on other receptor types. In some cases a selective compound may have at least a 20 fold greater effect on activity of the desired receptor than on other receptor types or at least a 50 fold greater effect or at least a 100 fold greater effect or at least a 1000 fold greater effect or at least a 10 000 fold greater effect or at least a 100 000 fold greater effect or more than a 100 000 fold greater effect. Selectivity or selective as an inverse agonist is understood as a property of the compound of the invention whereby an amount of compound that effectively inversely agonizes the 5 HT2A receptor and thereby decreases its activity causes little or no inverse agonistic or antagonistic activity at other related or unrelated receptors. In particular in one embodiment a compound has surprisingly been found not to interact strongly with other serotonin receptors 5 HT 1A 1B 1D 1E 1F 2B 2C 4A 6 and 7 at concentrations where the signaling of the 5 HT2A receptor is strongly or completely inhibited. In one embodiment the compound is also selective with respect to other monoamine binding receptors such as the dopaminergic histaminergic adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. Compounds that are highly selective for 5 HT2A receptors may have a beneficial effect in the treatment of psychosis schizophrenia or similar neuropsychiatric disorders while avoiding adverse effects associated with drugs hitherto suggested for this purpose.

Serotonin or 5 hydroxytryptamine 5 HT plays a significant role in the functioning of the mammalian body. In the central nervous system 5 HT is an important neurotransmitter and neuromodulator that is implicated in such diverse behaviors and responses as sleeping eating locomotion perceiving pain learning and memory sexual behavior controlling body temperature and blood pressure. In the spinal column serotonin plays an important role in the control systems of the afferent peripheral nociceptors Moulignier 150 3 15 1994 . Peripheral functions in the cardiovascular hematological and gastrointestinal systems have also been ascribed to 5 HT. 5 HT has been found to mediate a variety of contractile secretory and electrophysiologic effects including vascular and nonvascular smooth muscle contraction and platelet aggregation. Fuller 1982 Botillin 1 316 1978 Barchas et al. 1973 . The 5 HT2A receptor subtype also referred to as subclass is widely yet discretely expressed in the human brain including many cortical limbic and forebrain regions postulated to be involved in the modulation of higher cognitive and affective functions. This receptor subtype is also expressed on mature platelets where it mediates in part platelet aggregation one of the initial steps in the process of vascular thrombosis.

Given the broad distribution of serotonin within the body it is understandable that tremendous interest in drugs that affect serotonergic systems exists Gershon et at 5 246 1989 Saxena et at 15 Supp. 7 1990 . Serotonin receptors are members of a large human gene family of membrane spanning proteins that function as transducers of intercellular communication. They exist on the surface of various cell types including neurons and platelets where upon their activation by either their endogenous ligand serotonin or exogenously administered drugs they change their conformational structure and subsequently interact with downstream mediators of cellular signaling. Many of these receptors including the 5 HT2A subclass are G protein coupled receptors GPCRs that signal by activating guanine nucleotide binding proteins G proteins resulting in the generation or inhibition of second messenger molecules such as cyclic AMP inositol phosphates and diacylglycero 1. These second messengers then modulate the function of a variety of intracellular enzymes including kinases and ion channels which ultimately affect cellular excitability and function.

At least 15 genetically distinct 5 HT receptor subtypes have been identified and assigned to one of seven families 5 HT1 7 . Each subtype displays a unique distribution preference for various ligands and functional correlate s . Serotonin may be an important component in various types of pathological conditions such as certain psychiatric disorders depression aggressiveness panic attacks obsessive compulsive disorders psychosis schizophrenia suicidal tendency certain neurodegenerative disorders Alzheimer type dementia Parkinsonism Huntington s chorea anorexia bulimia disorders associated with alcoholism cerebral vascular accidents and migraine Meltzer 21 106S 115S 1999 Barnes Sharp 38 1083 1152 1999 Glennon 14 35 1990 . Recent evidence strongly implicates the 5 HT2 receptor subtype in the etiology of such medical conditions as hypertension thrombosis migraine vasospasm ischemia depression anxiety psychosis schizophrenia sleep disorders and appetite disorders.

In one aspect the present invention relates to a method of treating depression in a patient comprising identifying a patient in need thereof and administering to the patient a therapeutically effective amount of a first compound in combination with a therapeutically effective amount of a second compound.

In another aspect the present invention relates to a method of treating mania in a patient comprising identifying a patient in need thereof and administering to the patient a therapeutically effective amount of a first compound in combination with a therapeutically effective amount of a second compound.

In yet another aspect the present invention relates to a method of treating social phobia in a patient comprising identifying a patient in need thereof and administering to the patient a therapeutically effective amount of a first compound in combination with a therapeutically effective amount of a second compound.

In a further aspect the present invention relates to a method of treating psychosis in a patient comprising identifying a patient in need thereof and administering to the patient a therapeutically effective amount of a first compound in combination with a therapeutically effective amount of a second compound.

In another aspect the present invention relates to a method of treating a neuropsychiatric disorder in a patient comprising identifying a patient in need thereof and administering to said patient a therapeutically effective amount of a first compound in combination with a therapeutically effective amount of a second compound. In some embodiments the neuropsychiatric disorder is selected from the group consisting of schizophrenia and related idiopathic psychoses anxiety sleep disorders appetite disorders affective disorders such as major depression bipolar disorder and depression with psychotic features and Tourette s Syndrome drug induced psychoses psychoses secondary to neurodegenerative disorders such Alzheimer s or Huntington s Disease.

In still another aspect the present invention relates to a method of treating insomnia in a patient comprising identifying a patient in need thereof and administering to the patient a therapeutically effective amount of a first compound in combination with a therapeutically effective amount of a second compound.

The term therapeutically effective amount as used herein means an amount of an active compound or pharmaceutical agent that elicits the biological or medicinal response in a tissue system animal or human that is being sought by a researcher veterinarian medical doctor or other clinician which includes alleviation amelioration or lessening of the symptoms of the disease being treated or prevents or slows the progress of the disease or increase of the symptoms.

In certain embodiments the patient may be a mammal. The mammal may be selected from the group consisting of mice rats rabbits guinea pigs dogs cats sheep goats cows primates such as monkeys chimpanzees and apes and humans. In some embodiments the patient is a human.

In some embodiments the first compound in the above methods is an inverse agonist selective for a serotonin receptor. In certain embodiments the serotonin receptor is a 5HT2A receptor while in other embodiments the serotonin receptor is a 5HT2C receptor. In other embodiments the inverse agonists binds to a 5HT2A receptor and a 5HT2C receptor.

In other embodiments the first compound is a compound disclosed in U.S. Patent Application Publication Ser. No. 2002 0004513 A1 published on Jan. 10 2002 by Andersson et al. and entitled AZACYCLIC COMPOUNDS which is the publication of the U.S. application Ser. No. 09 800 096 or in U.S. Patent Application Publication Ser. No. 2003 0220316 A1 published on Nov. 27 2003 by Andersson et al. and entitled AZACYCLIC COMPOUNDS which is the publication of the U.S. application Ser. No. 10 409 782 or in U.S. application Ser. No. 10 802 970 filed on Mar. 16 2004 by Andersson et al. and entitled AZACYCLIC COMPOUNDS the entire disclosure of all of which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in their entirety including any drawings.

In another embodiment the first compound is N 1 methylpiperidin 4 yl N 4 fluorophenylmethyl N 4 2 methylpropyloxy phenylmethyl carbamide which is the compound of Formula I 

In another embodiment the first compound in the above methods is an antagonist selective for a serotonin receptor. In certain embodiments the serotonin receptor is a 5HT2A receptor while in other embodiments the serotonin receptor is a 5HT2C receptor. In other embodiments the antagonists binds to a 5HT2A receptor and a 5HT2C receptor.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above methods is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor SSRI . Examples of SSRIs include but are not limited to bupropion Wellbutrin Zyban citalopram Celexa duloxetine escitalopram Lexapro fluoxetine Prozac fluvoxamine Luvox nefazodone Serzone paroxetine Paxil sertaline Zoloft sibutramine trazodone Dividose and venlafaxine. Any other SSRI currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In other embodiments the second compound in the above methods is a serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor SNRI . Examples of SNRIs include but are not limited to citalopram Celexa dulexetine escitalopram Lexapro fluvoxamine Luvox and venfalaxine effexor . Any other SNRI currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In further embodiments the second compound in the above methods is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor MAO I . Examples of MAO Is include but are not limited to tranylcypromine Parnate phenelzine Nardil maprotiline and isocarboxazid Marplan . Any other MAO I currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In yet other embodiments the second compound in the above methods is a tricyclic antidepressant TCA . Examples of TCAs include but are not limited to amitryptiline Norpramine amoxapineclomipramine Anafranil desipramine doxepin Sinequan imipramine Tofranil maprotiline Elavil protryptiline and trimipramine. Any other TCA currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In some other embodiments the second compound in the above methods is a compound selected from aripiprazole Abilify clozapine fluoxetine olanzapine Symbyax olanzapine Zyprexa quetiapine Seroquel risperidone Risperdal valproic acid Depakote and ziprasidone Geodon . Any other atypical antidepressant currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above methods is a compound selected from chlorpromazine Thorazine mesoridazine Serentil prochlorperazine Compazine thioridazine Mellaril haloperidol Haldol pimozide Orap clozapine Clozaril loxapine Loxitane olanzapine Zyprexa quetiapine Seroquel resperidone Resperidal ziprasidone Geodon lithium carbonate Aripiprazole Abilify Clozapine Clozaril Compazine Etrafon Geodon Haldol Inapsine Loxitane Mellaril Moban Navane Olanzapine Zyprexa Orap Permitil Prolixin Phenergan Quetiapine Seroquel Reglan Risperdal Serentil Seroquel Stelazine Taractan Thorazine Triavil Trilafon and Zyprexa.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above methods is an antipsychotic agent. The antipsychotic agent may be selected from the group consisting of a phenothiazine phenylbutylpiperadine debenzapine benzisoxidil and salt of lithium. The phenothiazine group of compounds may be selected from the group consisting of chlorpromazine Thorazine mesoridazine Serentil prochlorperazine Compazine and thioridazine Mellaril . The phenylbutylpiperadine group of compounds may be selected from the group consisting of haloperidol Haldol and pimozide Orap . The debenzapine group of compounds may be selected from the group consisting of clozapine Clozaril loxapine Loxitane olanzapine Zyprexa and quetiapine Seroquel . The benzisoxidil group of compounds may be selected from the group consisting of resperidone Resperidal and ziprasidone Geodon . The salt of lithium may be lithium carbonate. In some embodiments the antipsychotic agent may be selected from the group consisting of Aripiprazole Abilify Clozapine Clozaril Compazine Etrafon Geodon Haldol Inapsine Loxitane Mellaril Moban Navane Olanzapine Zyprexa Orap Permitil Prolixin Phenergan Quetiapine Seroquel Reglan Risperdal Serentil Seroquel Stelazine Taractan Thorazine Triavil Trilafon and Zyprexa or pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof.

In other embodiments the second compound in the above methods is a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. The norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor is selected from the group consisting of thionisoxetine and reboxetine.

In further embodiments the second compound in the above methods is a dopamine agonist. The dopamine agonist may be selected from the group consisting of sumatriptan almotriptan naratriptan frovatriptan rizatriptan zomitriptan cabergoline amantadine lisuride pergolide ropinirole pramipexole and bromocriptine.

In yet another embodiment the second compound in the above methods is an anti insomnia drug. Examples of anti insomnia drugs include but are not limited to alprazolam Xanax chlordiazepoxide Librium Limbitrol clorazepate Tranxene estazolam ProSom flurazepam Dalmane hydroxyzine Atarax lorazepam Ativan pentobarbital Nembutal quazepam Doral secobarbital Seconal temazepam Restoril triazolam Halcion valium zaleplon Sonata zolpidem Ambien and the benzodiazepine family of drugs. Any other anti insomnia drug currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In other embodiments the second compound in the above methods is an anti manic drug. Examples of anti manic drugs include but are not limited to divalproex Depakote lithium carbonate Eskalith and lithium citrate. Any other anti manic drug currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above methods is an anti phobia drug. An example of anti phobia drugs includes but is not limited to D cycloserine. Those of skill in the art recognize that some of the other drugs disclosed herein also work as anti phobia drugs. Any other anti manic drug currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

Insomnia is a heterogeneous highly prevalent condition that is associated with increased risk of new or recurrent psychiatric disorders increased daytime sleepiness with consequent cognitive impairment poorer prognoses reduced quality of life and high healthcare related financial burden. Emerging data suggest that resolution of insomnia may improve psychiatric outcomes. The nature of insomnia can differ among individuals with some individuals presenting with difficulties in falling asleep sleep induction difficulties staying asleep sleep maintenance or a combination of both. It is difficult to titrate the sleep inducing effects from the sleep maintenance effects when a single anti insomnia drug is used. Therefore some patients with only sleep induction or only sleep maintenance difficulties may be treated with a drug that treats both kinds of sleep disturbances. Another way to tailor a sleep medications to the specific sleep complaint of a patient is to use two different anti insomnia drugs in combination ideally one drug would primarily induce sleep and a second drug would primarily improve sleep maintenance. A sleep inducing agent may be selected from the general classes of barbiturates benzodiazepines direct GABA agonists positive allosteric modulators of GABA receptors histamine receptor antagonists histamine receptor inverse agonists and others. Sleep maintenance agents can be selected from drugs that are antagonist or are inverse agonist at the general class of 5 HT2 receptors more specifically agents that are antagonists and or inverse agonists at the 5 HT2A and or 5 HT2C receptors. These include drugs like ritanserin ketanserin MDL 100 907 eplivanserin the compound of formula I and others.

The treatment of insomnia involves primarily pharmacological interventions. Until recently the treatments of choice have been the benzodiazepines. However this class of drugs has been associated with a number of adverse effects including tolerance dependence withdrawal and abuse potential impairment in daytime cognitive and psychomotor performance including an increased risk of accidents and falls adverse effects on respiration and the disruption of normal sleep architecture with reduction in both slow wave sleep and rapid eye movement. More recently newer non benzodiazepine hypnotics have emerged including zolpidem zopiclone eszopiclone Lunesta zaleplon gaboxadol indiplon and beta carbolines like abecarnil. These agents primarily act by enhancing the activity of the GABA A receptor. These therapies have proven effective with reducing time to sleep onset decreasing wake time after sleep onset and sleep maintenance and reducing the number of nighttime awakenings. However these newer drugs still produce side effects that ultimately may limit their use.

An extensive body of research exists on CNS effects of H1 antagonists. These include both subjective e.g. self rating of increased drowsiness and objective e.g. EEG measurement of sleep latency estimates of sedation and from simple e.g. critical flicker fusion to the complex tasks e.g. impaired driving . There is a distinction between the older first generation H1 antagonists and the newer second generation ones. At the recommended dosages all the second generation H1 antagonists are less sedating in more patients than their predecessors. This is largely attributable to poor brain penetrating properties of the newer medications when compared to the older H1 antagonists. However higher dose of even the newer H1 antagonists also induce sleep. The common sedative properties produced by most H1 antagonists remain a major concern and therefore these compounds are no longer medications of choice in the treatment of allergic rhinitis allergic conjunctivitis or urticaria. However these drugs may find a new utility in treating sleep induction problems. Particularly when used in combination with sleep maintenance agents.

Accordingly in one embodiment the second compound in the above methods is an anti insomnia drug that is an H1 antagonist or inverse agonist. Examples of H1 antagonists include but are not limited to azatadine astemizole brompheniramine carbinoxamine chlorpheniramine clemastine cyproheptadine dimenhydrinate diphenhydramine doxepin doxylamine ktotifen leocabastine meclizine mepramine manserin promethazine tipelennamine triprolidine acrivastine cetrizine desloratadine fexofenadine and loratidine. Any other H1 antagonist or inverse agonist currently known or later developed are also within the scope of the present disclosure.

In other embodiments the first or second compound in the above methods is a serotonin 5 HT2A receptor antagonist. The serotonin 5 HT2A receptor antagonist may be M 100 907 or an analog thereof. By M 100 907 it is meant the compound of Formula II.

In some embodiments a first compound of Formula I is administered in combination with a second compound of Formula II . In other embodiments a first compound of Formula II is administered in combination with a second compound selected from the group consisting of a SSRI including but not limited to bupropion Wellbutrin Zyban citalopram Celexa duloxetine escitalopram Lexapro fluoxetine Prozac fluvoxamine Luvox nefazodone Serzone paroxetine Paxil sertaline Zoloft sibutramine trazodone Dividose and venlafaxine a SNRI including but not limited to citalopram Celexa dulexetine escitalopram Lexapro fluvoxamine Luvox and venfalaxine effexor a MAO I including but are not limited to tranylcypromine Parnate phenelzine Nardil maprotiline and isocarboxazid Marplan a TCA including but not limited to amitryptiline Norpramine amoxapineclomipramine Anafranil desipramine doxepin Sinequan imipramine Tofranil maprotiline Elavil protryptiline and trimipramine aripiprazole Abilify clozapine fluoxetine olanzapine Symbyax olanzapine Zyprexa quetiapine Seroquel risperidone Risperdal valproic acid Depakote ziprasidone Geodon chlorpromazine Thorazine mesoridazine Serentil prochlorperazine Compazine thioridazine Mellaril haloperidol Haldol pimozide Orap clozapine Clozaril loxapine Loxitane olanzapine Zyprexa quetiapine Seroquel resperidone Resperidal ziprasidone Geodon lithium carbonate Aripiprazole Abilify Clozapine Clozaril Compazine Etrafon Geodon Haldol Inapsine Loxitane Mellaril Moban Navane Olanzapine Zyprexa Orap Permitil Prolixin Phenergan Quetiapine Seroquel Reglan Risperdal Serentil Seroquel Stelazine Taractan Thorazine Triavil Trilafon Zyprexa an antipsychotic agent including but not limited to a phenothiazine such as chlorpromazine Thorazine mesoridazine Serentil prochlorperazine Compazine and thioridazine Mellaril a phenylbutylpiperadine such as haloperidol Haldol and pimozide Orap a debenzapine such as clozapine Clozaril loxapine Loxitane olanzapine Zyprexa and quetiapine Seroquel a benzisoxidil such as resperidone Resperidal and ziprasidone Geodon a salt of lithium such as lithium carbonate Aripiprazole Abilify Etrafon Haldol Inapsine Mellaril Moban Navane Permitil Prolixin Phenergan Reglan Risperdal Stelazine Taractan Triavil and Trilafon a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor including but not limited to thionisoxetine and reboxetine a dopamine agonist including but not limited to sumatriptan almotriptan naratriptan frovatriptan rizatriptan zomitriptan cabergoline amantadine lisuride pergolide ropinirole pramipexole and bromocriptine an anti insomnia drug including but not limited to alprazolam Xanax chlordiazepoxide Librium Limbitrol clorazepate Tranxene estazolam ProSom flurazepam Dalmane hydroxyzine Atarax lorazepam Ativan pentobarbital Nembutal quazepam Doral secobarbital Seconal temazepam Restoril triazolam Halcion valium zaleplon Sonata zolpidem Ambien the benzodiazepine family of drugs azatadine astemizole brompheniramine carbinoxamine chlorpheniramine clemastine cyproheptadine dimenhydrinate diphenhydramine doxepin doxylamine ktotifen leocabastine meclizine mepramine manserin promethazine tipelennamine triprolidine acrivastine cetrizine desloratadine fexofenadine and loratidine an anti manic drug including but not limited to divalproex Depakote lithium carbonate Eskalith and lithium citrate an anti phobia drug including but not limited to D cycloserine and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof.

In some embodiments the administering step in the above methods comprises administering the first compound and the second compound simultaneously. These embodiments include those in which the first compound and the second compound are in the same administrable composition i.e. a single tablet pill or capsule or a single solution for intravenous injection or a single drinkable solution or a single dragee formulation or patch contains both compounds. The embodiments also include those in which each compound is in a separate administrable composition but the patient is directed to take the separate compositions nearly simultaneously i.e. one pill is taken right after the other or that one injection of one compound is made right after the injection of another compound etc.

In other embodiments the administering step comprises administering one of the first compound and the second compound first and then administering the other one of the first compound and the second compound. In these embodiments the patient may be administered a composition comprising one of the compounds and then at some time a few minutes or a few hours later be administered another composition comprising the other one of the compounds. Also included in these embodiments are those in which the patient is administered a composition comprising one of the compounds on a routine or continuous basis while receiving a composition comprising the other compound occasionally.

In another aspect the present invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising a first compound and a second compound.

In some embodiments the first compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is an inverse agonist selective for a serotonin receptor. In certain embodiments the serotonin receptor is a 5HT2A receptor while in other embodiments the serotonin receptor is a 5HT2C receptor. In other embodiments the inverse agonists binds to a 5HT2A receptor and a 5HT2C receptor.

In other embodiments the first compound is a compound disclosed in U.S. Patent Application Publication Ser. No. 2002 0004513 A1 published on Jan. 10 2002 by Andersson et al. and entitled AZACYCLIC COMPOUNDS which is the publication of the U.S. application Ser. No. 09 800 096 or in U.S. Patent Application Publication Ser. No. 2003 0220316 A1 published on Nov. 27 2003 by Andersson et al. and entitled AZACYCLIC COMPOUNDS which is the publication of the U.S. application Ser. No. 10 409 782 or in U.S. application Ser. No. 10 802 970 filed on Mar. 16 2004 by Andersson et al. and entitled AZACYCLIC COMPOUNDS the entire disclosures of all of which are hereby incorporated by reference herein in their entirety including any drawings.

In another embodiment the first compound is N 1 methylpiperidin 4 yl N 4 fluorophenylmethyl N 4 2 methylpropyloxy phenylmethyl carbamide which is the compound of Formula I 

In another embodiment the first compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is an antagonist selective for a serotonin receptor. In certain embodiments the serotonin receptor is a 5HT2A receptor while in other embodiments the serotonin receptor is a 5HT2C receptor. In other embodiments the antagonists binds to a 5HT2A receptor and a 5HT2C receptor.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor SSRI . Examples of SSRIs include but are not limited to bupropion Wellbutrin Zyban citalopram Celexa duloxetine escitalopram Lexapro fluoxetine Prozac fluvoxamine Luvox nefazodone Serzone paroxetine Paxil sertaline Zoloft sibutramine trazodone Dividose and venlafaxine. Any other SSRI currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In other embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor SNRI . Examples of SNRIs include but are not limited to citalopram Celexa dulexetine escitalopram Lexapro fluvoxamine Luvox and venfalaxine effexor . Any other SNRI currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In further embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor MAO I . Examples of MAO Is include but are not limited to tranylcypromine Parnate phenelzine Nardil maprotiline and isocarboxazid Marplan . Any other MAO I currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In yet other embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a tricyclic antidepressant TCA . Examples of TCAs include but are not limited to amitryptiline Norpramine amoxapineclomipramine Anafranil desipramine doxepin Sinequan imipramine Tofranil maprotiline Elavil protryptiline and trimipramine. Any other TCA currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In some other embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a compound selected from aripiprazole Abilify clozapine fluoxetine olanzapine Symbyax olanzapine Zyprexa quetiapine Seroquel risperidone Risperdal valproic acid Depakote and ziprasidone Geodon . Any other atypical antidepressant currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a compound selected from chlorpromazine Thorazine mesoridazine Serentil prochlorperazine Compazine thioridazine Mellaril haloperidol Haldol pimozide Orap clozapine Clozaril loxapine Loxitane olanzapine Zyprexa quetiapine Seroquel resperidone Resperidal ziprasidone Geodon lithium carbonate Aripiprazole Abilify Clozapine Clozaril Compazine Etrafon Geodon Haldol Inapsine Loxitane Mellaril Moban Navane Olanzapine Zyprexa Orap Permitil Prolixin Phenergan Quetiapine Seroquel Reglan Risperdal Serentil Seroquel Stelazine Taractan Thorazine Triavil Trilafon and Zyprexa.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is an antipsychotic agent. The antipsychotic agent may be selected from the group consisting of a phenothiazine phenylbutylpiperadine debenzapine benzisoxidil and salt of lithium. The phenothiazine group of compounds may be selected from the group consisting of chlorpromazine Thorazine mesoridazine Serentil prochlorperazine Compazine and thioridazine Mellaril . The phenylbutylpiperadine group of compounds may be selected from the group consisting of haloperidol Haldol and pimozide Orap . The debenzapine group of compounds may be selected from the group consisting of clozapine Clozaril loxapine Loxitane olanzapine Zyprexa and quetiapine Seroquel . The benzisoxidil group of compounds may be selected from the group consisting of resperidone Resperidal and ziprasidone Geodon . The salt of lithium may be lithium carbonate. In some embodiments the antipsychotic agent may be selected from the group consisting of Aripiprazole Abilify Clozapine Clozaril Compazine Etrafon Geodon Haldol Inapsine Loxitane Mellaril Moban Navane Olanzapine Zyprexa Orap Permitil Prolixin Phenergan Quetiapine Seroquel Reglan Risperdal Serentil Seroquel Stelazine Taractan Thorazine Triavil Trilafon and Zyprexa or pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof.

In other embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. The norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor is selected from the group consisting of thionisoxetine and reboxetine.

In further embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a dopamine agonist. The dopamine agonist may be selected from the group consisting of sumatriptan almotriptan naratriptan frovatriptan rizatriptan zomitriptan cabergoline amantadine lisuride pergolide ropinirole pramipexole and bromocriptine.

In yet another embodiment the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is an anti insomnia drug. Examples of anti insomnia drugs include but are not limited to alprazolam Xanax chlordiazepoxide Librium Limbitrol clorazepate Tranxene estazolam ProSom flurazepam Dalmane hydroxyzine Atarax lorazepam Ativan pentobarbital Nembutal quazepam Doral secobarbital Seconal temazepam Restoril triazolam Halcion valium zaleplon Sonata zolpidem Ambien and the benzodiazepine family of drugs. Any other anti insomnia drug currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above methods is an anti insomnia drug that is an H1 antagonist or inverse agonist. Examples of H1 antagonists include but are not limited to azatadine astemizole brompheniramine carbinoxamine chlorpheniramine clemastine cyproheptadine dimenhydrinate diphenhydramine doxepin doxylamine ktotifen leocabastine meclizine mepramine manserin promethazine tipelennamine triprolidine acrivastine cetrizine desloratadine fexofenadine and loratidine. Any other H1 antagonist or inverse agonist currently known or later developed are also within the scope of the present disclosure.

In other embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is an anti manic drug. Examples of anti manic drugs include but are not limited to divalproex Depakote lithium carbonate Eskalith and lithium citrate. Any other anti manic drug currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In some embodiments the second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is an anti phobia drug. An example of anti phobia drugs includes but is not limited to D cycloserine. Those of skill in the art recognize that some of the other drugs disclosed herein also work as anti phobia drugs. Any other anti manic drug currently known or later developed are within the scope of the present disclosure.

In another embodiment the first or second compound in the above pharmaceutical composition is a serotonin 5 HT2A receptor antagonist. The serotonin 5 HT2A receptor antagonist may be M 100 907 or an analog thereof. By M 100 907 it is meant the compound of Formula II.

In some embodiments the first compound of the pharmaceutical composition is Formula I and the second compound of the composition is Formula II . In other embodiments the first compound of the pharmaceutical composition is Formula II and the second compound of the composition is selected from the group consisting of a SSRI including but not limited to bupropion Wellbutrin Zyban citalopram Celexa duloxetine escitalopram Lexapro fluoxetine Prozac fluvoxamine Luvox nefazodone Serzone paroxetine Paxil sertaline Zoloft sibutramine trazodone Dividose and venlafaxine a SNRI including but not limited to citalopram Celexa dulexetine escitalopram Lexapro fluvoxamine Luvox and venfalaxine effexor a MAO I including but are not limited to tranylcypromine Parnate phenelzine Nardil maprotiline and isocarboxazid Marplan a TCA including but not limited to amitryptiline Norpramine amoxapineclomipramine Anafranil desipramine doxepin Sinequan imipramine Tofranil maprotiline Elavil protryptiline and trimipramine aripiprazole Abilify clozapine fluoxetine olanzapine Symbyax olanzapine Zyprexa quetiapine Seroquel risperidone Risperdal valproic acid Depakote ziprasidone Geodon chlorpromazine Thorazine mesoridazine Serentil prochlorperazine Compazine thioridazine Mellaril haloperidol Haldol pimozide Orap clozapine Clozaril loxapine Loxitane olanzapine Zyprexa quetiapine Seroquel resperidone Resperidal ziprasidone Geodon lithium carbonate Aripiprazole Abilify Clozapine Clozaril Compazine Etrafon Geodon Haldol Inapsine Loxitane Mellaril Moban Navane Olanzapine Zyprexa Orap Permitil Prolixin Phenergan Quetiapine Seroquel Reglan Risperdal Serentil Seroquel Stelazine Taractan Thorazine Triavil Trilafon Zyprexa an antipsychotic agent including but not limited to a phenothiazine such as chlorpromazine Thorazine mesoridazine Serentil prochlorperazine Compazine and thioridazine Mellaril a phenylbutylpiperadine such as haloperidol Haldol and pimozide Orap a debenzapine such as clozapine Clozaril loxapine Loxitane olanzapine Zyprexa and quetiapine Seroquel a benzisoxidil such as resperidone Resperidal and ziprasidone Geodon a salt of lithium such as lithium carbonate Aripiprazole Abilify Etrafon Haldol Inapsine Mellaril Moban Navane Permitil Prolixin Phenergan Reglan Risperdal Stelazine Taractan Triavil and Trilafon a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor including but not limited to thionisoxetine and reboxetine a dopamine agonist including but not limited to sumatriptan almotriptan naratriptan frovatriptan rizatriptan zomitriptan cabergoline amantadine lisuride pergolide ropinirole pramipexole and bromocriptine an anti insomnia drug including but not limited to alprazolam Xanax chlordiazepoxide Librium Limbitrol clorazepate Tranxene estazolam ProSom flurazepam Dalmane hydroxyzine Atarax lorazepam Ativan pentobarbital Nembutal quazepam Doral secobarbital Seconal temazepam Restoril triazolam Halcion valium zaleplon Sonata zolpidem Ambien the benzodiazepine family of drugs azatadine astemizole brompheniramine carbinoxamine chlorpheniramine clemastine cyproheptadine dimenhydrinate diphenhydramine doxepin doxylamine ktotifen leocabastine meclizine mepramine manserin promethazine tipelennamine triprolidine acrivastine cetrizine desloratadine fexofenadine and loratidine an anti manic drug including but not limited to divalproex Depakote lithium carbonate Eskalith and lithium citrate an anti phobia drug including but not limited to D cycloserine and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof.

In some embodiments the pharmaceutical compositions described herein are used to treat disorders disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 759 561 filed on Jan. 15 2004 by Weiner et al. and entitled SELECTIVE SEROTONIN 2A 2C RECEPTOR INVERSE AGONISTS AS THERAPEUTICS FOR NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in its entirety including any drawings.

It is understood by those of skill in the art that the compounds disclosed herein may be present as the compounds themselves or as pharmaceutically acceptable salts esters amides or prodrugs thereof all of which are contemplated by the present invention.

The term pharmaceutically acceptable salt refers to a formulation of a compound that does not cause significant irritation to an organism to which it is administered and does not abrogate the biological activity and properties of the compound. Pharmaceutical salts can be obtained by reacting a compound of the invention with inorganic acids such as hydrochloric acid hydrobromic acid sulfuric acid nitric acid phosphoric acid methanesulfonic acid ethanesulfonic acid p toluenesulfonic acid salicylic acid and the like. Pharmaceutical salts can also be obtained by reacting a compound of the invention with a base to form a salt such as an ammonium salt an alkali metal salt such as a sodium or a potassium salt an alkaline earth metal salt such as a calcium or a magnesium salt a salt of organic bases such as dicyclohexylamine N methyl D glucamine tris hydroxymethyl methylamine and salts with amino acids such as arginine lysine and the like.

The term ester refers to a chemical moiety with formula R COOR where R and R are independently selected from the group consisting of alkyl cycloalkyl aryl heteroaryl bonded through a ring carbon and heteroalicyclic bonded through a ring carbon and where n is 0 or 1.

An amide is a chemical moiety with formula R C O NHR or R NHC O R where R and R are independently selected from the group consisting of alkyl cycloalkyl aryl heteroaryl bonded through a ring carbon and heteroalicyclic bonded through a ring carbon and where n is 0 or 1. An amide may be an amino acid or a peptide molecule attached to a molecule of the present invention thereby forming a prodrug.

Any amine hydroxy or carboxyl side chain on any of the compounds disclosed herein can be esterified or amidified. The procedures and specific groups to be used to achieve this end are known to those of skill in the art and can readily be found in reference sources such as Greene and Wuts Protective Groups in Organic Synthesis 3Ed. John Wiley Sons New York N.Y. 1999 which is incorporated herein in its entirety.

A prodrug refers to an agent that is converted into the parent drug in vivo. Prodrugs are often useful because in some situations they may be easier to administer than the parent drug. They may for instance be bioavailable by oral administration whereas the parent is not. The prodrug may also have improved solubility in pharmaceutical compositions over the parent drug. An example without limitation of a prodrug would be a compound of the present invention which is administered as an ester the prodrug to facilitate transmittal across a cell membrane where water solubility is detrimental to mobility but which then is metabolically hydrolyzed to the carboxylic acid the active entity once inside the cell where water solubility is beneficial. A further example of a prodrug might be a short peptide polyaminoacid bonded to an acid group where the peptide is metabolized to reveal the active moiety.

In some embodiments the pharmaceutical composition described herein further comprises a physiologically acceptable carrier diluent or excipient or a combination thereof.

The term pharmaceutical composition refers to a mixture of a compound of the invention with other chemical components such as diluents or carriers. The pharmaceutical composition facilitates administration of the compound to an organism. Multiple techniques of administering a compound exist in the art including but not limited to oral injection aerosol parenteral and topical administration. Pharmaceutical compositions can also be obtained by reacting compounds with inorganic or organic acids such as hydrochloric acid hydrobromic acid sulfuric acid nitric acid phosphoric acid methanesulfonic acid ethanesulfonic acid p toluenesulfonic acid salicylic acid and the like.

The term carrier defines a chemical compound that facilitates the incorporation of a compound into cells or tissues. For example dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO is a commonly utilized carrier as it facilitates the uptake of many organic compounds into the cells or tissues of an organism.

The term diluent defines chemical compounds diluted in water that will dissolve the compound of interest as well as stabilize the biologically active form of the compound. Salts dissolved in buffered solutions are utilized as diluents in the art. One commonly used buffered solution is phosphate buffered saline because it mimics the salt conditions of human blood. Since buffer salts can control the pH of a solution at low concentrations a buffered diluent rarely modifies the biological activity of a compound.

The term physiologically acceptable defines a carrier or diluent that does not abrogate the biological activity and properties of the compound.

The pharmaceutical compositions described herein can be administered to a human patient per se or in pharmaceutical compositions where they are mixed with other active ingredients as in combination therapy or suitable carriers or excipient s . Techniques for formulation and administration of the compounds of the instant application may be found in Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences Mack Publishing Co. Easton Pa. 18th edition 1990.

Suitable routes of administration may for example include oral rectal transmucosal or intestinal administration parenteral delivery including intramuscular subcutaneous intravenous intramedullary injections as well as intrathecal direct intraventricular intraperitoneal intranasal or intraocular injections.

Alternately one may administer the compound in a local rather than systemic manner for example via injection of the compound directly in the renal or cardiac area often in a depot or sustained release formulation. Furthermore one may administer the drug in a targeted drug delivery system for example in a liposome coated with a tissue specific antibody. The liposomes will be targeted to and taken up selectively by the organ.

The pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention may be manufactured in a manner that is itself known e.g. by means of conventional mixing dissolving granulating dragee making levigating emulsifying encapsulating entrapping or tabletting processes.

Pharmaceutical compositions for use in accordance with the present invention thus may be formulated in conventional manner using one or more physiologically acceptable carriers comprising excipients and auxiliaries which facilitate processing of the active compounds into preparations which can be used pharmaceutically. Proper formulation is dependent upon the route of administration chosen. Any of the well known techniques carriers and excipients may be used as suitable and as understood in the art e.g. in Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences above.

For injection the agents of the invention may be formulated in aqueous solutions preferably in physiologically compatible buffers such as Hanks s solution Ringer s solution or physiological saline buffer. For transmucosal administration penetrants appropriate to the barrier to be permeated are used in the formulation. Such penetrants are generally known in the art.

For oral administration the compounds can be formulated readily by combining the active compounds with pharmaceutically acceptable carriers well known in the art. Such carriers enable the compounds of the invention to be formulated as tablets pills dragees capsules liquids gels syrups slurries suspensions and the like for oral ingestion by a patient to be treated. Pharmaceutical preparations for oral use can be obtained by mixing one or more solid excipient with pharmaceutical combination of the invention optionally grinding the resulting mixture and processing the mixture of granules after adding suitable auxiliaries if desired to obtain tablets or dragee cores. Suitable excipients are in particular fillers such as sugars including lactose sucrose mannitol or sorbitol cellulose preparations such as for example maize starch wheat starch rice starch potato starch gelatin gum tragacanth methyl cellulose hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose sodium carboxymethylcellulose and or polyvinylpyrrolidone PVP . If desired disintegrating agents may be added such as the cross linked polyvinyl pyrrolidone agar or alginic acid or a salt thereof such as sodium alginate.

Dragee cores are provided with suitable coatings. For this purpose concentrated sugar solutions may be used which may optionally contain gum arabic talc polyvinyl pyrrolidone carbopol gel polyethylene glycol and or titanium dioxide lacquer solutions and suitable organic solvents or solvent mixtures. Dyestuffs or pigments may be added to the tablets or dragee coatings for identification or to characterize different combinations of active compound doses.

Pharmaceutical preparations which can be used orally include push fit capsules made of gelatin as well as soft sealed capsules made of gelatin and a plasticizer such as glycerol or sorbitol. The push fit capsules can contain the active ingredients in admixture with filler such as lactose binders such as starches and or lubricants such as talc or magnesium stearate and optionally stabilizers. In soft capsules the active compounds may be dissolved or suspended in suitable liquids such as fatty oils liquid paraffin or liquid polyethylene glycols. In addition stabilizers may be added. All formulations for oral administration should be in dosages suitable for such administration.

For buccal administration the compositions may take the form of tablets or lozenges formulated in conventional manner.

For administration by inhalation the compounds for use according to the present invention are conveniently delivered in the form of an aerosol spray presentation from pressurized packs or a nebulizer with the use of a suitable propellant e.g. dichlorodifluoromethane trichlorofluoromethane dichlorotetrafluoroethane carbon dioxide or other suitable gas. In the case of a pressurized aerosol the dosage unit may be determined by providing a valve to deliver a metered amount. Capsules and cartridges of e.g. gelatin for use in an inhaler or insufflator may be formulated containing a powder mix of the compound and a suitable powder base such as lactose or starch.

The compounds may be formulated for parenteral administration by injection e.g. by bolus injection or continuous infusion. Formulations for injection may be presented in unit dosage form e.g. in ampoules or in multi dose containers with an added preservative. The compositions may take such forms as suspensions solutions or emulsions in oily or aqueous vehicles and may contain formulatory agents such as suspending stabilizing and or dispersing agents.

Pharmaceutical formulations for parenteral administration include aqueous solutions of the active compounds in water soluble form. Additionally suspensions of the active compounds may be prepared as appropriate oily injection suspensions. Suitable lipophilic solvents or vehicles include fatty oils such as sesame oil or synthetic fatty acid esters such as ethyl oleate or triglycerides or liposomes. Aqueous injection suspensions may contain substances which increase the viscosity of the suspension such as sodium carboxymethyl cellulose sorbitol or dextran. Optionally the suspension may also contain suitable stabilizers or agents which increase the solubility of the compounds to allow for the preparation of highly concentrated solutions.

Alternatively the active ingredient may be in powder form for constitution with a suitable vehicle e.g. sterile pyrogen free water before use.

The compounds may also be formulated in rectal compositions such as suppositories or retention enemas e.g. containing conventional suppository bases such as cocoa butter or other glycerides.

In addition to the formulations described previously the compounds may also be formulated as a depot preparation. Such long acting formulations may be administered by implantation for example subcutaneously or intramuscularly or by intramuscular injection. Thus for example the compounds may be formulated with suitable polymeric or hydrophobic materials for example as an emulsion in an acceptable oil or ion exchange resins or as sparingly soluble derivatives for example as a sparingly soluble salt.

A pharmaceutical carrier for the hydrophobic compounds of the invention is a cosolvent system comprising benzyl alcohol a nonpolar surfactant a water miscible organic polymer and an aqueous phase. A common cosolvent system used is the VPD co solvent system which is a solution of 3 w v benzyl alcohol 8 w v of the nonpolar surfactant Polysorbate 80 and 65 w v polyethylene glycol 300 made up to volume in absolute ethanol. Naturally the proportions of a co solvent system may be varied considerably without destroying its solubility and toxicity characteristics. Furthermore the identity of the co solvent components may be varied for example other low toxicity nonpolar surfactants may be used instead of POLYSORBATE 80 the fraction size of polyethylene glycol may be varied other biocompatible polymers may replace polyethylene glycol e.g. polyvinyl pyrrolidone and other sugars or polysaccharides may substitute for dextrose.

Alternatively other delivery systems for hydrophobic pharmaceutical compounds may be employed. Liposomes and emulsions are well known examples of delivery vehicles or carriers for hydrophobic drugs. Certain organic solvents such as dimethylsulfoxide also may be employed although usually at the cost of greater toxicity. Additionally the compounds may be delivered using a sustained release system such as semipermeable matrices of solid hydrophobic polymers containing the therapeutic agent. Various sustained release materials have been established and are well known by those skilled in the art. Sustained release capsules may depending on their chemical nature release the compounds for a few weeks up to over 100 days. Depending on the chemical nature and the biological stability of the therapeutic reagent additional strategies for protein stabilization may be employed.

Many of the compounds used in the pharmaceutical combinations of the invention may be provided as salts with pharmaceutically compatible counterions. Pharmaceutically compatible salts may be formed with many acids including but not limited to hydrochloric sulfuric acetic lactic tartaric malic succinic etc. Salts tend to be more soluble in aqueous or other protonic solvents than are the corresponding free acid or base forms.

Pharmaceutical compositions suitable for use in the present invention include compositions where the active ingredients are contained in an amount effective to achieve its intended purpose. More specifically a therapeutically effective amount means an amount of compound effective to prevent alleviate or ameliorate symptoms of disease or prolong the survival of the subject being treated. Determination of a therapeutically effective amount is well within the capability of those skilled in the art especially in light of the detailed disclosure provided herein.

The exact formulation route of administration and dosage for the pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention can be chosen by the individual physician in view of the patient s condition. See e.g. Fingl et al. 1975 in The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics Ch. 1 p. 1 . Typically the dose range of the composition administered to the patient can be from about 0.5 to 1000 mg kg of the patient s body weight. The dosage may be a single one or a series of two or more given in the course of one or more days as is needed by the patient. Note that for almost all of the specific compounds mentioned in the present disclosure human dosages for treatment of at least some condition have been established. Thus in most instances the present invention will use those same dosages or dosages that are between about 0.1 and 500 more preferably between about 25 and 250 of the established human dosage. Where no human dosage is established as will be the case for newly discovered pharmaceutical compounds a suitable human dosage can be inferred from EDor IDvalues or other appropriate values derived from in vitro or in vivo studies as qualified by toxicity studies and efficacy studies in animals.

Although the exact dosage will be determined on a drug by drug basis in most cases some generalizations regarding the dosage can be made. The daily dosage regimen for an adult human patient may be for example an oral dose of between 0.1 mg and 500 mg of each ingredient preferably between 1 mg and 250 mg e.g. 5 to 200 mg or an intravenous subcutaneous or intramuscular dose of each ingredient between 0.01 mg and 100 mg preferably between 0.1 mg and 60 mg e.g. 1 to 40 mg of each ingredient of the pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt thereof calculated as the free base the composition being administered 1 to 4 times per day. Alternatively the compositions of the invention may be administered by continuous intravenous infusion preferably at a dose of each ingredient up to 400 mg per day. Thus the total daily dosage by oral administration of each ingredient will typically be in the range 1 to 2000 mg and the total daily dosage by parenteral administration will typically be in the range 0.1 to 400 mg. Suitably the compounds will be administered for a period of continuous therapy for example for a week or more or for months or years.

Dosage amount and interval may be adjusted individually to provide plasma levels of the active moiety which are sufficient to maintain the modulating effects or minimal effective concentration MEC . The MEC will vary for each compound but can be estimated from in vitro data. Dosages necessary to achieve the MEC will depend on individual characteristics and route of administration. However HPLC assays or bioassays can be used to determine plasma concentrations.

Dosage intervals can also be determined using MEC value. Compositions should be administered using a regimen which maintains plasma levels above the MEC for 10 90 of the time preferably between 30 90 and most preferably between 50 90 .

In cases of local administration or selective uptake the effective local concentration of the drug may not be related to plasma concentration.

The amount of composition administered will of course be dependent on the subject being treated on the subject s weight the severity of the affliction the manner of administration and the judgment of the prescribing physician.

The compositions may if desired be presented in a pack or dispenser device which may contain one or more unit dosage forms containing the active ingredient. The pack may for example comprise metal or plastic foil such as a blister pack. The pack or dispenser device may be accompanied by instructions for administration. The pack or dispenser may also be accompanied with a notice associated with the container in form prescribed by a governmental agency regulating the manufacture use or sale of pharmaceuticals which notice is reflective of approval by the agency of the form of the drug for human or veterinary administration. Such notice for example may be the labeling approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for prescription drugs or the approved product insert. Compositions comprising a compound of the invention formulated in a compatible pharmaceutical carrier may also be prepared placed in an appropriate container and labeled for treatment of an indicated condition.

