---

title: System and method for monitoring environmental conditions
abstract: A monitoring system and method for detecting environmental conditions is provided, the monitoring system including a sensing unit including a plurality of sensors for obtaining data related to environmental conditions, a controller interfaced with the sensing unit for receiving and encoding the data related to environmental conditions into a predetermined format using a base64 encoding scheme, and a communication device for receiving the data in the predetermined format from the controller, forming an e-mail message (which can be further encoded) including instructions on how to decode the email message and transmitting the e-mail message including the data in the predetermined format to at least one predetermined recipient.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07916015&OS=07916015&RS=07916015
owner: The Johns Hopkins University
number: 07916015
owner_city: Baltimore
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050325
---
This application claims the benefit of prior filed U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 556 392 filed Mar. 25 2004 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

This invention was made with Government support under Contract No. N00024 03 D 6606 awarded by the Naval Sea Systems Command NAVSEA . The Government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates generally to a system and method for monitoring various environmental conditions.

Under the current heightened level of alert due to the serious threat of terrorist attack against the United States various govemmental and private security agencies now employ systems and devices to monitor the environment for the presence of hazardous chemicals biological agents and radioactive substances. Because such systems and devices must be very sensitive to the presence of these agents false alarms can be a common occurrence. Moreover because these hazardous agents may be widely dispersed many sensing devices are necessary to provide the required coverage. Additionally conventional sensors and systems for detecting these agents can be prohibitively expensive.

False alarms can create an uncertain situation for hazardous materials HAZMAT operators thus inhibiting their performance and their decision making processes. Accordingly a significant need exists to reduce the number of false alarms that typically occur when using a single technology to detect the presence of chemical warfare agents CWA s .

Wireless technologies have become more and more popular recently. For example wireless Internet and cell phones have already taken a huge portion of the market share away from wired Internet and telephone lines. As people are more open to wireless technologies because of increased convenience and information security companies introduce novel wireless technologies and specific areas of applications. One of the most popular wireless technologies presently in use is the Blackberry hereinafter Blackberry manufactured by Research in Motion Limited RIM Ontario Canada. The Blackberry supports a variety of functions that are popular among professionals such as e mail cell phone browser and organizer. Moreover as the Blackberry uses existing cellular communication networks for communication it has a vast area of service capability.

Blackberry is an end to end wireless connectivity option. The Blackberry is unique because it is a single integrated device which allows users to easily send e mails. Additionally unlike the traditional way of connecting to an e mail server to check emails the Blackberry s push technology will automatically direct e mails to the user s Blackberry device and notify the user when a message is received.

Blackberry devices support a wide range of networks. For example in the United States Blackberry supports CDMA2000 1X Networks DataTAC Networks Global System for Mobile communications General Packet Radio Service GSM GPRS Networks Mike Networks Mobitex and Nextel Networks. Outside the United States the Blackberry operates on more than 50 networks in more than 30 countries.

The Blackberry is not only a convenient device for individual users it also provides a mobile communication solution for corporations and government organizations. The Blackberry is especially useful for transmitting time sensitive data and information. For example out of office salesmen can receive customer information immediately rather than go back to the office and check e mail.

A block diagram illustrating conventional Blackberry architecture is shown in . The Blackberry communication system includes a Blackberry wireless handheld device which communicates with a wireless network . The wireless network is connected to a corporate firewall . The corporate firewall is connected to a Blackberry enterprise server . The Blackberry enterprise server is then connected to a corporate e mail server and to a corporate application and content servers . Thus it is seen that the Blackberry is popular because of its vast range of service its convenience low cost and its capabilities. Moreover the Blackberry is also government issue communication device for many government agencies.

Accordingly under current conditions where there is a threat of terrorism using biological chemical nuclear and or other agents against the United States and other countries agent detection equipment and methods using the Blackberry and Blackberry type devices for communication may provide a low cost scalable accurate and easy to implement solution for identifying dangerous agents and reporting the results to one or more recipients and for allowing the control of mitigating and warning devices.

It is therefore a feature of the present invention to provide a system and method for monitoring various environmental conditions and for transmitting coded information about those conditions and for controlling devices to respond to those conditions using a communication device such as for example a Blackberry or Blackberry type communication device.

It is another feature of the present invention to provide a small sized low power low cost environmental monitoring control system which uses a communication device e.g. a Blackberry 950 communication device that is compatible with wireless e mail systems and extensible to controlling environmental control systems e.g. in buildings and other locations and that can be made secure using multiple encryption schemes to the text of e mails.

It is a further feature of the present invention to provide an environmental monitoring control system which uses base64 encoding of data for transmission by a communication device e.g. a Blackberry which spoofs the communication device so that the communication device determines that a data file such as for example a JPEG picture file is a standard text e mail. This process uses the communication device as a data pipe to exfiltrate data.

It is another feature of the present invention to use a Blackberry communication device to exfiltrate data thereby standardizing the communication and processing interfaces.

It is yet another feature of the present invention to provide a mobile monitoring system and method for detecting environmental conditions the mobile monitoring system and method including a sensing unit having a sensing unit for obtaining data related to environmental conditions the sensing unit including at least one radiation sensor and at least one of an electro optical EO imager and a plurality of orthogonal chemical sensors for acquiring a similar data product using dissimilar means a controller interfaced with the sensing unit for receiving and encoding the data related to environmental conditions into a predetermined format and a communication device for receiving the data in a predetermined format from the controller forming an e mail message and transmitting the e mail message including the data in a predetermined format to at least one predetermined recipient. The mobile monitoring system and method further includes a receiver for receiving e mails containing queries instructions and or commands from a control station and or a user and transmitting the received e mails to the controller for further processing.

It is still yet a further feature of the present invention to provide at least one sensing unit having a plurality of sensors including a chemical sensor a biological sensor a radiation sensor and or an imager for detecting powders explosives nerve agents e.g. VX gas sarin etc. blister agents e.g. mustard gas chemical agents biological agents e.g. anthrax radioactive elements and or images e.g. photographic images . It is a further object of the present invention to provide at least one air pump activated by a controller the air pump being used for moving air through both a manifold and a sorbent tube the manifold being interfaced with at least one or more sensors for providing air flow to the sensors with which the manifold is attached. In alternative embodiments two air pumps are provided each air pump being interfaced with the manifold for providing air flow to at least one of the sensors.

It is yet another feature of the present invention to provide at least two sensors which are orthogonal to each other and the outputs of the sensors are weighted so as to minimize false alerts.

It is another feature of the present invention to provide an EO imager including a visible light imager an infra red IR imager a ultra violet UV imager and or an X ray imager.

It is still yet a further feature of the present invention to implement a base64 encoding scheme for encoding the data related to environmental conditions alerts actions triggers results of the processing of the data and or for providing images for transmission using ASCII data. It is a further feature of the present invention to provide information on decoding and assembling encoded data within the encoded data. It is yet another object of the present invention to provide a pearl script within an encoded e mail for providing recipients with the option to interact with the environmental monitoring control system of the present invention.

It is yet another feature of the present invention to provide a method for detecting environmental conditions using a wireless device the method including obtaining orthogonal data related to environmental conditions and encoding the data related to environmental conditions and or one or more images into a predetermined format using a base64 encoding scheme forming an e mail message having a subject line and a body the e mail message including the data related to environmental conditions and or images and transmitting the e mail message including the data in a predetermined format to at least one predetermined recipient. The e mail message further includes information on how to decode and assemble the encoded data. The method further includes the step of receiving at least one of a command and a query and providing the received command and or query to a controller for processing.

The following detailed description of the preferred embodiments of the present invention will be made with reference to the accompanying drawings. In describing the invention explanations about related functions or constructions which are known in the art will be omitted for the sake of clarity in understanding the concept of the invention.

A block diagram illustrating the basic configuration of a system for monitoring environmental conditions including a sensor ensemble SE according to a first embodiment of the present invention is shown in . The SE includes a sensor unit a microprocessor memory e.g. RAM ROM etc. a communication device e.g. a Blackberry or other equivalent unit for sending and receiving e mails and an antenna . The sensor unit includes a first chemical sensor a second chemical sensor a third chemical sensor and a fourth sensor . The sensors through are preferably orthogonal to each other as will be described hereinbelow . Moreover in preferred embodiments the sensors through can simultaneously detect and sample blood blister and nerve agents. The sensor unit communicates with the microprocessor and transmits data relating to the presence and or absence of various agents to the microprocessor. The microprocessor reads the data from the sensors and formats the data according to the content of the data and forwards the formatted data after base64 encoding which can include both raw and processed data to the communication device which assembles the formatted data into an e mail of a desired format e.g. including a one or more recipients a subject line and a body .

The subject line and the recipients are selected by the microprocessor according to predetermined conditions. For example if a triggering event meets or exceeds a predetermined threshold e.g. a threshold corresponding to a major event the recipients of an alerting e mail e.g. majors generals etc. can be chosen accordingly. On the other hand if a triggering event only meets or exceeds a minor threshold e.g. a threshold corresponding to a minor event such as a slight increase in background radiation which could be caused by an individual with implanted radioactive seeds to treat a cancerous condition then only local police officers guards would be alerted. The one or more e mails containing the data from the sensing unit are transmitted to desired recipients not shown via a serving base station not shown and a wired e mail server which transmits the e mail over normal protocols that govern Internet and other e mail. Users of this system can communicate with the communication device to query the status adjust the system s parameters and or request a service by sending a formatted e mail to the communication device . A microprocessor on the communication device then processes data contained in the received e mail and optionally controls the sensors and or optional relays. Alternatively after the e mail is initially processed by the communication device data contained in the received e mail is forwarded to the microprocessor which further processes the received data and responds accordingly e.g. by adjusting the sensors within sensor unit responding to system pings etc. . Formatted e mails are forwarded to the communication device via the Internet or other network a serving base station not shown and the antenna . The received messages are then processed and stored by either or both the communication device and the microprocessor and desired actions e.g. wireless transmission to a recipient are then taken as will be described below . For example a formatted e mail is transmitted from the transmit receive antenna to a control center or to one or more e mail servers not shown via its transmit receive antenna .

A block diagram illustrating the system for monitoring environmental conditions according to a second embodiment of the present invention is shown in . In this embodiment the SE comprises a communication device e.g. a Blackberry as shown which includes an integrated microprocessor P a plurality of orthogonal sensors a mux and an antenna . The SE operates similarly to the SE described above with a difference being the use of the Blackberry s internal microprocessor rather than the use of separate microprocessor e.g. microprocessor P as shown in to read data process and encode data and otherwise control the sensors as shown in the embodiment illustrated in . Another difference is the use of the mux for inputting outputting data and control commands to from sensors and the communication device . Accordingly for the sake of clarity no further description of the operation of the SE will be given.

A block diagram illustrating the system for monitoring environmental conditions according to a third embodiment of the present invention is shown in . This embodiment is similar to the first embodiment of the present invention in that an optional microcontroller is interfaced to a communication device via an RS 232 interface . This embodiment demonstrates exemplary interfaces which can be used to communicate between the various units of the present invention. The microcontroller interfaces with a radiation sensing unit via a custom transistor transistor logic TTL interface a chemical sensing unit via an RS 232 interface which can be the same as RS 232 and with an imager including e.g. a camera etc. as necessary via an Ethernet interface . Memory includes a RAM and ROM and interfaces with the microcontroller .

A block diagram illustrating the system for monitoring environmental conditions according to a fourth embodiment of the present invention is shown in . As shown the SE according to the present embodiment is split into three subsystems including an algorithms and communications subsystem AaC a sensors subsystem SS and an actions outputs AO subsystem . The SS includes a chemical sensor suite C a biological sensor suite B a radiation sensor suite R an imager e.g. a camera I and a sorbent tube S. The chemical sensor suite C the biological sensor suite B the radiation sensor suite R the sorbent tube S and the imager I can include one or more sensors or other means for detecting various agents as desired. The AaC subsystem includes a microcontroller memory e.g. RAM ROM Etc. a communication device e.g. a Blackberry device an analog to digital converter ADC a digital to analog converter DAC and a transistor to transistor TTL input output I O device . The microcontroller interfaces with the SS using a serial and or an Ethernet connection and the microcontroller interfaces with the communication device using a serial connection such as an RS 232 type connection. The memory provides initialization commands e.g. initialization strings etc. to the microcontroller and is also used to store data for later use. A manifold not shown interfaces with the sorbent tube S the chemical suite C and or the biological suite B so as to provide air flow to the respective suite. One or more optional pumps not shown are powered by the motor M which can include a plurality of motors .

In operation the AaC reads outputs from the SS and can optionally act upon the SS for example by calibrating the sensors turning the sensors on off etc. as desired in order to wrap or merge the data received from the SS into a meta datagram which is transmitted via the communication device i.e. the communication pipe . The communication device can communicate using traditional communication schemes including IEEE 802.11 Bluetooth Ethernet etc. as desired. The system can also accept commands and queries from the communication pipe by way of messages which are sent to the system from an external source e.g. a user a control center etc . The messages can be used to affect the subsystems SS AO and AaC and respectively. The SS interfaces with the AaC using various communication protocols including Serial e.g. RS 232 RS 422 Ethernet WiFi and Custom e.g. SPI direct sensing of the ADC etc. .

In operation the microcontroller manages the configuration control and flow of data and commands to from the SS . The microcontroller also runs algorithms and determines if the current sample meets certain requirements such as to trigger an alarm condition. Moreover if an alarm condition is detected then an e mail message can be generated and transmitted via the communication device . The communication device can optionally send a message to the microcontroller to affect the SS or other systems by for example changing system parameters. For example when the radiation sensor suite R is triggered the AaC reads the information it has received and determines whether the trigger meets a preset threshold e.g. radiation threshold . If the AaC determines that the trigger it has received meets or exceeds a preset threshold the AaC can then trigger the imager I to capture an image of an actor e.g. an individual a vehicle an object such as a container a rock etc. which caused radiation suite R to trigger and or trigger the relay R the motor M and or the indicators to control desired systems. For example if a radiation sensor in the radiation sensor suite R is triggered the microcontroller can configure an e mail to warn of the threat. Moreover the microcontroller can then send an image of the actor which caused the triggering event and trigger the motor M to stop start ventilation in a building and or to take environmental samples. Additionally the relay R can be triggered to open close doors and indicators can be triggered to warn individuals of possible danger etc. Moreover the microcontroller can activate the sorbent tube S if predetermined conditions are met or if activated by an external source e.g. the control center the user etc. .

The sensors in each suite e.g. the chemical sensor suite C the biological sensor suite B and or the radiation sensor suite R are preferably orthogonal to each other and or to other suites. Moreover in one embodiment there can be up to 256 suite packages of any combination .

The controller also can take an output from multiple orthogonal chemical sensors included in a chemical suite C and determine whether to trigger an alarm e.g. by sending an e mail . The algorithm used by the microcontroller allows for weighting of each sensor and thus can account for different sensitivities such as response time accuracy etc. to minimize false alarms. The system can also accept the input from an additional RS 232 Ethernet or custom user interface.

In a preferred embodiment the SS and the AO are configured for specific applications and the AaC can be common to all applications which can result in significant cost reduction and reduced system complexity.

A flow diagram illustrating the data flow process according to an embodiment of the present invention is shown in . In step a microcontroller initializes sensors . In step the microcontroller then prepares a Ready E mail for transmission by a communication device e.g. a Blackberry to desired recipients. The Ready E mail can include an SE identification the location of the SE the number and or types of sensors included in the SE etc. The communication device then transmits the Ready E mail. The microcontroller then reads the sensors data in step . In operation the microcontroller weighs the inputs from a plurality of sensors with at least two of the sensors being orthogonal to each other with for example the more sensitive sensors being given more weight. Additionally the microcontroller can affect the settings of one or more sensors in order to yield the best set of data. After the microcontroller reads and or processes the sensors data the results are formatted into one or more messages depending upon the content. For example ASCII data is formatted into a standard e mail message that contains the sensor data raw alerts actions triggers and or the processed results of the sensors data. The binary ASCII data is then base64 encoded and a message is generated that details how to decode and assemble the data. The base64 encoded data is then input into and transmitted by a communication device e.g. a Blackberry in step . Each sensor produces at its output a numerical value indicative of the level of whatever it is supposed to sense. The user of the system sets i a triggering point for each sensor e.g. a threshold value of the numerical value above which a positive indication is assumed and ii a duration or time period for which the threshold value is to be met or exceeded. If the output of the sensor exceeds the trigger point for the targeted duration then the trigger is considered valid and the pre program action is taken e.g. send an e mail to a predetermined email address sound an alarm give a visible indication and so on. If two orthogonal sensors which are sampling from the same input e.g. sensing the same thing give different and incompatible results e.g. one sensor indicates a first chemical while the other indicates a second different chemical then a warning message is generated and sent to the users e.g. transmitted from the SE to the predetermined e mail address. The users at this point can remotely command the system via e mail from the predetermined e mail address to the SE to take action. If two orthogonal sensors which have different sensitivities e.g. different thresholds give the same result e.g. indicate the same chemical but before the targeted duration expires the less sensitive sensor drops out e.g. does not meet its threshold the system will still trigger and report the condition. On the other hand if two orthogonal sensors which have different sensitivities give the same result e.g. both meet their thresholds indicating an alarm condition but before the targeted duration expires the more sensitive sensor drops out the system will consider this a false trigger.

In a reverse process the communication device e.g. a Blackberry receives a transmitted message and forwards the transmitted message to the microcontroller in step . The Microcontroller then processes the received transmitted message and one or more desired actions are taken e.g. sensors are turned on off reset parameters adjusted etc. as desired by sending appropriate commands to the sensors in step . In alternative embodiments data can be sent from the microcontroller to a desired recipient not shown using a General Packet Radio Service GPRS modem an Ethernet modem etc. Raw sensor data is then forwarded from the sensors to the microcontroller in step . The microcontroller then processes and encodes the raw sensor data as described above the binary ASCII data is then base64 encoded and a message is generated that details how to decode and assemble the data. The base64 encoded data is formed into a formatted sensor data e mail and forwarded to the communication device for transmission to a desired recipient in step .

A flowchart illustrating the process of collecting analyzing processing and transmitting data related to environmental conditions and receiving and processing according to an embodiment of the present invention is shown in . The system is started and initialized in steps and respectively. The system then proceeds to load system configurations and configure sensors in steps and respectively. The system includes a memory e.g. a RAM ROM FLASH etc. which maintains initialization routines etc. which are used at startup and during the initialization process. A suitable memory includes a memory which is integrated with the Blackberry. In step an optional initialization e mail with a unit identification and optional sensor type data e.g. the number and or type of sensors with which the unit is equipped is sent to a recipient e.g. a control center the user etc. by a communication device e.g. a Blackberry to inform the recipient that the unit is online. It should also be noted that in this embodiment it will be assumed all e mails are transmitted received using the Blackberry. The sensor data is then read by a microcontroller and processed in steps and respectively. In step a determination is made whether to fire a trigger based on the results of the sensor data and or the processing of the sensor data. The appropriate actions to take when firing a trigger can be determined using for example a table look up which contains predetermined thresholds and corresponding actions for alerting e.g. by sending an e mail message sampling and activating deactivating solenoids etc.

If it is determined that a trigger should be fired then step follows. Alternatively if a determination is made in step not to fire a trigger then step follows. In step a triggered action e.g. an appropriate action for the type of triggering event is performed and an appropriate e mail dependent upon the triggering event to desired recipients which can also be dependent upon the triggering event for example if a biological sensor is triggered the system can send an e mail message to an appropriate agency such as the Centers for Disease Control CDC is performed in step . In step the system determines when the last e mail was sent via the Blackberry and if it is determined that more than a preset amount of time in this example 24 hours has elapsed a status e mail is sent in step . Alternatively if 24 hours has not elapsed since the last e mail was sent in step a determination is made as to whether there is any incoming new e mail in step . If it is determined that there is an incoming new e mail the incoming new e mail is processed in step . Alternatively if it is determined in step that there is no new e mail sensor data is read in step .

A table illustrating exemplary rules for reporting detections by SE instruments is shown in . At the top of the table ion mobility spectrometer IMS technology surface acoustic wave SAW technology photoionization PID technology and Handheld Radiation Monitor HRM sensors and are shown. Depending upon the agent detected and the number of sensors detecting the one or more agents a predetermined action is taken. For example if Volatile Organic Compounds VOC and or PH Phosphine is detected by the PID technology sensor then after 20 seconds the SE sounds an alarm sends email including relevant data and starts sorbents tube not shown collection. Alternatively if an H agent is detected by only one of either the IMS technology sensor or the SAW technology sensor no action is taken. But if both the IMS technology sensor and the SAW technology sensor detect an H agent then an action is taken and the SE immediately sounds an alarm sends e mail and starts a sorbent pump not shown . By using orthogonal sensors i.e. a set of sensors that can acquire a similar data product e.g. to detect a similar or the same chemical agent etc. via dissimilar detection means e.g. using IMS and SAW technologies and weighing the results of each of the plurality of sensors the number of false alarms can be minimized.

The SE of the present invention can maintain an e mail distribution list for alarm notifications. The SE can then selectively e mail recipients and send e mails to one or more recipients depending upon the type of triggering event. For example if a radiation sensor triggers the SE then the SE can send an e mail to a nuclear response team and to other pre determined recipients. Additionally the SE can vary the repetition rate of e mails and can send e mails based on the level that sensors report. For example if the SE detects low level radiation the SE would report it to municipal authorities but if the SE detects extremely high levels of radiation then the SE would send the warning to a special response team. Additionally depending upon the e mail created the SE can select different e mail bodies.

For example to change the communication device s e mail distribution list for alarm notifications then a user would send the following e mail to a SE 

The communication device can also reply to correctly received e mails and reply to the sender a confirmation.

Another advantage of the present invention is that a user e.g. the control station etc. can ping the communication device. When pinged via e mail the communication device can reply using an e mail with the following subject and message body. Subject Ping Response Message body I m alive. 

The e mails sent to recipients by the communication device preferably include a script such as a pearl script which would enable the user to respond to the e mail and or effect changes to control the SE without having to open other editors know a programming language etc. For example an e mail including the following subject and body Subject Change Address List Body password xxx yyy.zzzxxx1 yyy.zzz . . . would enable the recipient to easily change the address of recipients on an e mail list by providing a password and the e mail addresses of one or more desired recipients and returning the e mail to the sender. This would allow cross platform functionality.

A perspective view illustration of a sensor ensemble SE unit according to an embodiment of the present invention is shown in . The SE includes an HRM for detecting radiation an optional liquid crystal display LCD display screen a sorbent pump for pumping gases a Blackberry for processing and receiving transmitting e mails etc. an optional cooling fan for cooling the system a battery or other suitable power supply control electronics which are designed such that the unit operates as described in this document a spare sorbent tube holder a primary sorbent tube holder a multiRae a light weight chemical detector and a HAZMAT CAD . The multirae is preferably a MultiRae Plus Photoionlonization detector PID by RAE Systems Sunnyvale Calif. The light weight chemical detector preferably is preferably an LCD3 by Smiths Detection Pine Brook N.J. which includes an Ion Mobility Spectrometer IMS and can simultaneously detect identify and or differentiate between different types of chemical warfare agents at below attack concentrations. The Hazmat CAD sensor is preferably a HAZMAT CAD plus SAW sensor manufactured by Arrow Tech Inc. Rolla N. Dak. which can detect and classify both chemical warfare and toxic industrial chemical agents.

A block diagram illustrating a stackable configuration of the present invention is shown in . A plurality of SEs SE SE communicate with one or more control centers and or e mail servers and a plurality of users . Although the control centers shown do not have to be integrated with the e mail servers for the sake of clarity they have been combined.

It is envisioned that many components for realizing the present invention are commercial off the shelf COTS units and therefore are readily available at low cost. The Blackberry used throughout the present invention is a for example Blackberry 950 model manufactured by Research In Motion RIM .

While the present invention has been described in detail according to an environmental monitoring system the present invention can also be used for controlling conditions at selected sites. Moreover the present invention can be used for command and control of various systems e.g. such as heating ventilation and air conditioning HVAC and other building systems. Furthermore the present invention can be used for authentication of environmental threats.

While the above description contains many specifics these specifics should not be construed as limitations of the invention but merely as exemplifications of preferred embodiments thereof. Those skilled in the art will envision many other embodiments within the scope and spirit of the invention as defined by the claims appended hereto.

