---

title: Apparatus and methods for determining voice and/or data processing performance of a wireless device
abstract: Apparatus, methods, processors and computer readable media for determining the voice and/or data processing performance or capability of a wireless device. Embodiments include a wireless device having a computer platform with a processing engine operable to generate a plurality of performance data during voice and/or data processing activities on the wireless device. The wireless device further includes a voice/data performance module operable to collect selected ones of the plurality of performance data associated with a predetermined voice and/or data processing capability of the wireless device. The embodiments may also include an apparatus operable to receive the collected performance data and to generate a performance report characterizing a voice and/or data processing performance or capability of the wireless device.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08023937&OS=08023937&RS=08023937
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 08023937
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051014
---
The present Application for Patent claims priority to Provisional Application No. 60 665 293 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Collecting And Reporting Performance Parameters For A Wireless Device filed Mar. 25 2005 and to Provisional Application No. 60 658 983 entitled Method And System For Performing A Test On A Wireless Device filed Mar. 4 2005 both assigned to the assignee hereof and both hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein.

The described embodiments generally relate to wireless communications devices and computer networks. More particularly the described embodiments relate to apparatus and methods for determining voice and or data processing performance of a wireless device along with the collection reporting and analysis of voice data processing related data from the wireless device.

Wireless networking connects one or more wireless devices to other computer devices without a direct electrical connection such as a copper wire or optical cable. Wireless devices communicate data typically in the form of packets across a wireless or partially wireless computer network and open a data or communication channel on the network such that the device can send and receive data packets. The wireless devices often have wireless device resources such as programs and hardware components which individually and cooperatively operate to use and generate data in accordance to their design and specific protocol or configuration such as using open communication connections to transmit and receive data on the network. In order for the wireless devices to operate efficiently and optimally either alone or on the wireless networks it would be useful for the data associated with the device its operation and applications to be collected and reported i.e. voice and or data performance measurement. The set up or configuration of these devices typically includes installing or adjusting various hardware software and or firmware and other associated parameters on the wireless device. Further the set up or configuration is typically analyzed by running the voice and or data performance tests on the wireless device to measure the performance and or operability of the wireless device on the wireless network. Each type of wireless device may have its own device specific set up and each wireless network and or carrier may also have their network specific and or carrier specific set ups. Thus the initial set up and configuration of a wireless device for operation on a given wireless network is typically very complicated and time consuming. However once the device is in operation i.e. in use by the commercial private owner the actual performance data such as set up time throughput etc. is largely unknown to the network carrier regarding that specific device.

Another complicating factor in understanding and tracking of device performance measurement is that typically external testing devices are required. For example in a wireless device such as a cellular phone various analyzers are serially connected to the phone and input and or measure various parameters. In order to maximize throughput such testing is typically performed in a batch mode on a plurality of wireless devices resulting in a confusing mass of external testing devices cables and wireless devices. Further typically such measurements involve mobile testing such as driving the cellular phone around a predetermined area to test its receive and transmit capabilities in varying environmental conditions. For example with a cellular phone these tests involve an exchange of messaging communications between a base station and the cellular phone. These mobile pre operation measurements can be very inefficient and may only occur in a testing mode prior to device operation in actual use. Further the external cabling and testing devices may have electromagnetic interactions with the transmit and receive functions of the wireless device thereby producing inaccurate results.

Accordingly it would be advantageous to provide an apparatus and method that allows for efficient comprehensive collection and reporting of wireless device voice and or data processing performance.

The described embodiments comprise apparatus methods processors and computer readable media for voice and or data processing performance measurement collection and reporting on a wireless device.

In one embodiment for example an apparatus for determining at least one of a voice processing and data processing performance of a wireless device comprises a performance module operable to generate and transmit a data collection configuration executable by a wireless device. The data collection configuration defines types of performance data to retrieve from a computer platform of the wireless device. Further at least one of a voice processing characteristic and a data processing characteristic of the wireless device is definable based on the performance data. The apparatus also comprises a data repository operable to receive and store the performance data collected from the computer platform of the wireless device.

In another embodiment an apparatus for determining at least one of voice processing performance and data processing performance of a wireless device comprises a generator means for generating and transmitting a data collection configuration across a wireless network to a wireless device. The data collection configuration defines types of performance data to retrieve from a computer platform of the wireless device. Further at least one of a voice processing characteristic and a data processing characteristic of the wireless device is definable based on the performance data. The apparatus also comprises a storing means for receiving and storing the performance data collected from the computer platform of the wireless device. Additionally the apparatus comprises an analysis means for analyzing the collected performance data and generating a performance report having at least one voice processing characteristic or at least one data processing characteristic of the wireless device based on the collected performance data.

In yet another embodiment a wireless device comprises a computer platform having a processing engine operable to generate a plurality of performance data during at least one of voice processing and data processing activities on the wireless device. The wireless device also comprises a performance module operable to collect selected ones of the plurality of performance data associated with at least one of a predetermined voice processing capability and a data processing capability of the wireless device wherein the selected ones of the plurality of performance data are based on a received data collection configuration.

In a further embodiment a wireless device comprises a processing means for generating a plurality of performance data during at least one of voice processing and data processing activities on the wireless device. The wireless device also comprises a means for collecting selected ones of the plurality of performance data associated with at least one of a predetermined voice processing capability and a data processing capability of the wireless device. The selected ones of the plurality of performance data are based on a data collection configuration received from across a wireless network. Further the wireless device comprises a means for selectively transmitting the collected selected ones of the plurality of performance data across the wireless network

In still another embodiment a method of determining at least one of a voice processing performance and a data processing performance of a wireless device comprises receiving performance data from across a wireless network where the received performance data are based on a predetermined data collection configuration and further based on an operation of the wireless device. The method further comprises analyzing the collected performance data to determine at least one of a voice processing characteristic and a data processing characteristic of the wireless device.

A further embodiment includes a computer program resident in a computer readable medium that when executed directs a computer device to perform the actions of determining a data collection configuration which comprises selecting one performance data from a plurality of performance data associated with a processing engine on a computer platform of the wireless device and dictating to the wireless device when to collect the selected performance data and when to transmit the collected performance data across the wireless network The computer program further directs the computer device to perform the action of transmitting the data collection configuration to the wireless from across the wireless network. Further included is the action of receiving performance data from the operation of the wireless device from across the wireless network where the received performance data are based on the data collection configuration. Additionally the computer program further directs the computer device to perform the action of analyzing the collected performance data to determine at least one of a voice processing characteristic and a data processing characteristic of the wireless device. Similarly in another embodiment at least one processor is configured to perform the above stated actions.

In another embodiment a method of determining at least one of a voice processing performance and a data processing performance of a wireless device comprises collecting predetermined ones of a plurality of performance data from a processing engine of the wireless device based on a data collection configuration. The predetermined performance data are associated with at least one of a voice processing characteristic and a data processing characteristic of the wireless device. The method further comprises selectively transmitting the collected performance data across a wireless network.

In a further embodiment a computer program is resident in a computer readable medium that when executed directs a wireless device to perform the actions of receiving a data collection configuration from across a wireless network. The data collection configuration identifies at least one of a plurality of performance data to collect from a processing engine of the wireless device where the identified performance data are associated with at least one of a predetermined voice processing characteristic and a data processing characteristic of the wireless device. Further the computer program directs the wireless device to perform the actions of collecting the identified performance data based on the received data collection configuration and selectively transmitting the collected performance data across the wireless network. Similarly in another embodiment at least one processor is configured to perform the above stated actions.

Additional aspects and advantages of the disclosed embodiments are set forth in part in the description which follows and in part are obvious from the description or may be learned by practice of the disclosed embodiments. The aspects and advantages of the disclosed embodiments may also be realized and attained by the means of the instrumentalities and combinations particularly pointed out in the appended claims.

Referring to one embodiment of a system for collecting processing related data and analyzing the voice and or data processing capabilities of any one of a plurality of wireless devices in communication with a wireless network includes a resident voice data performance module on each device. Each resident voice data performance module is operable according to a collection configuration defined by a remotely located collection module to collect and transmit selected ones of a plurality of types of performance data across a wireless network to a user manager server . For example collection module dictates what types of performance data to collect and when to gather the data along with when to upload the actual collected performance data to user manager . Further collection module may dictate one of a plurality of predetermined tests to perform on the respective wireless device in order to generate the predetermined performance data . User manager stores the transmitted performance data in a data repository which is accessible by an analysis engine . Analysis engine examines the collected performance data and generates a performance report which characterizes the actual voice and or data processing characteristics associated with the respective device based on the collected performance data . For example the analysis performed by analysis engine may compare select portions of performance data with select portions of a predetermined voice and or data processing standard to determine whether or not the performance data falls within the standards. Further after performing an initial analysis on an initial set of performance data analysis engine may initiate further communications through collection module with one or more wireless devices to retrieve additional data related to performance data and or to retrieve more performance data based on a new collection configuration based on the analysis in order to provide further analysis and reporting. Analysis engine may repeat such a feedback loop until a predetermined solution is achieved i.e. until a set number of tests are run and the results confirmed. Optionally user manager may include an optimization module that analyzes each respective performance report for example by applying an optimization algorithm and generates new device network processing configuration settings for a respective wireless device or for a network component to improve the voice and or data processing capability of interest. User manager may then transfer the updated device network processing configuration settings to the respective wireless device and or network component in order to improve the voice and or data processing performance capabilities associated with system . Thus the present apparatus and methods provide for the collection analysis and reporting of predetermined performance data associated with the voice and or data processing capabilities of a wireless device and allow for troubleshooting and optimization of voice and or data processing related device configurations in order to improve the voice and or data processing capabilities of the respective wireless device.

Performance data can include any type of data associated with a voice and or data processing activity on a wireless device . Performance data includes but is not limited to information on the applications that make the voice and or data calls application level protocol data and statistics e.g. File Transfer Protocol hereinafter FTP data browser protocol data transmission control protocol TCP data Internet protocol IP data hypertext transfer protocol HTTP data user datagram protocol UDP data Internet Control Message Protocol ICMP data etc. data link layer protocol data and statistics such as Point to Point Protocol PPP information Radio Link Protocol hereinafter RLP level statistics instant messaging protocol statistics and information such as real time protocol RTP radio frequency RF information other information relating to troubleshooting and utilities such as a ping utility and other data and information discussed below in more detail.

Voice data performance module may be initiated at any time and performance data may be stored on the respective wireless device and obtained at any time via a wired or wireless connection to the respective wireless device. Voice data performance module may include any hardware software firmware and or other set of executable instructions operable to manage the collection on the wireless device and transmission across the wireless network of any information relating to the voice and or data processing capabilities of the respective wireless device. Voice data performance module collects any voice and or data processing related performance data including but not limited to over the air OTA messages and wireless device data values and statistics relating to the processing of voice text video applications audio multi media etc. Additionally voice data performance module may collect associated data relevant to performance data including for example processing related information on the specific data applications that were used the duration of use radio frequency RF information position location system information what network resources were allocated etc. Further voice and or data processing related performance data correspond to or are associated with voice and or data processing characteristic of the respective device. As such performance data and or processing characteristic may further include for example voice processing performance related information such as signal strength frame error rate latency fading signal to noise ratio signal pollution from other communications devices any information relating to how quickly a communications signal is acquired and how quickly a voice call is established and any information relating to a measure of the voice quality. Similarly performance data and or processing characteristic may further include for example data processing performance related information such as overall data throughput of the respective device data throughput measurements of one or more components of the respective device a measure of the number of data re transmissions frame error rate latency such as in video conferencing applications etc. It should be noted that the same or similar performance data and or performance characteristics may be used for determining both voice performance and data performance. Further voice data performance module may store the collected performance data and or associated data in a data log either in a resident memory or another memory device connectable to the respective wireless device. In one embodiment for example voice data performance module comprises performance module management logic which includes executable instructions for managing the receiving and executing of configuration the collecting and storing of performance data and or associated data and providing access to or forwarding log and or its contents for further analysis. Thus in one embodiment voice data performance module provides each wireless device with a resident or self contained capability for retrieving and recording actual performance data associated with voice and or data processing activities on a wireless device as well as for allowing the transmission and remote analysis of such performance data.

Voice data performance module may cause the respective wireless device to selectively transmit performance data such as data service information and or associated data for that wireless device to another computer device such as user manager on the wireless network. In one embodiment voice data performance module transmits performance data and or associated data from that wireless device to user manager across the wireless network when requested. Alternately performance data and or associated data is transmitted over an open communication connection from the wireless device to the wireless network and thus piggybacked across an open connection such as a voice or data call at the cellular telephone . In a cellular network configuration performance data and or associated data can be transmitted to user manager for example through short message service SMS HTTP TCP and automatic call back ACB . In another embodiment a remote user manager reads performance data and or associated data from the respective device through the resident voice data performance module and in some instances writes commands such as new processing configuration settings to computer platform and alters the operation of the wireless device . Accordingly the access to voice data performance module allows the user manager to remotely control parameters for data collection and analyze and report specific device data and or voice operational information.

User manager may communicate with wireless devices through a direct wired connection or through a wireless connection such as through a network interface in communication with wireless network . The communications between user manager and wireless devices may include downloads of all or selected portions such as agents and data sets of a voice data performance module that form and or operate within voice data performance module resident on the respective device. Other such communications include uploads from each wireless device back to the user manager such as uploads of performance data and or associated data . User manager may be at least one of any type of server personal computer mini mainframe and the like. Further there can be separate servers or computer devices associated with user manager that work in concert to provide data in usable formats to parties and or a separate layer of control in the data flow between the wireless devices and user manager .

User manager includes voice data performance module which may be software hardware firmware and generally any executable instructions operable by analysis engine . Voice data performance module is executable by user manager to manage the collection and analysis of data logs from wireless devices . In one embodiment for example voice data performance module comprises performance management logic which includes executable instructions for managing the generation and transmission of configuration the receipt and storage of performance data and or associated data and initiating the analysis and optimization described herein. For example voice data performance module includes collection module that is operable to define collection configuration which is transmitted to the respective wireless device. Collection configuration is executable by the respective device to collect predetermined voice and or data processing related information i.e. performance data and or associated data . Examples of associated data include for example device identification such as a phone number a mobile directory number MDN an electronic serial number ESN an international mobile equipment identity IMEI etc. timestamps corresponding application information corresponding protocol information RF information position location system information and other subsystem information related to performance data . This information is stored in data logs . Voice data performance module may pull the logs based on commands from a user or the logs may be pushed from the respective devices at predetermined times or upon reaching predetermined memory data storage levels.

User manager and or voice data performance module utilizes data log for analyzing and reporting the voice and or data processing performance of the respective device including but not limited to voice call application performance data call application performance voice over internet protocol VoIP application performance text messaging application performance video application performance multimedia application performance IP services performance protocol processing performance troubleshooting diagnosis and configuration evaluation. User manager and its corresponding components can give a ready view of performance data collected from the wireless devices in any form such as tables maps graphics views plain text interactive programs or web pages or any other display or presentation of the data. For example user manager may present performance data and or performance report on a monitor or display device and or may transmit such as via electronic mail this information to another computer device for further analysis or review. Also user manager may change an operational parameter and or configuration of a respective wireless device and or of a network component based on the actual performance data and or based on the results of analysis engine .

Analysis engine may include hardware software firmware and combinations thereof for analyzing and processing performance data . Additionally in one embodiment analysis engine may further comprise analysis logic which may include algorithms decision making routines statistical programs etc. for analyzing and interpreting performance data . For example analysis engine may include programs for determining access successes and failures as disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 078 235 filed Mar. 11 2005 entitled APPARATUS AND METHODS FOR DETERMINING CONNECTION QUALITY OF A WIRELESS DEVICE ON A WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK assigned to the present assignee and hereby incorporated by reference. In another example analysis engine may include programs for determining position location information associated with voice data calls as disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 139 301 filed May 27 2005 entitled APPARATUS AND METHODS FOR ASSOCIATING A GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION WITH AN EVENT OCCURING ON A WIRELESS DEVICE assigned to the present assignee and hereby incorporated by reference. Although illustrated as being associated with user manager analysis engine may be located anywhere in communication with wireless network such as on user manager another server connected to the network or on a respective wireless device .

As noted above analysis engine outputs performance report which in one embodiment may be details of performance data that are reviewed manually such as by a technician or field engineer for evaluation of voice and or data processing operation related issues associated with a particular wireless device. In this case the technician or field engineer instead of or in cooperation with optimization module may generate new voice and or data processing configuration settings for the respective wireless device based on the collected performance data Generally report may be useful in trouble shooting device operation data related issues and identifying problem areas and or devices such as through analysis of data log and the collected performance data . As such performance report includes any form of output that represents analysis of performance data as well as any other associated data such as network data and wireless device data associated with the data log of one or more respective wireless devices.

Additionally as mentioned above optimization module may access performance data directly from either performance report or analysis engine and apply predetermined algorithms or programs to optimize the settings of one or more device and or network related configurations to improve the voice and or data processing performance such as connection quality video image acquisition etc. Optimization module may include any hardware software firmware and or other set of executable instructions operable to analyze performance data and determine revised network specific and or wireless device specific configuration changes to improve device performance in and of itself or performance on the network. Additionally optimization module may be operable to initiate further communications with a respective wireless device and or a network component such as a base station to retrieve additional communications related data associated with the data log in order to perform further analysis and optimization. The optimizations performed by optimization module may also be performed all or in part by a technician manually reviewing the data log or voice and or data performance report and any associated performance related data.

Wireless network includes any communications network operable at least in part for enabling wireless communications between a respective wireless device and any other device connected to wireless network . Further wireless network may include all network components and all connected devices that form the network. For example wireless network may include at least one or any combination of a cellular telephone network a terrestrial telephone network a satellite telephone network an infrared network such as an Infrared Data Association IrDA based network a short range wireless network a Bluetooth technology network a ZigBee protocol network an ultra wide band UWB protocol network a home radio frequency HomeRF network a shared wireless access protocol SWAP network a wideband network such as a wireless Ethernet compatibility alliance WECA network a wireless fidelity alliance Wi Fi Alliance network and a 802.11 network a public switched telephone network a public heterogeneous communications network such as the Internet a private communications network and land mobile radio network. Suitable examples of telephone networks include at least one or any combination of analog and digital networks technologies such as Personal Communications Services PCS code division multiple access CDMA wideband code division multiple access WCDMA universal mobile telecommunications system UMTS advanced mobile phone service AMPS time division multiple access TDMA frequency division multiple access FDMA orthogonal frequency division multiple access OFDMA global system for mobile communication GSM single carrier 1X radio transmission technology RTT evolution data only EV DO technology general packet radio service GPRS enhanced data GSM environment EDGE high speed downlink data packet access HSPDA analog and digital satellite systems and any other technologies protocols that may be used in at least one of a wireless communications network and a data communications network.

Network interface may be any mechanism that allows user manager to communicate across wireless network . For example network interface may include a local area network that connects user manager through an Internet Service Provider to the Internet which in turn may be connected to a respective wireless device through a carrier network and a base station.

Wireless devices can include any type of computerized wireless devices such as cellular telephone personal digital assistant two way text pager portable computer and even a separate computer platform that has a wireless communication portal and which also may have a wired connection to a network or the Internet. The wireless device can be a remote slave or other device that does not have an end user thereof but simply communicates data across the wireless network such as remote sensors diagnostic tools data relays and the like. The apparatus and method of voice and or data performance measurement collecting and reporting on the wireless device can accordingly be performed on any form of wireless device or computer module including a wired or wireless communication portal including without limitation wireless modems PCMCIA cards access terminals personal computers telephones or any combination or sub combination thereof.

In a cellular telephone embodiment for example referring to a cellular telephone system may include wireless network connected to a wired network via a carrier network . The use of cellular telecommunication pathways has been increasing because wireless devices such as the plurality of cellular telephones illustrated in are being manufactured with increased computing capabilities and are becoming tantamount to personal computers and hand held personal digital assistants PDAs communicating packets including voice and data over wireless network . These smart cellular telephones have installed application programming interfaces APIs onto their local computer platform that allow software developers to create software applications that operate on the cellular telephone and control certain functionality on the device. is a representative diagram that more fully illustrates the components of a cellular wireless network and interrelation of the elements of one embodiment of the present system. Cellular wireless network is merely exemplary and can include any system whereby remote modules such as wireless devices communicate over the air between and among each other and or between and among components of a wireless network including without limitation wireless network carriers and or servers.

In system user manager can be in communication over a LAN network with a separate data repository for storing performance data gathered from the remote wireless devices such as the respective data logs . Further a data management server may be in communication with user manager to provide post processing capabilities data flow control etc. User manager data repository and data management server may be present on the cellular network with any other network components that are needed to provide cellular telecommunication services. User manager and or data management server communicate with carrier network through a data link such as the Internet a secure LAN WAN or other network. Carrier network controls messages generally being data packets sent to a mobile switching center MSC . Further carrier network communicates with MSC by a network such as the Internet and or POTS plain old telephone service . Typically in network a network or Internet portion transfers data and the POTS portion transfers voice information. MSC may be connected to multiple base stations BTS by another network such as a data network and or Internet portion for data transfer and a POTS portion for voice information. BTS ultimately broadcasts messages wirelessly to the wireless devices such as cellular telephones by short messaging service SMS or other over the air methods.

Referring to each wireless device such as cellular telephone in this case has computer platform that can transmit data across wireless network and that can receive and execute software applications and display data transmitted from user manager or another computer device connected to wireless network . Computer platform also includes an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other chipset processor logic circuit or other data processing device. ASIC or other processor may execute an application programming interface API layer that interfaces with any resident programs such as voice data performance module in a memory of the wireless device. API is a runtime environment executing on the respective wireless device. One such runtime environment is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW software developed by Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. Other runtime environments may be utilized that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless computing devices. Memory may include read only and or random access memory RAM and ROM EPROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. Computer platform also includes a local database that can hold the software applications files or data not actively used in memory such as the software applications or data downloaded from user manager . Local database typically includes one or more flash memory cells but can be any secondary or tertiary storage device such as magnetic media EPROM EEPROM optical media tape or soft or hard disk. Additionally local database can ultimately hold a resident copy of voice data performance module or agent as is further described herein.

Referring to in one embodiment computer platform includes voice data performance module that interfaces with API and is executable by a communications processing engine . Communications processing engine includes various processing subsystems embodied in hardware firmware software and combinations thereof that enable the functionality of the respective wireless device and the operability of the respective device on wireless network such as for connecting with the network exchanging data communications with other devices etc. For example communications processing engine may include one or a combination of processing subsystems such as sound non volatile memory file system transmit receive searcher physical layer link layer call processing layer main control remote procedure music audio handset power management diagnostic digital signal processor vocoder messaging call manager Bluetooth Bluetooth LPOS position determination position engine user interface sleep data services security authentication USIM SIM voice services graphics USB video services camera camcorder interface and associated display drivers multimedia such as MPEG GPRS etc. along with other functionality applications. In one embodiment API includes a class of software extensions that allow voice data performance module to access communications processing engine . These software extensions can communicate with processing subsystems on the wireless device which allows both data reads and commands. For example this software extension can send commands including register for log messages on behalf of the applications that invoke it. The module can then forward the responses of the subsystems to voice data performance module or ultimately across wireless network to user manager . Each resident application on wireless device can create an instance of this new software extension to communicate with the subsystems independently.

It should be noted that the subsystems can include any data or data service operable on a wireless device which embody the device s operational functionality.

In one embodiment such as a cellular telephone processing subsystems include one or more of a receive Rx component for receiving communications sent to the processor of the wireless device a call processing CP component and or system determination SD component for handling the initiation authentication handoffs data exchanges messaging protocols internal processing and decision making etc. associated with processing a message and a transmit Tx component for sending communications from the processor of the wireless device such as to handset components wireless network wireless network components and other devices connected to the wireless network. In this embodiment CP component may handle the majority of the call processing tasks while SD component may handle tasks relating to selecting an appropriate system from a plurality of systems with which to communicate as well as higher level decision making tasks referenced by CP component . In addition processing subsystems may further include one or more of a diagnostic Dx component for evaluating a subsystem a fax Fx component for handling facsimile communications a call manager CM component for characterizing and logging call types a messaging component M for text sending and receiving and a data services DS component for processing all data related communications such as establishing and maintaining data calls.

Data collection configuration includes data parameters that define conditions and types of information to collect as performance data and associated data including when to collect the data and when to transmit data log across wireless network to user manager and or another computer device. As mentioned above in one embodiment data collection configuration is generated by voice data performance module on user manager . It should be noted however that data collection configuration may be generated by any computer device connected to wireless network or may be locally transmitted to the respective wireless device such as by a manual input from a user through a short range radio technology such as Bluetooth technology and or through transmission from a locally connected media reader.

For example as defined by data collection configuration performance data includes call data such as call initiation information session information call termination information and socket information. Call initiation information includes but is not limited to application related information such as ID version and security level service option mobile origination termination service negotiation network state e.g. dormant disconnected etc. Session information includes but is not limited to protocol in use e.g. CDMA 1X EV DO GSM UMTS GPRS EDGE HSDPA etc. other protocol related parameters e.g. PDP in UMTS mobile IP session initiation protocol e.g. registration related information etc. Call termination information includes but is not limited to termination cause IP address e.g. requested granted time e.g. active dormant etc. Socket information includes but is not limited to type created header information e.g. destination application statistic information e.g. reset retransmissions packet byte received sent number of concurrent socket etc.

In terms of RLP level statistics for example performance data that may be collected include but are not limited to records of establish attempts and established sync time round trip time frame byte count for received sent erasures errors received negative acknowledgements received sent retransmission idle fill other frame counts for received sent largest continuous erasure longest fading reset count and abort count. These statistics may be refreshed with the start of each RLP session. Further these statistics may be reported from one of communications processing subsystems such as Data Services in a CDMA protocol system.

In terms of HTTP for example performance data include but are not limited to the following application ID for request response HTTP request response status code and request response size etc.

For ICMP for example performance data include but are not limited to the following messages errors destination unreachable echos echo replies time exceeded etc.

For IP for example performance data include but are not limited to the following packets received received header address errors received packets discarded delivered reassembly required and fragments created etc.

For TCP for example performance data include but are not limited to the following active passive opens failed connection attempts reset connections current connections segments received segments sent and segments retransmitted events such as synch time etc.

For UDP for example performance data include but are not limited to the following datagrams received number of ports received errors and datagrams sent etc.

For PPP for example performance data include but are not limited to the following sync time frame byte count etc.

For applications such as the Ping tool in the internet control message protocol ICMP performance data include but are not limited to information relating to whether or not a host is reachable how long packets take to get to and from that host round trip time etc. For an application layer protocol such as the file transfer protocol FTP performance data includes but is not limited to data throughput.

Additionally voice data performance module may include a test module operable to test the voice and or data processing capabilities of any functionality of the respective wireless device. For example test module may include various test programs and test data to be processed via the test programs. User manager may transmit the various test programs and or test data to voice data performance module via data collection configuration . Alternatively test programs and or test data may already be loaded on the respective wireless device and user manager may transmit a command to the device to execute a selected test program or test data. Test module may utilize test programs and or test data to carry out real time operations on the respective device using wireless network resources. Alternatively test module may utilize test programs and or test data to locally simulate predetermined operations without the use of the wireless network resources. For example test programs and or test data may include messages typically generated by a base station of a wireless network. As such test module may simulate actions of a network component by supplying these predetermined messages and data to a receive component of the respective wireless device and then monitoring the processing of the simulated input and the resulting output from the device while logging performance data based on configuration .

In one embodiment for example voice data performance module may implement test module to execute a test program such as an FTP simulation which can be used in a script as an automation test to determine a throughput measurement. In another example voice data performance module may implement test module to execute test program to test forward and reverse file transfer. For example in one embodiment test module may use the BREWS IWeb interface for forward transfer and the BREW ISocket interface for reverse file transfer although the described embodiments are not limited to using the BREW system. In yet another example voice data performance module may implement test module to execute test program to test conveying information via a predetermined protocol. For example in one embodiment test module may use the BREW IWeb interface to implement and test hypertext transfer protocol HTTP communications such as in the forward mode. In this case voice data performance module retrieves data whenever the data is available from the IWeb interface and can also retrieve throughput information based on the data transferred from IWeb. In still another example voice data performance module may implement test module to execute test program to test file transfer. For example in one embodiment test module may use the BREW ISocket interface to implement a transmission control protocol TCP socket for file transfer e.g. reverse mode . In this case voice data performance module transmits test data to user manager and can also retrieve throughput information based on the data transferred from ISocket or any TCP IP socket interface.

Additional examples of performance data include but not limited to air interface data handoff data power control data registration data authentication data service redirection data short messaging service SMS data subscriber calling features data asynchronous data and fax services low medium and high speed packet data services voice data over the air services system selection for preferred roaming message driven indicators forward compatibility signaling application interface data field test data and other non enumerated performance data etc.

Further for example the types of performance data which are measured involve the operational performance of various functions parameters characteristics messaging protocols etc. such as terminations originations and maintenance in strong signal weak signal and mixed signal environments radio frequency RF performance data such as receive Rx data including sensitivity isolated magnetic dipole IMD and self jamming transmit Tx data such as waveform quality Rho power control and maximum power and broadband BB and digital signal processing DSP data such as signal acquisition soft handoff SHO searcher and finger assignment interoperability data such as channel data including access channel ACH dedicated paging channel DPCH forward traffic channel FTCH and reverse traffic channel RTCH messaging data dealing with layer 1 and layer 2 and handoff parameters including SHO interband hard handoff HHO and interfrequency HHO. Further for example the measured data for the wireless device such as system acquisition high speed packet data HSPD location determination call types POTS 3 way call waiting voice mail authentication etc. provisioning over the air service provisioning OTASP over the air parameter administration OTAPA IP over the air IOTA etc. and other data dealing with features such as short message service SMS multimedia service MMS browser Java software and BREW software.

Thus in one embodiment user manager can push at least one voice data performance module to be resident at least temporarily on the computer platform of each wireless device . For example user manager may push voice data performance module across wireless network to the respective device. Alternately voice data performance module can be placed on the platform at the time of manufacture or initial programming or the wireless device can pull the application from another computer device on the network such as user manager either with a request from the end user or automatically. User manager may then transmit data collection configuration to voice data performance module to retrieve performance data . Performance data can include but is not limited to network connection voice text video audio multi media applications messages messaging protocols and parameters generated from communications processing engine during the actual operation of wireless device. Performance data can allow for the specific understanding of the operation of the individual device along with troubleshooting of a device within the wireless network based upon the gathered performance data. As mentioned above voice data performance module or agent can be permanently stored in the local database of the wireless device computer platform or can only be temporarily held in memory thereof for a one time or n time execution to transmit performance data .

In operation referring to one embodiment of a method for voice and or data performance measurement on a wireless device includes loading at least a portion of a voice and or data performance application onto a computer platform of the wireless device Block . For example the voice and or data performance application may be embodied within the hardware and or firmware of the wireless device during the manufacture of the device. Alternatively the voice and or data performance application may be pushed by a user manager to the wireless device or pulled from a user manager by the wireless device across a wireless network. In another alternative the loading of the voice and or data performance application may be configurable in any manner for example being initiated by a predetermined event such as unacceptable voice and or data processing characteristic.

Further this embodiment of the method includes receiving a predetermined data collection configuration that defines the parameters associated with the collection of predetermined voice and or data processing performance related data Block . For example the respective wireless device may receive this configuration from a user manager across a wireless network . Alternatively the user of the wireless device may input this configuration directly into the device such as through the device keypad. In one embodiment this predetermined configuration is designed to collect performance data indicative of a predetermined voice and or data processing characteristic of the respective wireless device.

Optionally the predetermined data collection configuration may include test programs and or test data designed to test a predetermined voice and or data characteristic. In this case test module executes test programs and or test data thereby generating a predetermined test on the device Block .

This embodiment of the method also includes retrieving performance data from a processing engine of the respective wireless device in accordance with the predetermined data collection configuration and logging the performance data in a memory associated with the wireless device Block . For example performance data and predetermined associated information data that are generated by communications processing engine of the wireless device during its operation may be stored in data log are collected based on the predetermined configuration and stored in memory of the respective wireless device. Optionally the logged performance data may be generated through the execution of test programs and or test data by test module .

Additionally the method includes forwarding the collected performance data across the wireless network Block . For example the received and logged performance data are forwarded across the wireless network for analysis by another computer device such as a user manager . Further in one embodiment the collected performance data is uploaded from the wireless device in accordance with data collection configuration such as through a standard HTTP an FTP or some other data transfer protocol.

Further this embodiment of the method includes analyzing a voice and or data processing capability of the wireless device based on the received performance data and or the associated information data Block . For example the performance data may be analyzed by an analysis engine associated with a user manager located across the wireless network from the wireless device. Alternatively the analysis engine may reside on the wireless device. In one embodiment the analysis engine may compare selected portions of the performance data with predetermined voice and or data processing standards to determine device voice and or data processing performance. Additionally the analysis may be based on more than one set of performance data. As such the voice and or data performance may be based on an analysis of a plurality of device subsystem operations.

Further this embodiment of the method includes generating a performance report characterizing the voice and or data processing capabilities of the respective wireless device based on the analyzed performance data Block . For example this action includes presenting the results such as performance report defining voice and or data processing characteristic in a table a graph etc.

Additionally the method optionally may include optimizing a configuration of a wireless device and or a network component based on the performance report Block . For example this action includes analysis engine executing optimization module to run predetermined algorithms or programs to optimize the settings of one or more device and or network related configurations to improve a voice and or data processing capability. In another example the method may include a technician or analyst reviewing the results and manually making the configuration adjustments. Additionally it should be noted that the method may be implemented in different locations within the system in different devices and by centralized or decentralized processing mechanisms.

Further the method may include a feedback loop for delivering an updated data collection configuration and or for delivering new processing configuration settings to the device. For example the updated collection configuration may be designed to collect additional performance data and or associated data based on an analysis of the collected data log . Also for example new processing configuration settings may be generated by optimization module to enhance voice and or data processing capabilities of the respective device based on the collected data log .

Additionally it should be noted that the method may include granting access to the performance data and or performance report to other business or commercial systems. To ensure the security and or integrity of the collected performance data such access may be granted in a monitored fashion such as through a user manager. Further other computer devices including both storage and processing devices can be located across the wireless network from the wireless device and accordingly the architecture associated with the user manager is readily scalable.

In another example of the above defined method an end user complains that he she is not getting the data throughput on their wireless device as specified in a user manual. A help desk associated with the wireless device and or the wireless network issues a command from the user manager to download the voice and or data performance module to the wireless device. The help desk configures voice and or data performance module to collect specific performance data and other associated information and configures the upload parameters. The end user uses his her wireless device in a normal fashion such as by making normal voice calls and data calls. The voice and or data performance module collects the predetermined performance data and associated data and uploads this information to the user manager as specified in the upload parameters. The user manager processes analyzes the performance data and generates the performance report. The user manager then notifies the help desk of the report and the help desk personnel can then make device configuration changes based on the results of the report.

In another example of the above defined method a field engineer issues a command from the user manager to download the voice and or data performance module to a set of wireless devices. The field engineer configures voice and or data performance module to collect specific performance data and associated data as well as to run specific scripts tests. The set of wireless devices are then subjected to a drive test which due to the recording capabilities of the voice and or data performance module can be implemented without external test and or measurement devices. It should be noted that the field engineer does not need to physically be inside the drive test vehicle to monitor the testing as the monitoring can occur from the user manager. The voice and or data performance module then performs field tests automatically based on the predetermined configuration and uploads the collected performance data to the user manager. The user manager processes analyzes the performance data and generates a performance report. The user manager notifies the field engineer of the performance report and the field engineer can then make device configuration changes based on the results of the report.

In view of the method being executable on computer platform of a wireless device the method includes a program resident in a computer readable medium where the program directs a wireless device having a device platform to perform the steps of the method. Such a program can be executed on any single computer platform or can be executed in a distributed way among several computer platforms. Furthermore the method can be implemented by a program that directs a computer device such as user manager to perform a voice and or data performance determination through gathering and processing performance data from the wireless devices .

The computer readable medium can be the memory of the computer platform of the cellular telephone or other wireless device or can be in a local database such as local database of the device platform . Further the computer readable medium can be in a secondary storage media that is loadable onto a wireless device computer platform such as a magnetic disk or tape optical disk hard disk flash memory or other storage media as is known in the art.

Further the method may be implemented for example by operating portion s of the wireless network and or LAN such as device platform and user manager to execute a sequence of machine readable instructions. The instructions can reside in various types of signal bearing or data storage primary secondary or tertiary media. The media may comprise for example RAM not shown accessible by or residing within the components of the wireless network or LAN . Whether contained in RAM a diskette or other secondary storage media the instructions may be stored on a variety of machine readable data storage media such as DASD direct access storage device storage e.g. a conventional hard drive or a RAID redundant array of independent disks array magnetic tape electronic read only memory e.g. ROM EPROM or EEPROM flash memory cards an optical storage device e.g. CD ROM WORM write once read many DVD digital optical tape paper punch cards or other suitable data storage media including digital and analog transmission media.

In summary the apparatus can be implemented solely on any wireless device . The wireless device can have at least one voice data performance module including an application or agent resident either permanent or temporarily on the computer platform thereof which causes the gathering of performance data from communications processing engine and which can effect selective transmission of the performance data for that wireless device to another computer device such as user manager on the wireless network . If the wireless device is so embodied performance data may be transmitted over an open communication connection from the wireless device to the wireless network such as an open voice or data call. If the wireless device is a cellular telephone and the wireless network is a cellular telecommunication network such as shown in performance data can be transmitted through short message service or other wireless communication methods. User manager then applies analysis engine to the collected performance data and generates performance report that details various voice and or data processing performance characteristics of the respective wireless device. Based on this report or by implementation of optimization module operational settings of the respective wireless device and or of the wireless network may be modified to enhance voice and or data processing capabilities.

While the foregoing disclosure shows illustrative embodiments it should be noted that various changes and modifications could be made herein without departing from the scope of the described embodiments as defined by the appended claims. Furthermore although elements of the described embodiments may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated.

