---

title: Enhanced process for gaming using multiple random progressive prize opportunities and bingo-type of gaming products thereby
abstract: Novel enhanced gaming systems employ unique, specialized, for example, FIRESTAR ™ type of indicia disposed upon at least one location of a plurality of pre-mapped locations housed on, for example, a multiplicity of bingo-type of cards. Percentages of indicia arrayed on, for example, card sets are controlled by a gaming proprietor's or operator's configuration settings as are the respective locations of the subject indicia, for example, by using a random number generator to induce players to participate in multiple opportunities to garner prizes, for example, for achieving a bingo-type of victory concomittant with pre-established winning requirements and a pre-selected occurrence of a unique specialized indicum. Progressive reports serve to keep players, proprietors/operators and gaming authorities apprised of earnings both in terms of amounts, odds and related data on occurrence of the same indicia in real time providing unique inducement and tracking value in both hard copy and electronic form.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07749066&OS=07749066&RS=07749066
owner: Gametech International, Inc.
number: 07749066
owner_city: Reno
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050202
---
This application claims priority to Provisional Application No. 60 540 589 filed Feb. 2 2004 the contents of which are incorporated herein in their entirety.

The present disclosure relates to electronic gaming. In particular the present disclosure relates to games providing gambling opportunities including but not limited to bingo keno slot pull tab card based and related games.

The gaming arts inherently support needs both to attract and induce player interest on an ongoing basis. Likewise gaming proprietors require the ability to control prize awarding structures and pre selected modes for effectively communicating entertaining and attractive messages to players while tracking odds of success and generating records of the historical inputs of players and outputs of their systems that can be replicated and shared with gaming authorities. However the long standing need in terms of all games including bingo type of games relates to how they work to keep people entertained and induce their ongoing participation.

The present inventors have discovered that progressive gaming structures can be implemented in existing and prospective formats whereby players are induced to play and continue and proprietors can track and display or record prize winnings including odds and credits earned distributed and available. Unexpectedly according to the instant disclosure the progressive prize structure itself is as strong a draw for players as any known mechanism currently in use and is simply executed and effective for use with existing and prospective gaming formats.

Games have regularly been defined as contrivances or arrangements for testing skill and or being entertained. Within the context of electronic gaming and gambling schemes pursued and measures planned by a gaming proprietor need to further embrace the concept that operating rules allow one to play the game or games rewards and prizes based upon the promise that the gaming proprietor and system used function according to predetermined rules. Since acting straightforwardly based upon rules can be programmed into such systems visibility of same to players and generation of subsequent records of fairness and rule based dealings are further aspects of the present disclosure.

An important improvement in gaming demanded by the market is the intangible element of attraction to users perhaps driven by a longstanding need to improve functional aspects that progressive prize games to date have yet to satisfy. Manifestations of the present disclosure in the bingo type of game context for example enable skilled gaming players to realize the mathematical improvements in odds and thus better grasp the improved chances to win in a user friendly and entertaining context.

The present inventors have discovered that functionally speaking progressive prize schemes are effective to induce ongoing participation in many types of electronic gaming systems including for example an illustrative example found in bingo type of games. This application incorporates by reference U.S. Ser. Nos. 10 743 350 60 435 274 60 501 557 and 60 502 675 as if each was respectively set forth herein. Likewise those skilled in the art will understand application of novel and utile aspect of the instant disclosure including software which leverage off of the strength of related gaming structures sold by GameTech however they relate to the same.

Those skilled in the gaming art will readily understand the interplay between the present disclosure known and prospective systems for example with the Universal Gaming Device type of gaming system and the Pay N Play type of system. Available from GameTech International. Inc. of Reno Nev. . The present disclosure works with portable fixed hand held internet based and other electronic gaming systems known to artisans.

The present inventors offer for consideration the proposition that commonality among certain types of gaming systems make them susceptible to certain novel enhanced progressive prize generation opportunities. The present disclosure is succinctly summarized within the context of a progressive bingo type of game for example however artisans will readily understand the applicability to pull tab and lottery types of games among others sharing both the elements of chance and sliding scales of odds. Other games developed likewise can support the teachings of the present disclosure.

As set forth above the teachings of the present disclosure are readily manifested and implemented within the context of a progressive bingo game as set forth in this detailed description of the present disclosure in an illustrative fashion and defined in the claims which are appended hereto.

The exemplary embodiment of a bingo type of gaming system is in no way meant to be limiting of the present disclosure rather to make the instant description technically accessible to those of normal skill in the art.

According to an illustrative bingo type based game embodiment the present disclosure a player is offered an opportunity to win a progressive jackpot prize upon concurrent receipt of the occurrence of a complete pattern of numbers whereby the last numbered space garnered has a unique specialized indicum dispersed thereupon in a predetermined space. This pattern includes but certainty is not limited to straight lines diagonal lines and those patterns and combinations pre selected to constitute a win.

Those having a medium of skill is the art understood the term bingo designate both the sudden occurrence of an event of completion of an action and a game of chance in which each contestant or player sports at least one card printed or marked with differently numbered squares or spaces on to which to place markers upon the drawing and announcement of numbers by a caller. The making of any predesignated complete pattern of numbers is coextensive with a victory known itself as a BINGO . See for example THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3EDITION Haughton Mifflin Company 1992 at Page 188. In manifesting aspects of the present disclosure electronically or through related means enabling the functionality of instant disclosure artisans readily understand how simulacrums of cards rows and spaces function. Likewise association of for example the FIRESTAR type of or brand of symbol will become clear based upon the disclosure and scope of the subject matters visited within the claims as set forth below. For the purposes of this specification the proprietary FIRESTAR brand of logo is used both in exemplary and specific terms in that it is a trademark of GameTech International Inc. and also used for illustrative purposes in the broader sense as a subject indicum herein denoted as a progressive prize winning symbol.

According to an embodiment of the present disclosure there is provided in a gaming system having progressive prize opportunities the improvement comprising a plurality of player selectable options for allowing a player to have at least one option selected from the group of choices consisting of electing to participate in progressive prize opportunities and earning the ability to participate in progressive opportunities whereby once a progressive win occurs a progressive prize report is generated providing real time information to the player as to the progressive contribution in the example of the instant electronic manifestation those who are successful at achieving a FIRESTAR type of symbol mediated bingo event alternatively can be rewarded by means of credit cash or alternative payment schemes including combinations and credit like awards. This is shown by a report available in real time to players but the underlying progressive nature of the prize structure also shown is what induces ongoing participation.

Likewise the gaming system proprietor gaming hall operator has ongoing access to the frequency of occurrence of the for example FIRESTAR type of symbol on the electronic manifestations of the gaming cards in addition to a mathematical expression manifesting the frequency with which such a FIRESTAR type of indicum occurs in association with a number or location. An additional benefit of the instant teachings is realized whereby for example a gaming regulatory authority may be presented with a report detailing the frequency of occurrence of the for example FIRESTAR type of symbol on particular electric gaming card or the frequency with which a FIRESTAR type of symbol is associated with a number as often required for compliance.

In exemplary fashion referring still to a bingo type of electronic gaming device the FIRESTAR type of symbol and or FIRESTAR associated number can be made to appear on every first card every second card every third card or at whatever desired interval is intended. This enables at least one of the gaming hall operator gaming hall proprietor regulatory agency functionary manufacturer or the like pre designated quality controller to require that a player purchase a predetermined amount of cards play a predetermined number of prior or previous games and or undertake other actions or analogous functions as criteria for eligibility for the FIRESTAR type of prize thereby inducing an ongoing stream of participation according to the disclosure of the instant teachings.

Basically stated under the FIRESTAR brand are housed progressive gaming applications including the exemplary bingo type of games outlined above and discussed below and claimed below which function conjunctively with the Diamond brand of system and the Pay N Play type of system available from GameTech International Inc. The FIRESTAR brand of progressive bingo offers the player a chance to win a progressive jackpot if they bingo with the last number being called being determined to be in fixed proximate relation to for example on upon or under the FIRESTAR type of symbol.

The winners according to this exemplary illustration of the process for gaming using multiple progressive opportunities can be given credit as a first possible mechanism for satisfaction of payments cashed through the Pay N Play brand of system likewise cash may be dispensed or some combination of these means used.

Another important feature of the process is the existence of an option to determine the frequency or relative frequency of occurrences of the FIRESTAR brand of symbol denoted number on the cards by way of example the occurrence of the FIRESTAR branded number can be configured to be on every electronic card every second electronic card every third fourth or fifth electronic card. Further contemplated under the process of the instant disclosure is an option of requiring players to purchase a predetermined minimum set amount of cards engage in a predetermined minimum set amount of rounds of play or the like means or mechanism to induce participation continuous play and an ongoing inducement in value accumulation.

To play with the FIRESTAR brand of system players make credit purchases for play on the basic GAMETECH fixed base or portable unit by entering a pack number into their desired unit See U.S. Ser. Nos. 10 743 350 60 435 274 60 501 557 60 502 675 expressly incorporated by number herein .

According to a process of the present disclosure the following information is used to configure operation of the FIRESTAR type of progressive bingo. According to this example the Bingo Manager indicates what the optional choice of maximum payout amount to be credited is Optional Maximum Credit Pay . If the progressive prize amount is greater than the Maximum Credit Pay the remainder of the payout is eligible to be made in cash. For example if the FIRESTAR type of progressive payout is 500.00 and the maximum credit amount is 300.00 the customer is credited 300.00 and the remaining balance of 200.00 paid in cash. This may be shown for example by having a prompt appear on the customer screen instructing the customer to seek the attendant.

The option of Maximum Overall pay means the sum total of that which is allowed to be paid out on a FIRESTAR type of progressive win including both credit and cash amounts. Likewise the Optional Maximum Progressive Amount need to be configured to denote the maximum value of a FIRESTAR type of progressive prize. Similarly Optional Maximum Goal Prize Amount needs to be configured to match the maximum value that the seed money will build to create money for this purpose means the amount that is used to rebuild the progressive prize once it has been won.

Optional choices for the FIRESTAR brand of progressive Bingo games finish the configuration options set forth in .

The Bingo Manager allows the progressive amount to be displayed on the player screen. Likewise the sound may be either enabled or disabled for the FIRESTAR brand of progressive games sound function on the player unit for a progressive winner.

It is also necessary to set parameters relating to the applicable games it can apply to one or all games in the session the card minimum how many cards the customer must purchase to participate in the FIRESTAR type of progressive bingo previous required games which requires the customer to have participated in a designated number of games prior to purchase of the subject game.

For example if this setting is configured as two previous games and the number is ten the player would have had to participate in games eight and nine to be eligible for game ten configured by individual game . The frequency or progressive step amount designates the frequency of occurrence of the FIRESTAR branded symbol in . For example the occurrence of the FIRESTAR branded number can be configured to be on every card every second card every third card. The progressive minimum prize may also be set as an option connoting the minimum prize for progressive games in addition to the Maximum Progressive Add the percentage to be held by the hall as profit from sales of a Pay N Play type game the Pay N Play Prize the percentage that will be designated to the game winner when FIRESTAR type of progressive prize is not won the FIRESTAR Progressive Prize Percentage Funding the percentage that will be designated to fund the progressive prize from the card sales and the FIRESTAR Progressive Seed Prize Percentage Funding which defines the percentage designated to rebuild the seed .

Turning now to in general terms the basic player screen shows electronic bingo type of cards as discussed above.

If the caller accesses the pick game option from the main screen the term FIRESTAR will appear on all games designated as FIRESTAR branded progressive games. Otherwise the terms and conditions of conventional bingo for example apply during play when the caller advances to a new game the player is prompted to purchase cards as per the general operations of the Pay N Play system. If the game is a FIRESTAR branded progressive game the players screen changes to reflect the FIRESTAR symbol and optionally the progressive prize amount.

Depending on the frequency configured the FIRESTAR symbol will be randomly placed on the player cards. As configured in accordance with the minimum number of cards and the previous games played may required for the FIRESTAR brand of game to be available.

Those skilled in the art will readily understand that this game can be played with any on selected by a bingo manager. By way of example only in Game Play players buy cards and play 4 6 or 8 on common value would be 3 6 or 9 for one dollar or multiple 6 on s can be purchased. The cards appear on the players screen per 6 on. Player then selects on location on one of the cards . This location applies to all cards but not all prizes. The individual card that the location was selected on will now have a gold border. The other cards will appear with a blue border. This will apply for all 6 ons purchased

For Blue Prizes the customer bingos with the last number e.g. O 64 called being on the location that they selected but not the card that they selected. The odds on Blue Prizes for a letter X pattern on a 6 on the odds would be 5 in 48 or 1 in 9.6 games that this prize would hit. The odds are not effected by the number of cards played but the greater the number of cards played the greater the chance to have multiple bingos and therefore split prizes. Depending on the player spend and the number of people playing this game it would hit about 4 times an hour and the prize amount would be anywhere from an estimated 2.00 to 20.00. This would be like the low level prize in that trickles a small amount of money back to the players to keep their interest up like a slot machine .

For Gold Prize the customer bingos with the last number e.g. O 64 called being the card gold card that they made their original selection on. If they do not select one the system will randomly select one for them. The player will have one gold card per 6 on. This progressive would hit about once an hour. The odds on Gold Prize would be 1 in 8 games that this prize would hit on a single card. The odds are controlled by making the player select one location on one card on a 3 on or 6 on. This would force the halls to sell cards as 6 ons or whatever is selected. The odds are also controlled by selecting which patterns the halls are allowed to play.

For Line Prize the third prize will be a typical line game. The game and prize amount can be varied. The odds which apply only to a line hit in 5 or fewer calls for example would be 1 in 59 107.

For the Mystery Money Prize the customer must have a line bingo and the last ball called must fall on this bingo. The bingo will have to be on a gold card. The odds can be changed depending on a line in 5 or a line in 6 etc. There are various decisions for the player to make. The first being which card on the 6 on should be gold and the second being the location on the card. Some locations will have better odds of hitting prize 4 than others. If a player does not select a location that is in the pattern then they have no chance of hitting either Prize 1 or Prize 2.

An enhanced electronic bingo game comprising a communications module for transferring information relating to a plurality of card number and related strings of data between a player to a system a display for providing a menu to select different game options an authentication module an input module and a control module for setting progressive prize winning opportunities embodies an example of the instant disclosure further comprising a plurality of specialized indicia denoting prizes disposed in association with select numbers and spaces of a plurality of the involved bingo cards wherein special prizes are awarded to a player who achieves a particular pattern with a last number e.g. O 64 called corresponding to at least one of a number and a space marked by a specialized indicum wherein multiple differing specialty prizes may be awarded depending on the pattern hit the number of calls before the pattern was hit and the specific card on which the pattern was hit wherein the odds of the game can be adjusted by a bingo manager by changing the number of specialized indicia per group of cards which adjusts the frequency with which the specialized indicia appear on the cards and further comprising a function permitting a player to pay extra money to increase the frequency with which the cards in his game receive specialized indicia disposed thereon thereby increasing the player s odds of garnering a special prize .

In sum the present inventors have realized that progressive gaming schemes are effective for both enhancing and enriching the gaming experience for players. A unique bingo based version of the present disclosure as illustratively visited above within the context of an electronic gaming system is currently known as the FIRESTAR brand of progressive bingo system available from GameTech International Inc. of Reno Nev. and enables players to enjoy specialized indicia in select locations on some of the numbers and spaces of involved bingo cards special prizes for players who achieve bingos on those spaces and ways to increase chances of winning.

While the above description contains many specifics these should not be construed as limitations on the scope of the disclosure but rather as an exemplification of preferred embodiments thereof. The disclosure includes any combination or subcombination of the elements from the different species and or embodiments disclosed herein. One skilled in the art will recognize that these features and thus the scope of the present disclosure should be interpreted in light of the following claims and any equivalents thereto.

