---

title: Functionality index (FI) for use with an engineering management system (EMS)
abstract: A top-down tiered process establishes an objective measure of the functional capacity of an asset to address a specified use. The process comprises: developing Issue Categories and lists of functional impact Sub-issue Types and specific issues under each type that may impact functionality of the asset for a specified use; providing the list to evaluators; employing evaluators to evaluate functionality, evaluators assigning a numerical Severity measure to each Sub-issue Type present during the evaluation; recording occurrences of issues under each Sub-issue Type discovered, summing occurrences to determine a Density of each Sub-issue Type; recording the evaluation in one or more engineering management systems (EMS); and using the recorded evaluation, calculating a value to be inserted on a numerical scale as a functionality index, FI. In select embodiments of the present invention, a numerical scale is used with values from 0-100.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07734488&OS=07734488&RS=07734488
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07734488
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050802
---
Under paragraph 1 a of Executive Order 10096 the conditions under which this invention was made entitle the Government of the United States as represented by the Secretary of the Army to the entire right title and interest therein of any patent granted thereon by the United States. This patent and related ones are available for licensing. Contact Bea Shahin at 217 373 7234 or Phillip Stewart at 601 634 4113.

In the United States the Department of Defense is responsible for nearly 380 000 facilities estimated at a plant replacement value of 435 billion. These facilities play an important role in support of the military s mission. The sustainment restoration modernization SRM and eventual demolition and reconstruction of this infrastructure portfolio are of great interest to facility planners and policy makers.

Building investments are made and buildings are constructed to support some specified mission or purpose. The building design process yields the optimal building location materials and configuration to best serve that purpose. As the building operates in service and ages building materials components and systems deteriorate leading to some less than optimal ability to support its mission. This loss is determined through a condition assessment process and may be measured by a condition index CI such as described in U.S. Pat. No. 7 058 544 B2 Knowledge Based Condition Survey Inspection KBCSI Framework and Procedure to Uzarski et al. 6 Jun. 2006 incorporated herein by reference. Building performance i.e. ability to support a specified mission is also impacted by general obsolescence e.g. inability to support a new mission.

This obsolescence may be due to change in user requirements technological obsolescence and changes in building codes and regulations. For example as user requirements change or the mission changes as is likely to happen during the lifespan of a permanent building the functional capability of the building to support a current mission has decreased some amount. This loss may be determined objectively and quantitatively through a functionality assessment and measured by a functionality index FI . Building condition is improved through repair restoration or both. However a gain in functionality generally requires facility modernization.

 Building Performance is measured at a specific point in time and defined as the in service suitability of a building for a specified mission. Among other indicators it refers to how well how safe and how efficient a building supports a given mission. A building s performance state may be defined to be dependent on two attributes of the building the physical condition state and the functionality state. 

The physical condition state provides a measure of the general health of the building. Physical deterioration of the building due to normal aging excessive or abusive use or poor maintenance reduces ability to support its initially established mission. For example a leaking roof reduces the building s ability to provide a comfortable safe environment. Research has focused on quantifying the condition state of a building in a consistent objective and repeatable fashion. In the BUILDER Engineering Management System EMS the physical condition state is quantified using a Condition Index CI .

The functionality state relates to the facility s ability to support a specific mission whether it be the designed mission a present mission or a proposed mission. It is an estimate of the capability of a facility or building to support performance of a current mission in the absence of physical deterioration. An impact to functionality e.g. loss or degradation due to an inefficient building layout improper choice of materials or equipment building code violations and the like affects mission performance even though the condition of the building is new. Changes to functionality may arise independently after the building has been put in service e.g. changes in user requirements building codes materials technology and the like. For example an existing maintenance facility without the proper size and configuration to handle current military equipment has reduced capability to support a mission of vehicle maintenance. Impact to functionality may be qualitatively described by identifying those constraints inherent in the building design that lead to less than optimal mission support when compared to a new purpose built building designed to support that specified mission at the highest level.

Conventionally facility or building assessments or evaluations are performed to determine the scope and estimate of required SRM work. These conventionally undertaken assessments involve the identification and recording of deficiencies or issues that lead to a less than optimal facility. Issues or deficiencies may be defined with respect to both condition and functionality. During an assessment process based on identifying issues or deficiencies an assessor or evaluator identifies what building deficiencies or issues are to be recorded and may categorize i.e. prioritize identified issues. Further an estimator may determine the cost of corrective action for each prioritized issue or deficiency if any. At no point during this conventional procedure is any metric produced which quantitatively and objectively describes the functional capability of the building to support a given mission.

Some metrics developed from the manipulation of backlog data are based on the cost of corrective action. The use of backlog data does not provide an acceptable basis for describing mission readiness. In addition resources spent estimating the cost of corrective action for a functional issue or deficiency is wasted if the SRM budget does not allow the corrective action to be performed. This leads to an assessment process that may not yield the expected results in terms of the resources that have been expended to complete the assessment. Thus what is needed is a process that addresses data requirements in a cost effective and timely manner to quantify the capability of a facility to support a specific mission at any point in the lifecycle of a facility including design construction utilization and modification.

In select embodiments of the present invention a top down tiered standardized data collection recording and evaluation process establishes an objective measure of the functional capacity of an asset to address one or more specified uses. In general the process comprises developing one or more lists of functionally impacted Sub issue Types d and recording specific issues under each type that may impact functionality of the asset for the use providing the list to one or more evaluators employing the evaluator to use the list to evaluate functionality of the asset such that the evaluator assigns a severity measure on a severity scale to each identified Sub issue Type d and the evaluator records each occurrence of issues under each Sub issue Type d associated with the asset and sums the occurrences to determine Density of each Sub issue Type d recording the evaluator s evaluation in one or more engineering management systems EMS and using the recorded evaluation calculating as the measure a value to be inserted on a numerical scale as a functionality index FI. In select embodiments of the present invention the process employs a numerical scale with values from 0 100.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process provides at least part of the evaluation as answers to questions in the lists.

In select embodiments of the present invention the engineering management system is the BUILDER application. Although examples below relate to buildings engineering management systems related to pavements PAVER railroads RAILER transmission pipes PIPER roofs ROOFER and the like may also employ embodiments of the present invention.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process provides for evaluating assets selected from types of assets that may comprise buildings facilities paving systems roads railways airports dams roofing systems athletic fields pipelines transmission lines public utility systems communications systems combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further comprises generating one or more objective parametric cost estimates of modernization of the asset to correct one or more issues associated with the functional Sub issue Types. Parametric cost estimating is a technique employing one or more Cost Estimating Relationships CERs and associated algorithms and logic. The technique estimates the cost of the development manufacture or modification of an asset. Measurement is based on the technical physical or other characteristics of the asset. Parametric cost estimating links cost to an asset s technical parameters. Refer to a graph of a parametric cost estimate for a specific example showing that when the facility is fully functional i.e. FI is 100 then the cost to modify is zero but as FI drops to 40 on a scale of 100 the cost to modify is the replacement cost so any further modifications would not be economically viable. That is a new facility could be built for the cost of modification. The disadvantage of further modifying a facility with an FI of less than 40 is readily apparent the cost to modify approaching 2 times the cost of replacement as the FI approaches zero.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further comprises combining the functionality index FI with a condition index CI to establish an objective measure of suitability of the asset for meeting a specified use. In select embodiments of the present invention the process further comprises setting intervals on a severity scale such that the degrees of severity for the functionality index FI are consistent with those of a Condition Index CI scale used in the BUILDER application.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process yields an asset evaluation by completion of one or more facility surveys for each specified use of the asset.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further employs the functionality index FI to facilitate prioritizing work requirements.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further employs the functionality index FI to facilitate making investment decisions to choose from among alternative modernization configurations for the asset.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process developing the functionality index FI for one or more uses of a typical asset further comprises researching categorizing and enumerating the functionality Sub issue Types d and specific issues thereunder as relates to obsolescence user requirement changes lost efficiency codes and regulations compliance for a use of the typical asset and the like providing one or more functionality rating sheets that explicitly define levels of functionality impact and sustainment restoration modernization SRM considerations at a number of discrete intervals along the scale of the functionality index FI such that the rating sheets delineate sections of the rating scale and the rating sheets facilitate evaluators in judging functionality scenarios determining which interval is a best fit and assigning a score within that interval presenting the rating sheet Sub issue Types d and specific issues together with a number of different functionality impact scenarios for one or more uses of an asset to one or more panels of experts to provide functionality ratings reflecting the inability of the asset to meet the specified use assuming existence of the Sub issue Types and specific issues in the scenario alone or in combinations thereof using the panel s ratings to develop quantitative functionality deduct values t relationships and procedures for assessments by evaluators and implementing the list in one or more engineering management systems as an assessment checklist for use by evaluators.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further comprises organizing the ratings based on functionality Sub issue Types Severity and Density screening outliers computing mean Deduct Values t for each Sub issue Type Severity Density combination plotting the Deduct Values t versus Density and fitting the plotted data with a curve to mathematically describe the relationship of the Deduct Value t for each Sub issue Type and Severity as a function of Density.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further develops the Deduct Value t to a statistical 95 confidence interval such that the resulting functionality index FI is 5 points of true attaining this accuracy by employing a minimum number of raters. In select embodiments of the present invention the minimum number of raters is seventeen on average.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process applies a deduct adjustment to the sum t of the individual Deduct Values t such that the deduct adjustment reflects the nonlinear effect on asset use of multiple functionality Sub issue Types d.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process derives a deduct adjustment for calculating Adjusted Deduct Values t by establishing one or more panels of expert raters providing the raters with multiple scenarios each scenario containing one or more functionality Sub issue Types d using the raters to provide an overall rating for each scenario establishing a plot of the sum t of the individual Deduct Values t versus the direct rating value of each number of Sub issue Types e.g. 2 3 4 5 for five total Sub issue Types catalogued as presenting in the scenario to obtain an appropriate deduct adjustment as represented by the slope of the plot for each number of functionality Sub issue Types included in a given assessment such that depending on the nature and number of Sub issue Types d the overall rating yields an Adjusted Deduct Value t less than the sum t of the individual Sub issue Type Deduct Values t.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further provides one or more flowchart software interfaces in one or more engineering management systems.

In select embodiments of the present invention the asset is a building. In select embodiments of the present invention the engineering management system is the BUILDER application.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process is iterated for different uses of the asset.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process encompasses three or more tiers. In select embodiments of the present invention the process employs three tiers asset level system level and component level such that systems are parts of the asset and one or more components are parts of one or more systems and system and component levels provide refined estimates of the scope of required modernization the component level providing the most refined estimate.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further organizes Sub issue Types d into functionality categories presenting each Sub issue Type d as a question evaluators answering questions for each Sub issue Type d to determine the Density and severity at which the Sub issue Type d impacts a specified use such that the answers to the questions are used to determine a rating for the functionality category and to calculate a functionality index FI. One or more of the answers may be based on observations of the evaluator with input from building users and maintenance personnel.

In select embodiments of the present invention the process further employs the functional index FI as an execution metric establishing one or more thresholds such that when the functionality index FI for an asset falls below a threshold a requirement to modernize is generated.

Refer to describing a Functionality Assessment process that may be implemented in using an embodiment of the present invention. One advantage of this approach is process standardization. An assessor evaluator is provided with an organized and logical list of Sub issue Types d see and specific issues or deficiencies under each type that impact functionality e.g. that may lead to degraded functional capacity. Based on the assessor s completion of a facility survey for the functional assessment a record is created of specific functional issues or deficiencies under each Sub issue Type d potentially requiring corrective action through modernization. Note if corrective action could be accomplished through repair or refurbishment then the deficiency would be in condition not function. Further the process provides for calculation of an objective repeatable and scientifically based functionality index FI metric that relates functional capability capacity on a numerical scale such as 0 100. Among other benefits this allows objective comparison among a portfolio of assets.

In select embodiments of the present invention a system employs means for implementing a top down tiered standardized data collection recording and evaluation process for establishing an objective measure of the functional capacity of an asset to address one or more specified uses. The system comprises means for developing one or more lists of functionally impacted Sub issue Types d and specific issues under each Sub issue Type d that may impact functionality of the asset for one or more specified uses means for providing the list to one or more evaluators means for employing evaluators to use the list to evaluate functionality of the asset such that evaluators assign a severity measure on a severity scale to each Sub issue Type d record occurrences of issues under each Sub issue Type d associated with the asset and occurrences of issues are summed to determine Density of the Sub issue Type d means for recording an evaluator s evaluation in at least one engineering management system EMS and means for using the recorded evaluation to calculate as the measure a value to be inserted on a numerical scale as a functionality index FI.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system employs a numerical scale of values from 0 100.

In select embodiments of the present invention the means for evaluation comprise at least answers to questions in the list.

In select embodiments of the present invention the engineering management system is the BUILDER application.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system incorporates one or more custom algorithms to calculate the functionality index FI.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system generates one or more objective parametric cost estimates of modernization of the asset to correct one or more functional Sub issue Types d.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system incorporates means to combine the functionality index FI with a condition index CI to establish an objective measure of suitability of the asset for meeting the specified use.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system incorporates a severity scale upon which intervals are established such that degrees of severity are consistent with those of a Condition Index CI scale used in the BUILDER application.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for evaluation include one or more facility surveys for each specified use.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system yields a functionality index FI that facilitates prioritizing work requirements. In select embodiments of the present invention the system yields a functionality index FI that further facilitates making investment decisions to choose from among alternative modernization configurations for the asset.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system facilitates development of a functionality index FI for one or more uses of a typical asset. In select embodiments of the present invention the system further comprises means for researching categorizing and enumerating functionality Sub issue Types d and specific issues thereunder as relates to obsolescence user requirement changes lost efficiency codes and regulations compliance for use of the typical asset and the like means for developing and providing one or more functionality rating sheets that explicitly define levels of functionality impact and SRM considerations at a number of discrete intervals along the scale of functionality index FI such that the rating sheets delineate sections of the rating scale and facilitate evaluators in judging functionality scenarios determining which interval is a best fit and assigning a score within the interval means for presenting the rating sheet Sub issue Types d and specific issues together with a number of different functionality impact scenarios for one or more uses of the asset to one or more panels of experts to provide functionality ratings of impact to the asset s capacity for meeting the specified use assuming the existence of one or more Sub issue Types d and one or more issues thereunder means for using the panel s ratings to develop quantitative functionality deduct value relationships and procedures for assessments by evaluators and means for implementing the list in one or more engineering management systems as an assessment checklist for use by evaluators. Refer to for one such checklist for the ADA design requirements of a specific Sub issue Type d as may be provided on a laptop computer for use on site by the evaluator.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system incorporates means for researching categorizing and enumerating functionality Sub issue Types d and issues thereunder. These means may be selected from the group comprising manual searches computerized searches interviews literature reviews surveys polls combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for using a panel s ratings to develop quantitative functionality deduct value relationships and procedures for assessments by evaluators may be selected from the group comprising computers software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the means for implementing the list in one or more engineering management systems as an assessment checklist for use by evaluators may be selected from the group comprising electronic devices personal digital assistants PDA laptop computers computers software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system incorporates one or more flowchart software interfaces in the engineering management system.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system facilitates a functionality assessment of a building. In select embodiments of the present invention the engineering management system used with the system is the BUILDER application.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system further comprises means for organizing ratings based on functionality Sub issue Type Severity and Density means for screening outliers means for computing mean Deduct Values t for each Sub issue Type Severity Density combination means for plotting Deduct Values t versus Density and means for fitting plotted data with a curve to mathematically describe the relationship of the Deduct Value t for each Sub issue Type d and Severity as a function of Density.

In select embodiments of the present invention the means for organizing ratings based on functionality Sub issue Type d Severity and Density may be selected from the group comprising electronic devices personal digital assistants PDA laptop computers computers software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the means for screening outliers may be selected from the group comprising COTS software laptop computers computers software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the means for computing mean Deduct Values t for each Sub issue Type Severity Density combination may be selected from the group comprising laptop computers computers software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the means for plotting Deduct Values t versus Density may be selected from the group comprising COTS software laptop computers computers software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the means for fitting plotted data with a curve to mathematically describe the relationship of the Deduct Value t for each Sub issue Type d and Severity as a function of Density may be selected from the group comprising COTS software laptop computers computers software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system further comprises means for developing the Deduct Value t to a statistical 95 confidence interval such that the resulting functionality index FI is 5 points of true attaining this accuracy by employing a minimum number of raters. In select embodiments of the present invention the minimum number of raters is seventeen on average.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system incorporates means to apply one or more deduct adjustments to the sum t of the individual Deduct Values t to reflect the nonlinear effect on asset use of multiple functionality Sub issue Types d.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system incorporates means to derive the deduct adjustment for calculating Adjusted Deduct Values t comprising means for establishing one or more panels of expert raters means for providing the raters with multiple scenarios each scenario containing one or more functionality Sub issue Types d means for raters to provide an overall rating for each scenario means for establishing a plot of the sum t of individual Deduct Values t versus the direct rating value of each number of Sub issue Types d e.g. 2 3 4 5 for 5 Sub issue Types d existing in an evaluation to obtain an appropriate Adjusted Deduct Value t as represented by the slope of the plot for each number of functionality Sub issue Types d existing in a given assessment such that depending on the nature and number of Sub issue Types d the overall rating yields an Adjusted Deduct Value t less than the sum t of the individual Sub issue Type Deduct Values t.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for establishing one or more panels of expert raters may be selected from the group comprising requests for support of experts direction to experts to serve contracts for experts to serve combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for providing raters with multiple scenarios each scenario containing one or more functionality Sub issue Types d may be selected from the group comprising laptop computers computers personal digital assistants PDA software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for raters to provide an overall rating for each scenario may be selected from the group comprising laptop computers computers personal digital assistants PDA software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for establishing a plot of the sum t of individual Deduct Values t versus the direct rating value of each number of Sub issue Types d may be selected from the group comprising COTS software laptop computers computers software programs custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system may iterate the process for different uses of the asset.

In select embodiments of the present invention the system employs a tiered process encompassing three or more tiers. In select embodiments of the present invention the system employs three tiers asset level system level and component level such that systems are parts of assets and one or more components are parts of one or more systems and system and component levels provide refined estimates of the scope of required modernization the component level providing the most refined estimate.

In select embodiments of the present invention means are provided for organizing Sub issue Types d within functionality categories or Types T presenting each Sub issue Type d thereunder as a question an evaluator answering each question to facilitate determining Density and Severity at which Sub issue Types d impact the specified use such that the answers yield a rating for a functionality category in turn facilitating calculation of the Functionality Index FI. One or more of the answers may be based on observations of evaluators combined with input from building users and maintenance personnel.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for developing comprise one or more panels of experts.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for providing the list to one or more evaluators may be selected from the group comprising electronic communications mail hand delivery combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for employing evaluators to use the list to evaluate functionality of the asset may be selected from the group comprising directions to an employee hiring of a contractor combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for recording an evaluator s evaluation in one or more engineering management systems may be selected from the group comprising electronic devices manual transcription laptop computers personal digital assistants PDA computers barcode readers purpose built electronic instruments combinations thereof and the like.

In select embodiments of the present invention means for using a recorded evaluation to calculate the Functionality Index FI may be selected from the group comprising custom algorithms application specific integrated circuits ASIC electronic devices laptop computers personal digital assistants PDA computers purpose built electronic instruments combinations thereof and the like.

To serve as a meaningful communication tool and metric a building functionality score needs to be consistent objective and repeatable when used by various assessors. Achieving this objectivity requires a standardized evaluation and data collection and recording process. To be viable to implement the data collection process needs to be efficient with the minimum amount of assessment time required. To accomplish this a top down tiered approach is developed to narrow the focus and assure greater assessment detail is applied to priority issues or problems. This approach saves effort reduces cost and focuses attention where needed. It also allows the identification and development of modernization requirements to efficiently flow from a broad strategic planning phase to a detailed tactical planning phase. This assessment approach encompasses three levels A B C as shown in depicting the Tiered Functionality Assessment Process of select embodiments of the present invention.

Each tier A B C in the assessment is focused on a specific level of detail in the building hierarchy. A next lower level provides a more refined estimate of the scope of re capitalization modernization work requirements.

A Level assessment A evaluates functionality of the Building overall as a top level functionality assessment of the building. A parametric cost model may be implemented to use the resulting FI and compute a scoping cost estimate to modernize the building as a whole. Note as a whole does not necessarily mean the entire building requires modernization. Rather the building as a whole is being evaluated and the modernization requirements for the entire building whatever scope they may be will be identified. 

A Level assessment B evaluates the functional areas A B C a medium level assessment tailored to designated functional areas systems or spaces of the building. A parametric cost model may take the resulting FI and scope a cost estimate to modernize specific building functional areas.

A Level assessment C evaluates Components A B C as shown in for functional area B only. This is a detailed assessment of specific components or component sections. This assessment refines the scope of work and cost to those specific affected components and component sections.

A Level or high level assessment A is performed to determine the overall functional suitability of the building for supporting a given mission. If this high level assessment A determines the facility to be well suited to support the mission then additional or more detailed assessments are not needed again until changes in user requirements building codes and the like. If the Level assessment A reveals issues or potential issues then a more detailed Level assessment B may be performed to evaluate specific functional areas of the building. This additional detail provides a full description of the issue. Note Issues are defined with respect to a mission not with respect to building problems un associated with a mission. An issue for one mission may not even be a concern for another mission while an issue for a third mission may be a serious deficiency. Thus the term issue is dependent on the mission of the facility and is used as a best fit descriptor of items that may represent at least a cause for concern dependent on the specific mission being supported. The term is used as a classifier for purposes of developing an embodiment of the present invention not as an absolute description of an identified item s potential impact on the building. Thus an item that is termed an issue in an embodiment of the present invention could be a deficiency for one mission and of little or no concern to another. If modernization is planned or scheduled to address these functional issues then a detailed Level assessment C may be employed to identify those individual systems components or sections that are suspect and in need of modification or replacement.

A Level A functionality rating scopes a quick building wide assessment of suitability to support a given mission. For example it looks at issues of functionality that impact the currently assessed mission of the building as a whole. Level assessments A do not address specifically what is or may be deficient. Rather these assessments do not highlight satisfactory performance areas while highlighting those functional areas including systems or components in some cases that are or may be deficient based solely on the nature of the issue as it relates to the mission needing to be accomplished. At this level this is done without a detailed functional issue assessment.

In select embodiments of the present invention the Level A functionality assessment addresses fourteen discrete functionality categories or issues that may adversely impact a given mission of a facility as shown in Table 1. These categories relate to user requirements technical obsolescence and legal requirements including building codes and regulations.

As shown on the right side of just one use of the FI may be to generate an objective parametric cost estimate of modernization to correct specific functional issues or deficiencies within the various Sub issue Types d . The FI based parametric estimate is much quicker and less expensive to obtain than a detailed engineering cost estimate. The FI may also facilitate prioritizing work requirements and making investment decisions to choose among the options of sustainment modernization restoration SRM and new construction. This process allows decision makers to look at alternatives iterating the process and weighing the cost of each alternative with the respective level of occupancy quality and mission support that each is capable of providing. This type of objective decision support is not possible with conventional assessment processes.

To validate select embodiments of the present invention functionality impact issues related to building obsolescence user requirement changes lost efficiency and building codes and regulations compliance were rigorously researched and categorized. These functionality issues were presented to a panel of building experts to rate the overall building functionality impact. Data were used to develop functionality Deduct Value relationships a d S D and procedures for assessments. A process was computerized in the BUILDER Version 3.0 pre release application. This included the design of an assessment checklist and software interface flowchart.

BUILDER is a software program that automates an engineering management system EMS that may be used for all entities that manage or assess buildings for fitness of use space planning and the like. As well it provides decision makers objective data for evaluating investment potential. The Building Functionality Assessment Process an example of which is given in and the resultant calculated Functionality Index FI metric FI of an embodiment of the present invention may be used with BUILDER to manage building assets efficiently.

To help facility managers make informed infrastructure investment decisions on an objective basis a building s functionality state has to be quantifiable measurable and reviewable over time. The FI of select embodiments of the present invention as may be used in the BUILDER EMS application supports SRM facility infrastructure investment decisions.

To quantify the functionality state of a building in select embodiments of the present invention the functionality metric FI is developed. For consistency FI employs the same guidelines as the Condition Index CI of BUILDER developed for buildings as well as for similar EMS s for pavements roofs pipelines railroad track structure and the like. In select embodiments of the present invention the FI scale ranges from 0 100 with definitions of the intervals on the scale described in Table 2 below.

The intervals on the scale are set such that the degrees of Severity are consistent with those of the Condition Index CI scale used in BUILDER and similar EMS s developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In a manner similar to the CI the FI quantitatively and objectively establishes the functional suitability of the building to support a specified mission. Functional assessments unlike condition assessments may not be performed without knowledge of the mission to be met by the facility.

Associated with each functionality issue category or type T are specific Sub issue Types d thereunder. For an older facility the Environmental Health issue category T may include asbestos air quality radon lead paint and the like. These Sub issue Types d are mission defined and impact the functionality of the building to perform a specific mission affecting its capability to support that mission in a safe and efficient manner. The number of Sub Issue types d considered with the extent Density and significance Severity of each type is used to establish the functionality rating or index FI for a given mission of a facility.

Refer to depicting a generalized Functionality Index FI Model . In select embodiments of the present invention the degree quantitative amount of functionality impact i.e. the Functionality Index FI may be established by considering individual issue categories T further divided into Functionality Sub issue Types d and two attributes Severity and Density for each Sub issue Type d . The manner in which the Sub issue Type d affects mission to include regulatory compliance comfort safety and the like establishes Severity . How widespread the Sub issue Type d is within the facility establishes Density .

In select embodiments of the present invention to perform a Level assessment A an evaluator completes a facility level i.e. Building functionality questionnaire. The questionnaire considers each Sub issue Type d of interest e.g. those in Table 1 and assigns each to fall within one of a representative group of ranges of FI ratings e.g. a group of ranges designated as green A amber B and red C. This captures the impact on support to a given mission of individual Functionality Sub issue Types d .

Refer to . In select embodiments of the present invention the FI may be indicated on a thermometer indicating quantified measures of suitability in ranges such that a top range A may have a green background indicating satisfactory to support the specified mission a middle range B may have an amber background indicating satisfactory for most purposes or marginal for selected mission support purposes and a lowest range C that may have a red background indicating marginal or unsatisfactory capability to support the specified mission. Specific definitions of color coded ranges may be 

In select embodiments of the present invention combining a specific Sub issue Type d its Severity and Density results in a functionality deduct value t that is used in a weighted deduct value Density model to compute the FI . The weighted deduct value density model is based on the relationship 

In select embodiments of the present invention by applying rating scale theory the FI approximates the rating obtained by the use of a panel of expert raters. In effect the rating scale validates the functionality issues with meaningful numerical functionality indexes at appropriate assessment levels. The raters are employed in a rigidly controlled rating session setting. To develop the FI using this method a number of assumptions are made 

In select embodiments of the present invention during a rating session raters are presented with a number of different functionality impact scenarios for a facility supporting a specified mission. The mission may be the original mission a current mission or a proposed mission. To separate the concept of condition from the functionality metric raters are instructed not to consider condition as a reason for functionality impact. Functionality impact scenarios are used to address one or more functionality Sub issue Types d of varying Severity and Density . For select embodiments of the present invention Table 3 lists the specific Sub issue Types d as questions associated with each of the functionality categories listed in Table 1. Each rater is asked to rate the overall building functionality based on the Sub issue Types d existing in each scenario. This rating is on a 0 100 scale and is based on the guidelines discussed above for establishing the framework of the FI .

For implementing select embodiments of the present invention panel members are given a Functionality Rating Sheet an example of which is shown in Table 4. This sheet explicitly defines levels of building functionality loss and SRM considerations at a number of discrete intervals along the functionality index FI scale. This sheet delineates these intervals along the rating scale. This allows raters to judge any functionality scenario determine which interval is the best fit and then assign a score within that interval. Adherence to the guidelines of the rating sheet ensures consistency and reduces error.

In select embodiments of the present invention functionality rating data from the panel are compiled to develop models for translating functionality issues into quantitative Deduct Values t. Results are organized based on functionality Sub issue Type d Severity and Density . Outliers are screened and mean Deduct Values t are computed for each Sub issue Type Severity Density combination. Deduct Values t are then plotted and fitted with a curve to mathematically describe the relationship of the Deduct Value t for a Sub issue Type d and Severity as a function of Density as shown in .

Refer to showing a graph of Deduct Values t versus percent Density for a given Sub issue Type d and Severity . Functionality Deduct Curves are illustrated for Red and Amber configuration issue conditions respectively. No curves are needed for the Green condition as that is a satisfactory rating. In select embodiments of the present invention Functionality Deduct Curves are developed to a statistical 95 confidence interval that the resulting FI is 5 points of true. To attain this accuracy a minimum number of raters are required. On average statistical sample sizes of seventeen raters are required. In select embodiments of the present invention nineteen raters are used on average.

When multiple Sub issue Types d exist their cumulative functionality impact is not the arithmetic sum of individual Sub issue Types d . If it were the presence of several Sub issue Types d simultaneously could result in the FI being less than zero exceeding the bounds of the metric. Consider also the psychophysics aspect that reduces the influence of any given Sub issue Type d when additional Sub issue Types d exist. Psychophysics describes how an organism rater uses its sensory systems to detect events in its environment. The processes of the sensory systems are of interest rather than their structure or physiology. Therefore a Deduct Adjustment Factor F t d is applied to the sum t of the individual Deduct Values t to reflect the nonlinear effect on a mission of cumulative functionality Sub issue Types d .

Refer to a graph depicting one plot each of the Sum of Individual Deduct Values versus Adjusted Deduct Values t for and Sub issue Types d from which correction factors may be derived. In select embodiments of the present invention Adjusted Deduct Values t are derived by providing an expert panel of raters with several scenarios containing multiple functionality Sub issue Types d as in the above example of with 2 3 4 5 and 6 Sub issue Types d . Depending on the nature and number of Sub issue Types d an overall rating yields a functionality Deduct Value a d S T less than the sum t of the individual Sub issue Type Deduct Values t. By plotting the sum t of the individual Deduct values t versus the direct rating value of the combined multiple Sub issue Types d a correction factor represented by the slope of the appropriate line may be defined individually for each number of Sub issue Types d present in a given assessment.

In select embodiments of the present invention the data models for the Functionality Deduct Curves and the multiple Sub issue Type adjustment factors are stored in the BUILDER EMS system libraries. This allows for automatic calculation of the FI by collecting and recording the applicable functionality Sub issue Types d .

Refer to a screen print of the Functionality Assessment screen in BUILDER shown for illustration purposes only. At the Level Tier assessment level A one or more functionality assessments are performed depending on the number of alternative missions to be supported. Each assessment is stored by date as a separate record with a description . In addition the building use type specific mission supported for which that building s functionality was evaluated is also recorded. The use type defines the evaluated mission supported by the building. Multiple use types may be listed for a given building thus assuming for rating purposes multiple possible missions to support. Thus the building functionality may be assessed for its current use or for alternative to potential uses. Additionally the list of 14 functionality issue categories T provided in Table 1 is available on this screen.

Refer to . In select embodiments of the present invention during the Level functionality assessment A each of these categories T may be expanded to show the Sub issue Types d relevant for each. shows the Sub issue Types d associated with the Location issue category Issue Type . Each of these Sub issue Types d is presented as a question that the evaluator answers to determine the Density and Severity at which each individual Sub Issue Type d impacts support of a mission. The answers to these questions determine the rating for the functionality category T and are used to calculate the FI . In select embodiments of the present invention the answers objective ratings are based on observations of a functionality evaluator with input from building users and maintenance personnel as appropriate. The completion of the evaluation provides a consistent repeatable and objective metric of functionality FI that is used to estimate the suitability of the facility to support a designated or planned use i.e. mission depending on the questions initially asked.

The FI is important to the SRM decision making process because it is an objective indicator. In select embodiments of the present invention the FI indicates how suitable the facility s inherent characteristics size location configuration and the like are for supporting its designated mission including the safety and overall well being of the building occupants. As planners evaluate different scenarios the FI and functionality assessment procedure used to develop it are practical tools for establishing the capabilities of existing infrastructure.

In select embodiments of the present invention the FI serves a dual role as both an evaluation and an execution metric. One use as an execution metric involves establishing thresholds. When the functionality index FI for a building falls below some minimum threshold standard modernization requirements may be generated. Because the FI is an objective metric it provides quantifiable justification of modernization needs. Additionally in select embodiments of the present invention the FI may be used to parametrically estimate the cost of building modernization as further discussed below.

Refer to an example of the change in FI as may be plotted over time to implement the FI as an execution metric. The plot exhibits discrete decreases in FI that may be due to a number of causes as diverse as change in mission technology communications advances requiring re wiring and the like. Although the discrete decreases in performance do not occur all at once they are measured at a specific time via an assay or inspection and their measurement is indicated at a discrete moment in time. At some point a threshold is reached at which the asset is no longer suitable to meet mission requirements. At some time after passing the threshold modernization of the asset is undertaken to enable it to support its current mission and perhaps a new mission as foreseen for the near term.

In select embodiments of the present invention in addition to determining functionality requirements for an asset s current purpose users may also perform functionality assessments to determine future requirements for a potential new mission. For example military base closures may require a mission along with the supporting resources of people material and equipment to be transferred to other bases. The functional characteristics of existing buildings on the new bases may be assessed to measure their ability to support a new mission. This may occur if a new type of aircraft is to be stationed at the base and hangar modernization is required to support it. Multiple scenarios for different missions and building configurations may be run. Applying results of these evaluations to modernization requirements projected modernization resources may be optimized.

In select embodiments of the present invention an asset s FI and CI are used to objectively quantify justification for rehabilitation or modernization. This includes comparing cost of restoration and modernization versus demolition and new construction. With this objective information about condition and functionality work plans may be developed based on sound investment strategies prioritization criteria and budget constraints. Leveraging the capabilities of the BUILDER EMS simulations may be run to show the future impact of current SRM decisions on buildings for example. In select embodiments of the present invention the FI implemented in BUILDER and like software provides a proactive means of asset management based on an objective metric.

Summarizing some of the salient features provided by employing select embodiments of the present invention 

It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as described. Accordingly all such modifications are intended to be included within the scope of this invention as defined in the following claims. In the claims means plus function clauses are intended to cover the structures described herein as performing the recited function and not only structural equivalents but also equivalent structures. Thus although a nail and a screw may not be structural equivalents in that a nail employs a cylindrical surface to secure wooden parts together whereas a screw employs a helical surface in the environment of fastening wooden parts a nail and a screw may be equivalent structures.

The abstract is provided to comply with the rules requiring an abstract that will allow a searcher to quickly ascertain the subject matter of the technical disclosure of any patent issued from this disclosure. Any advantages and benefits described may not apply to all embodiments of the invention.

