---

title: Offline methods for authentication in a client/server authentication system
abstract: A method for providing authentication of a user of a recipient unit when the recipient unit is off-line includes storing one or a plurality of challenge-reply sets associated with an article based on an on-line communication with a sender unit. Each of the challenge-reply sets includes at least a challenge-reply pair for use in off-line authentication of the user for a particular resource available through the recipient unit. When the user is offline, the method includes selecting at least one of the plurality of stored challenge-reply sets for off-line authentication of the user for the particular resource available through the recipient unit.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09281945&OS=09281945&RS=09281945
owner: Entrust, Inc.
number: 09281945
owner_city: Dallas
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050930
---
This is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR PROVIDING ELECTRONIC MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION having Ser. No. 10 849 402 filed on May 19 2004 having as inventors Voice et al. and owned by instant Assignee which is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR SECURELY PROVIDING IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION USING TRANSLUCENT IDENTIFICATION MEMBER having Ser. No. 10 748 523 filed on Dec. 30 2003 having as inventors Chiviendacz et al. and owned by instant Assignee.

The invention relates generally to method and apparatus for providing authentication between a user and a target resource or information sending entity and more particularly to methods and apparatus that employ soft tokens or hard tokens for providing mutual authentication between a user and a target resource or information sending entity.

Mutual authentication systems and methods are known that attempt to authenticate a user or recipient of information that is being provided by a content service provider or other target resource that is for example accessible through an online communication link such as through the Internet an intranet or any other suitable wireless or non wireless network. Such methods and apparatus attempt to thwart malicious exploits by hackers and others that attempt to steal a user s identity. For example a malicious entity may send an email using the address of a legitimate bank and directs the recipient to a counterfeit website . The recipient believing that it is a legitimate site may be tricked into providing information such as an account number and password that can be used by the malicious entity to access the recipient s online account. The problem may be particularly acute in the consumer world where conventional methods of online mutual authentication may be very complex typically requiring expensive hardware deployment and complex user interactions that make such mutual authentication techniques impractical. As such it would be desirable to provide a system and method that allows the confirmation of users or recipients that are accessing an intended target organization i.e. sending entity in a relatively inexpensive but secure manner.

Two factor authentication techniques are known that for example use a first authentication factor to authenticate an end user s identity and a second factor that is used for authentication to supplement the user name and password typically used in the first factor authentication. The concept of a second factor is that a user can authenticate using something that they know i.e. their password and something that they have i.e. the second factor which may be for example a hardware token . Typically the second factor mechanisms are hardware based and are physically distributed to the end user. For example time synchronous tokens are known and are sometimes referred to as multi factor authentication techniques. Several known techniques are described further below.

Also various methods for performing authentication of a target organization in connection with Internet applications are known that include for example secure socket layer server authentication which provides certification from a trusted third party based on the identity of the organization hosting a given web application. However this can require the user to perform the manual step of double clicking on an on screen icon and reading through information. The requirement of manual action often precludes it from being performed consistently and thus undermines the effectiveness of the method. In addition client security plug in applications are also known that involve an end user downloading and installing client side software which provides a visual indication of when the user is communicating with the legitimate site. However it can be burdensome for end users to download and install software or to go through several manual steps to confirm the identity of the target organization.

In addition both user and target organization authentication methods can be impractical when extending to other channels of communication such as interactive voice response systems or communication through mobile devices such as cellular phones personal digital assistants Internet appliances or other mobile devices as they can rely on a user display and entry methods unique to web based applications.

Ensuring that a sent email message or other electronic message has been sent by a sender that can be trusted also referred to as being authentic helps ensure against theft of important information by unscrupulous parties and can help limit spam and phishing. Phishing is a form of Internet scam that usually involves the mass sending of emails which appear to be from a legitimate organization such as a bank or other financial institution or other organization. These emails often direct the recipient to a fraudulent website or form where he or she is tricked into divulging personal or financial information. An alternative phishing scam may not ask for such information but upon entering the URL execute a download of a keystroke logging program that lets the phisher harvest information from the recipient s machine. The information can then be used for identity theft and fraud.

Phishing attacks can be costly and can drain a company s resources since for example a large number of attacks can be run against target companies in large volumes and billions of phishing messages pass through filtering systems that can slow down email delivery use up valuable processing times of servers and can ultimately result in the loss of important financial data to unscrupulous parties.

Several solutions are known that attempt to address this problem. Because phishing attacks often begin with large volumes of email sent from a forged sending address efforts to reduce spam email may be somewhat effective in reducing the number of phishing attacks. For example one method referred to as Sender Policy Framework an originator of a message or originator domain publishes in a directory or other suitable repository legitimate sending computer addresses which are verified by receiving message transfer agents. The message transfer agent may verify a received message via a DNS server domain name server . However this technique can require widespread adoption of SPF enabled message transfer agents which can potentially be costly to implement and deploy.

Another technique referred to as Coordinated Spam Reduction Initiative again requires originators in an originator domain to publish legitimate sending computer addresses which are verified by receiving message transfer agents in a relatively similar manner as described above.

Another technique requires domains to digitally sign email which is verified by the receiving message transfer agent via DNS servers. Again this can require the widespread adoption of modified versions of message transfer agents.

Another technique uses the S MIME protocol wherein sending individuals or domains digitally sign emails that are verified by receiving incoming message transfer agents or user email clients. This can require special email client features or recipient message transfer agents that are not currently supported in web based email clients.

Another technique employs secret images that are shared between a sender and a recipient. As understood a personalized image is sent by a user to an authentication server. The server stores the recipient sent image. The authentication server may then send the personalized image to the recipient with an email and the user seeing the image recognizes that it is the one he sent. Also during logon to a site the server may include the image in the logon page so that a user trusts the login page when the user sees their personalized image. Among other drawbacks this system appears to use the same image for multiple logins until the shared image is changed and may require the recipient to choose and send the image to a sending server.

In addition other systems are known which attempt to provide instead of sender authentication recipient authentication. For example U.S. Pat. No. 5 712 627 discloses among other things an issued identification card that has indicum at one of the addressable positions on an assigned card. The card may have rows and columns with different numbers characters or symbols that are addressable by the rows and columns. To determine whether a person seeking access to data is authorized to obtain requested access the identification card is distributed to authorized users. A requesting person seeking access provides the indicia at one or more addressable positions on the card as specified by a security system. To notify the person which indicum to enter and send back the system selects coordinate indicia known to be present on a particular card. The recipient must then send back the indicia located at the address sent by the security system. If the indicia matches that assigned to the person seeking access then access is granted. However such systems do not resolve the problem with respect to phishing since the system provides authentication of a receiver and not a sender and requests that a person seeking access identify themselves to the system and the system requires entry and sending by the user of information located on the security card.

Other authentication systems are also known that have been employed for example in the military numeral cipher authentication systems have been used that employ cards that are held by a sender and recipient. A transmission is authenticated for example by using a challenge and reply authentication scheme. A sender of an electronic transmission for example may use the card and randomly select a row and column and transmit the row and column identifiers as a challenge. For a reply row and column identifiers are used to look up an alphabetical letter which is then communicated back. As such the sender can be assured that the receiver is in possession of a card. However the authentication of the sender to the receiver is typically done by repeating the same challenge and reply in reverse and both sender and receiver must be in possession of the same authentication card to achieve mutual authentication.

Another technique also uses a card that includes rows and columns of information on both the sender and receiver side however this transmission authentication scheme is used to authenticate transmissions. For example during transmission authentication columns of transmission authentication diagraphs are located on the back of a cipher table and used to authenticate a sender. Column assignments are made by a designated representative such as a commander of a unit. The column assignments are known to both the sender and receiver apriori. Transmission authentication diagraphs are used only once. The first unused authenticator in the assigned column is used and a line is drawn through that authenticator to preclude its reuse. Such schemes do not utilize a random selection of information on the card and do not utilize the sending of coordinate information since the column information is known apriori. As such only the authentication information is apparently communicated. If the sender sends authentication information and it is valid as determined by the recipient the recipient crosses the authentication information off the card. The next time authentication is required the next authentication information in the same column is then used. As such a sequential and non random approach is used. However if the authentication card of a recipient is lost or obtained by an unscrupulous party they would know how to act as a sender since they know which authentication information is next in the column since no random selection is utilized and since the card has markings thereon. In this system no coordinate information is sent since the column of information used to authenticate a sender is made known apriori to the sender and receiver. In addition if the receiver does not receive the sender s transmission the synchronization between the sender and receiver would be lost which may cause subsequent authentication attempts to fail.

Also information security and user identification security are becoming increasingly important as technology becomes more sophisticated. For example multi factor authentication schemes are used in an attempt to thwart hackers or to thwart other inappropriate uses of information and user identities. For example a two factor authentication scheme may use information known to a recipient or user such as a password or personal identification number PIN as well as some type of physical token such as a banking card credit card password token or other physical token which a user must be in physical possession of in order to initiate and complete an online transaction. Another level of authentication may include biometric authentication that may include the scanning of a fingerprint eye or other biometric to again verify that the user attempting to gain access to a process device application or other right is in fact the appropriate user.

Transaction cards are known that may include for example smart cards magnetic strip based cards and other transaction cards that facilitate banking transactions credit card transactions or any other suitable transactions. As known in the art a user personal identification number PIN is usually required in addition to the possession of a banking card to obtain cash from a cash dispensing machine or to otherwise carry out an online transaction. One known multi factor authentication technique employs the use of a hardware token such as a battery operated smart card that displays a periodically changing and seemingly random number on a portion of the smart card. When a user wishes to execute a transaction with the smart card for example the user enters the seemingly random number that changes often. The receiving transaction server compares the received code entered by the user as displayed on the smart card with a corresponding number generated by a code source generator. If the code entered by the user matches the number generated by the code source generator the transaction is approved and the user is granted a particular right such as accessing a bank account purchasing goods obtaining information gaining access to a website or other software application or any other suitable right as desired. However such hardware tokens can be quite expensive and are battery powered thereby requiring changing of the battery and the potential of an electronic malfunction due to moisture problems or any other problems related to electronic circuitry.

Other smart cards that do not employ such screens typically require a card reader that reads for example a magnetic strip. This can be a restriction where a user wishes to perform an online transaction but is not sitting at a terminal that contains or has access to a magnetic strip reader.

In an apparently unrelated field translucent cards are known such as plastic cards that contain a semi transparent picture or pattern that when visually evaluated does not appear to connote any particular information. However when the translucent card is held over a display with a corresponding background filter pattern the combination of the pattern on the card with the background pattern on the display screen combine to present a visually recognizable message or word such as the word sorry or you re a winner . These are static messages which are not unique to any user and typically include only a single message. Such plastic cards may be used for example to see if a holder has won a prize. The card for example may be mailed in the mail to members of a population. Those recipients then go to a web page identified on the translucent card or otherwise indicated in the mailing information to see if they have won a prize. However such plastic cards do not provide multi factor authentication are not user specific do not include multiple messages and typically include static messages.

In certain circumstances it may be necessary to authenticate a user recipient when the user wants to use the resources of the recipient unit when the recipient unit is off line relative to a target source. For example the recipient unit may be a laptop computer that can login to a target source such as a server to use the resources of the server. A user may log into the server from a laptop computer by any one of the known authentication methods when the laptop is in online communication with the server. The authentication of the user however is typically provided by an on line interaction between the recipient unit and the target source. When the recipient unit is off line i.e. not communicating with the target source the system administrator may wish to also provide authentication of the user for accessing the resources of the recipient unit. Other than first level authentication the administrator may wish to provide second level authentication of the user when accessing the off line recipient. For example the above noted laptop server example the user of the laptop may travel with the laptop and be unable to access the server through online authentication. However the administrator may wish to limit the use of the laptop by the user when the user is off line or provide second level authentication of the user when using the resources of the laptop while off line. However without the recipient being online with the target source a user typically cannot be second level authenticated because the second level authentication information and verification of the user is typically transmitted from the target source to the recipient during on line authentication.

An existing solution to the above described problem is provided by RSA Security s RSA s SecurID for Microsoft Windows which is a client authentication client server application that allows the use of a SecurID time synchronous one time password token for authentication to the Microsoft Windows client. SecurID for Microsoft Windows is capable of completing the authentication process offline. SecurID includes an RSA Authentication Manager that resides on the server and an RSA Agent for Microsoft Windows that resides on the client.

The first step in SecureID s process is that after a successful online authentication the Authentication Manager prepares the client system for offline authentication by pre calculating a series of future time dependent authentication codes to be used by the client for a determined number of days. The Authentication Manager then hashes the codes and sends them for secure storage on the client system. When the user attempts to logon to their desktop offline the Authentication Agent for Microsoft Windows will recognize that the client isn t connected to the server will prompt the user for their userID and passcode. The Authentication Agent then compares the information entered by the user with the stored codes and will grant or deny access accordingly. The next time that the user logs onto the desktop with online connection to the server the Authentication Manager will update the codes stored on the client for future offline access.

The SecurID product however has several drawbacks. One drawback is that the entire offline authentication provided by SecurID is time dependant. SecurID requires the system clocks of the offline client and that of the authentication server to be synchronized or else the authentication attempts will fail because the submitted codes will be verified against the system clock. Another drawback is that the offline authentication mechanism isn t flexible enough to accommodate a user who can be offline for an indeterminate period of time. Should the offline period be longer than the predetermined time period allowed for offline authentication then the system can no longer authenticate the user. Once the time period expires user trust and authentication is no longer controlled by the authentication mechanism. Yet another drawback is that pre calculated time dependent authentication replies i.e. codes are stored on the client that have no corresponding challenges. Therefore the challenge never changes and applies to all of the pre calculated replies.

Accordingly a need exists for a method and apparatus that overcomes one or more of the above problems.

Briefly a method for providing authentication of a user of a recipient unit is disclosed when the recipient unit is off line. The method includes storing at least one challenge reply set associated with an article based on an on line communication with a sender unit. The challenge reply set includes at least a challenge reply pair for use in off line authentication of the user for a particular resource available through the recipient unit. When the user is offline the method includes selecting the stored challenge reply set for off line authentication of the user for the particular resource available through the recipient unit. The method also includes storing a plurality of challenge reply sets associated with an article with each challenge reply set including at least a challenge reply pair for use in off line authentication of the user. Accordingly when the user is offline the method includes selecting at least one of the plurality of challenge reply sets for off line authentication of the user for the particular resource available through the recipient unit.

In another embodiment a method for providing mutual authentication between a user and a sending unit i.e. target resource in one embodiment includes determining for a user that has been assigned an article such as a card or other suitable article that has indicia thereon desired sender authentication information that corresponds to actual sender authentication information that is embodied on the article. The sender authentication information can be located on the article by using the location information provided by the sending unit in a challenge. The method includes determining for the user corresponding article identification information such as a serial number that has been assigned to the article or a shared secret and sending a challenge for the user wherein the challenge includes at least location information to allow the user to identify desired sender authentication information located on the article and sending the article identification information. The user then receives the location information and article identification information and uses the article identification information as authenticating information that indicates that the sender has sent the information is trustworthy since the article that is in the possession of the user also includes the article identification information thereon. The user then uses the location information that has been sent to the user device to determine for example the corresponding desired sender authentication information that is located on the article such as by column and row information sent by the target resource and sends a reply to the challenge back to the target resource i.e. sending unit . The sender then authenticates the user based on the reply to the challenge. The reply includes user authentication information obtained from the article namely the desired sender authentication information. If the received sender authentication information sent by the user device and obtained from the article based on the location information matches the desired sender authentication information the target resource grants suitable access to the user i.e. the user device . As such article identification information is sent along with location information by a sender after for example a first level of authentication has been determined to be successful. The first level of authentication may include for example the user sending a password and user ID to the target resource in an initial stage of a logon procedure as known in the art whereafter the sending of the location information and article identifier information is subsequently sent based on a successful first factor authentication process.

In another example a method for providing mutual authentication does not require the sending of the article identification information to the user but instead only requires the sending of the location information to allow the user to identify the corresponding authentication information on the article and send a reply back to the target resource for verification. However in this embodiment if the reply does not include the expected target resource authentication information as expected by the sending unit the method includes repeating the same challenge for the user that includes the same location information that was previously sent. This process is repeated over for example each successive session until the user sends the appropriate target source authentication information that was derived from the article based on the location information sent in the challenge.

In addition suitable devices are also disclosed that carry out the above methods. Also a combination of the two methods is employed to effect a type of enhanced mutual authentication process.

Also disclosed is a method for providing electronic message authentication that employs an article also referred to as a member or token such as a card sticker or any other suitable article that includes sender authentication information and location information such as row and column headings. In one example each recipient of interest is issued an article that embodies sender authentication information that is identifiable by corresponding location information such as column and row identifiers. When the sender of an electronic message wants to send a message to a recipient of interest the sender sends the electronic message and both location information and corresponding desired sender authentication information located at the location identified by the location information. This includes data representing the location and authentication information such as an index to a reference to the location information or authentication information itself or any suitable representation thereof . The recipient may then in one embodiment look on their article e.g. card at the corresponding location and see if the sent desired sender authentication information matches the sender authentication information located on the article also referred to as expected sender authentication information . If a match occurs then the recipient trusts the sender of the message. The recipient need not send back any information to the sender. As such a simple card or other article may be used to authenticate a sender of a message to thwart phishing or other sender authentication problems. Other examples will be recognized by those of ordinary skill in the art.

In addition a system for providing electronic message authentication is also disclosed that carries out the above methodology and a transaction card is also disclosed that includes the location information and sender authentication information thereon in the form of a sticker or as part of the transaction card itself. In yet another embodiment the article may be a translucent article to allow light to pass therethrough so that a visual filtering pattern and sender authentication information may be sent by a sender along with the message. A user may hold up the article to a display screen and overlay it on the visual filtering pattern sent by the sender. If the resulting sender authentication information matches the results sent in the message the recipient may trust the sender of the message.

In another embodiment an apparatus and method for securely providing identification information generates one or more obscured user e.g. recipient identifiers for a recipient such as a plurality of identifiers that are generated based on user secret data such as a password personal identification number or other secret or non secret information or identifiers that are not based on user secret data such as the identifier being randomly generated and then associated with the user. In this case no user related information is used but the identifier can still identify the user. In another embodiment a single obscured identifier may be used.

In one embodiment the method and apparatus generates a translucent identification member TIDM such as a portion of or an entire plastic card sheet film or other suitable member that has a translucent area that includes the one or more obscured identifiers. As used herein translucent area can also include a transparent area. For example the translucent identification member may be made from transparent or clear sheets including smoked plastic or other suitable coloring with the obscured identifiers including non character information printed in ink or otherwise placed thereon or therein. The one or more obscured identifiers may be for example one time authentication identifiers that are unique to a recipient of the translucent identification member. As such the translucent identification member or card contains what appears to visually be a random pattern of information.

A corresponding visual filtering pattern is also generated for display on a display device when the user desires to use the translucent identification member. For example the visual filtering pattern also appears to be random from a visual point of view but when visually combined with the one or more obscured identifiers on the translucent identification member a designated one of the one or more obscured identifiers is visually revealed. In one embodiment a user may overlay the translucent identification member over a designated portion of a display device or in the designated portion of a display that displays the visual filtering pattern. A combination of the visual filtering pattern with the pattern of different obscured identifiers on the translucent identification member combine to form a visually revealed single identifier or message from the one or more identifiers. Hence for example in one embodiment a seemingly random pattern is generated on a screen which helps ensure only a single identifier is exposed visually to a user that is viewing the translucent identification member which is overlayed on the visual filtering pattern that is being displayed on the display.

Accordingly if desired a security officer that has access for example to a translucent identification member issuer may use a package of blank cellophane cards that may be used to make the translucent identification members on a local printer. The translucent identification members may be printed having translucent color pattern that serves as the one or more obscured identifiers or have other suitable indicia that appears to be semi random or obscured to a user. Use of color or color background may also be used to defeat photocopying attacks. It will be recognized that portions of or all functions of the translucent identification member issuer may be provided through a distribution of providers and networks or through a web based service. For example a recipient may access a TIDM issuance service through a web connection and locally print the TIDM or receive the TIDM through the mail. Also identifiers can be provided by one party and sent to another party for printing or manufacturing. Other distribution of operations may also be employed as desired.

Once a visually revealed identifier is presented to a user a user enters the visually revealed identifier through a user interface where it is compared to an expected identifier. If the entered identifier matches the expected identifier proper authentication is indicated and a recipient may be granted access to a device application or process or other desired right or submitted data is accepted e.g. such as a vote . In addition a list of revoked translucent identification members may also be maintained to prevent compromise due to theft or loss of translucent identification members. The list may be stored in any suitable location and updated by a service provider translucent identification member issuer or any suitable entity. Since the translucent identification members do not require electronics to generate random numbers the cost of such translucent identification members may be quite low and their reliability may also be relatively high since they are not susceptible to moisture or other damage typically associated with smart cards.

In an alternative embodiment a smart card or other transaction card or non transaction card e.g. voting card or other suitable card may include a translucent identification member if desired. Hence a transaction card is disclosed and includes for example a portion containing card identification information such as a transaction card number which may be impressed thereon such as through raised printing or electronically or through any other suitable storage mechanism such as magnetic strip or any other suitable mechanism as well as a portion containing a translucent identification member that has a translucent area that includes one or more obscured identifiers. As such transaction cards such as credit cards banking cards or any other transaction cards may include a window that contains the translucent identification member or may have a transaction identification number or other identification information affixed to a conventional transaction card to enhance security.

In another embodiment the role of the translucent identification member and the recipient unit are reversed. For example in this embodiment the translucent identification member contains the visual filtering pattern and the display screen displays at least one obscured identifier that may be for example data representing user authentication data that is unique to a user or other data if desired. The combination of overlaying the translucent identification member visual filter over the display that displays an obscured identifier reveals un obscures the at least one obscured identifier on the screen. The visual filtering pattern on the member stays the same since it is printed on the member and the displayed obscured identifier is changed during each session or at other suitable intervals.

Accordingly one or more of the following advantages may result. Since the translucent identification members can be printed by an organization security officer no manufacturing costs need to be incurred and they can be generated locally for a recipient. Since there need not be electronics there is no battery to be replaced and no damage from exposure to moisture need occur. No network or radio connectivity is required such as typically required by devices employing magnetic strips. The translucent identification member may be made of plastic or any other suitable material and in any suitable thickness. They are durable and easy to replace in the event of a compromise since they may be produced locally to an organization. Also investment in a substantial network infrastructure to continually generate master codes that are matched with dynamically changing codes on a screen and a smart card can be avoided.

In one embodiment the displayed visual filtering pattern selectively illuminates a portion of a translucent identification member to visually reveal one of the one or more obscured identifiers. The visual filtering pattern can be changed with each authentication session. The one or more obscured identifiers are printed indicia on a semitransparent or transparent card and is preferably unique within a particular domain of users. The one or more obscured identifiers are visually obscured through many suitable techniques such as color shading ordering of the characters a combination thereof or any other suitable visual obfuscation technique. illustrates one example of a system for securely providing identification information that includes a translucent identification member issuer operative to generate a secure identification member such as translucent identification member a visual filter generator a translucent identification member authentication module a recipient unit and memory . In this example the visual filter generator and translucent identification member authentication module are included as part of a translucent identification member authenticator that may be implemented as one or more software modules executing on a computing unit such as a personal computer work station server hand held device or any other suitable device or multiple networked devices. The translucent identification member authenticator is operatively coupled in this example to a web server which in turn is operatively coupled to a network such as the Internet to facilitate web based communication between a recipient unit and a translucent identification member authenticator . As such multiple circuits are formed by the software and processing device s . Also as used herein circuits also refers to any suitable electronic logic in any suitable form including but not limited to hardware microprocessors discrete logic state machines digital signal processor etc. software firmware or any suitable combination thereof.

The translucent identification member issuer the visual filter generator and the translucent identification member authentication module may be implemented in any suitable manner and is preferably but not limited to software modules executing on one or more computing devices that contain one or more processing devices that execute instructions that are stored in memory.

In this example the translucent identification member issuer will be described as a local server that generates the translucent identification member using a printer or other suitable mechanism to generate a translucent identification member . The translucent identification member includes a translucent area that includes one or more obscured identifiers thereon. However it will be recognized that the translucent identification member issuer may be included as part of the translucent identification member authenticator or may be located on any other suitable device including a web server and it will be recognized that any of the software programs described herein may be suitably located on any suitable device or devices as well.

The memory may be any suitable local or distributed memory and may be located on a web server or locally if desired. The memory may be RAM ROM or any suitable memory technology. The recipient unit may be any suitable device such as a laptop computer desktop computer hand held device or any other suitable device that includes a display and user interface and may include one or more processing devices that execute instructions stored in any suitable memory. The recipient device includes the requisite circuitry to provide one or more user interfaces such as graphic user interfaces through web browsers or other applications or operating systems and may include speech recognition interfaces or any suitable user input interfaces. As such the units include a display circuit operative to display a visual filtering pattern defined such that when the visual filtering pattern is visually combined with one or more obscured identifiers located on a translucent identification member a designated one of the one or more identifiers is visually revealed and an input interface operative to receive data representing the visually revealed identifier. In one example a user interface is used to request entry of a serial number associated with the translucent identification member and request entry of the revealed identifier to determine whether to grant a desired right for the recipient.

Also if desired a receiver unit can receive the filter or obscured identifiers for display on a display screen and send the response back through a completely different device or through a completely different channel such as a cell phone by SMS message email message or other suitable channel and or device.

Referring also to a method for securely providing identification information will be described. As shown in block a recipient sends a request into the translucent identification member issuer through the Internet or through any other suitable mechanism to request issuance of a translucent identification member . This may be done for example by a recipient registering with an online financial institution with user supplied data such as a password or other secret information. This is shown as recipient specific information that is received by the translucent identification member issuer .

As shown in block the method includes generating one or more obscured identifiers for a recipient which may be based on for example the recipient specific information and or other information . The other information may be a translucent identification member serial number or other suitable information if desired. This may be done for example by the translucent identification member issuer or any other suitable entity. As shown in block the method includes generating the translucent identification member that has a translucent area that includes one or more obscured identifiers . The one or more obscured identifiers are generated by the translucent identification member issuer in this example and stored in memory in a database form. The one or more obscured identifiers are stored in memory so that they may be subsequently accessed when it becomes necessary to create appropriate visual patterns to reveal the desired revealed identifier or when checking the returned revealed identifier .

For example the translucent identification member issuer may control a printer to print a cellophane card as a translucent identification member that has printed thereon one or more obscured identifiers. One example of a translucent identification member is shown in . The translucent identification member can be made of any suitable material such as plastic or any other suitable material that provides some level of transparency so that a combination of the one or more obscured identifiers when overlayed on a display that emits light allows the light energy or lack of light energy from the display to combine with the one or more obscured identifiers to visually designate one of the one or more identifiers on a translucent identification member. The one or more identifiers on a translucent identification member may also be a plurality of different obscured identifiers.

The translucent identification member may be a card sheet film or other member that may include if desired any suitable adhesive or connecting structure to be applied over a window of a transaction card or any other suitable material. The translucent identification member may also be connected to a transaction card such as for example by using a suitable connecting structure to join the translucent identification member to an end or side of a transaction card. The one or more obscured identifiers that are printed on the translucent identification member as noted above may be characters e.g. ASCII symbols print patterns colored versions thereof or any other suitable indicia. The one or more obscured identifiers appear to be visually obscured and hence seemingly random when viewed by a recipient. In other embodiments it may be desirable to print patterns of ink that do not connote characters but instead visually conceal a message or other information so that when overlayed on top of a display the pattern generated by the display in combination with the printed image allows the viewer to visually decipher a revealed identifier.

The translucent area includes an information pattern that represents one or more identifiers that may be unique identification information that may be used for one or more authentication sessions or other purposes. The information pattern represented by one or more obscured identifiers is preferably unique to a given domain of users to reduce the likelihood of the same user obtaining a same translucent identification member with the same obscured identifiers. The translucent area is configured e.g. sized to overlay at least a portion of the display screen on the recipient unit . In one embodiment each of the one or more obscured identifiers may serve as one time authentication identifiers for the recipient of the translucent identification member. It is noted as used herein identification information includes any information used to directly or indirectly authenticate a user e.g. TIDM recipient or other process of interest or to get access to a desired right associated with a process or device or any other suitable information that is intended to be kept secret except at the time a transaction is to be effected.

To make the TIDM the method may include receiving a request from a user for one or more obscured user identifiers and recording a link between the user and the identification information associated with the one or more obscured user identifiers. The method may include providing the one or more obscured user identifiers to the user wherein the one or more obscured user identifiers are on a translucent identification member that is sent to the user the one or more obscured user identifiers are sent to a third party to be placed on a translucent identification member for the user the one or more obscured user identifiers are sent to the user for placement on a translucent identification member and the one or more obscured user identifiers are selected from a pre existing pool of obscured user identifiers. The request from the user may include user specific information and the user specific information may be used to create the one or more obscured identifiers or may be combined with other information to produce the one or more obscured user identifiers.

As shown in block once the translucent identification member has been generated and provided to a recipient the visual filtering generator or other suitable mechanism generates a visual filtering pattern for display on the display of the recipient device. When the visual filtering pattern is displayed by the recipient device the visual filtering pattern visually combines with the one or more obscured identifiers located on the translucent identification member to designate one of the one or more identifiers. In other words the visual filtering pattern filters out undesired identifiers to reveal a selected one of the one or more identifiers.

As shown in block the method may include overlaying such as by a recipient or a device the translucent identification member on the displayed filtering pattern to visually identify a designated one of the obscured identifiers on the translucent identification member . The visually identified identifier is then entered by the recipient to facilitate a transaction or gain access to a specific desired right associated with any process or device of interest.

As shown again in the steps of are presented in more detail. As shown in block generating one or more obscured identifiers for a recipient may be done for example by the translucent identification member issuer or any other suitable entity by obtaining recipient specific information such as secret or non secret data or non user related information. This process may also be accomplished by using non user related and non user supplied material in which case the generated one or more obscured identifiers are subsequently associated with a user. When recipient specific information is used this may be a personal identification number password user name account number or other data provided by the recipient through the recipient unit or from any other suitable source. This is indicated as recipient specific information . As shown in block the recipient specific information is suitably combined such as through a suitable mathematical function or algorithm to produce the one or more obscured identifiers . The other information may be for example output generated from a random number generator the actual translucent identification member serial number or other TIDM identification information that may be printed on the translucent identification member or stored by the translucent identification member issuer or any other suitable information. As shown in block a translucent identification member serial number or any other suitable information for identifying the translucent identification member is assigned to the obscured one or more identifiers . It will be recognized that upon an initial request or generation of a translucent identification member that the translucent identification member issuer may select a translucent identification member serial number and associate therewith the recipient specific information . This information may be combined to generate the one or more obscured identifiers . The translucent identification member serial number may be stored in memory for later use by the translucent identification member authenticator authenticating a recipient using the translucent identification member . The order of the steps as described herein with respect to any method may be suitably reordered based on a desired result.

As shown in block generating the translucent identification member may include printing the obscured different identifiers in a desired format on a plastic film sheet or card to produce the translucent identification member . As shown in block displaying the filtering pattern on a display may include randomly selecting from the obscured identifiers a selected identifier to produce a visual filtering pattern on display that reveals the selected one of the obscured identifiers as the identifier to be revealed when the translucent identification member is overlayed on the visual filtering pattern .

As shown in and to further illustrate an example as shown in the translucent identification member has printed thereon the translucent identification member serial number or other identification information and the one or more obscured identifiers printed in the translucent area . As noted above this may be printed on cellophane material or other material readily accommodated by conventional printers if desired to reduce fabrication costs. However any suitable material or manufacturing process may be used. Once the recipient is in possession of the translucent identification member multi factor authentication is provided using the translucent identification member .

The filter may be generated in any suitable way. For example a selected obscured identifier may be chosen from the stored one or more obscured identifiers whose position on the TIDM is defined. The visual filter pattern generator produces a filtering pattern based on a predefined layout of the TIDM to insure that the filter blocks the proper character locations. Any other suitable technique may also be used.

As shown in the recipient device may display through a web browser or other suitable user interface an input screen based on a received HTML page if a web browser is being used containing fields that receive user input such as a user identifier field a password field and the translucent identification member serial number field . The user submits the entered information through suitable interface buttons . This information is then sent to the web server via the Internet and if desired forwarded to the translucent identification member authenticator . As shown in this example the information entered in user ID field or the password field may be considered recipient specific information that was previously entered when the translucent identification member issuer initially generated the translucent identification member .

Referring to the issuance of a translucent identification member will be described in more detail by way of an exemplary embodiment. In order to obtain a translucent identification member a recipient registers with an online bank or other institution using recipient specific information such as an account number or other information as indicated by registration request . This request is then passed through to a web server . The web server then communicates with a bank server which includes for example a customer management system and translucent identification member requester which may be a suitable software application executing on a processing device if desired or any other suitable structure. The bank server then generates a translucent identification member issuance request to the translucent identification member issuer which may be included in or separate from a suitable server . The translucent identification member issuance request includes the recipient specific information entered by the user. In response the translucent identification member issuer provides the obscured identifiers in a response message and generates and records a translucent identification member serial number in the memory along with the associated obscured identifiers that will appear on the translucent ID member for the requesting recipient. In this example the bank server links the recipient s account with the translucent identification member serial number and then stores the linked information in a database for later use. The bank server then generates the translucent identification member by for example formatting the obscured identifiers for printing and sending the information to a printer or other device which then prints out or manufactures the translucent identification member . Hence the translucent identification member serial number is assigned by the translucent identification member issuer and is associated e.g. linked with the one or more obscured identifiers and with the user in memory in a database.

The translucent identification member issuer may include an information randomizer and a translucent identification member formatter . The information randomizer may use the translucent identification member serial number as other information to be combined with the recipient specific information to generate the one or more obscured identifiers . This may be done using a hash algorithm or other suitable encoding technique as desired to generate the one or more obscured identifiers . The translucent identification member formatter may be another software application executing on a suitable processing device or devices that formats the information for output to a printer or other manufacturing device.

As shown in block if a match does not exist the recipient will be sent an error and requested to re enter the revealed identifier. The system may change to using a different identifier for the re try. Also the system may lockout the user after a certain number of failed attempts. However as shown in block if a match occurs second factor authentication is determined to be successful and the user is granted the desired right.

The translucent identification member issuer in this example generates a TIDM having a translucent area having a visual filtering pattern thereon configured to visually filter a displayed obscured user identifier s and is configured to overlay at least a portion of a display screen. Having a user enter in user specific information to initiate a session may be desirable where the same filtering pattern is printed on translucent identifier members for a plurality of users. It is desirable to know that the holder of the TIDM is a proper user as opposed to a thief that stole the TIDM. The authenticator or other source sends the generated obscured identifier to the recipient device. The recipient device displays the at least one visually obscured identifier as user authentication data and receives data representing the revealed user authentication data such as the revealed ID itself or a representation of it based on the translucent identification member having a filtering pattern thereon. For example when the translucent identification member having the filtering pattern thereon is held over the display the filter reveals the user identifier. If desired a translucent identifier serial number can be assigned to each TIDM even though the same filter pattern may be printed on more than one TIDM. As such several users may have translucent identification members with the same filter pattern.

The translucent identification member issuer is operative to generate a translucent identification member having a translucent area that includes a visual filtering pattern thereon configured to visually filter a displayed obscured user identifier and configured to overlay at least a portion of a display screen. The obscured identifier generator generates at least one visually obscured identifier for display on a display in response to received user information such as user specific information. The translucent identification member authenticator in this example receives data representing the revealed identifier such as through the user entering the information through a user interface after the filtering pattern is overlayed on the display and as previously described the translucent identification member authenticator compares the received revealed identifier with a corresponding expected identifier since it was generated by the obscured identifier generator to determine whether proper authentication of a recipient is appropriate. Alternatively the translucent identification member authenticator may send the received revealed identifier to a third party that carries out the comparison and sends a message back to the authenticator or recipient unit. Any other suitable division of operations may also be used as desired. The translucent identification member authenticator or third party then sends right grant information to a recipient unit in response to the received data matching the corresponding expected identifier.

Stated another way the method includes receiving user identification information as a first factor of authentication for a user and using such as by the TIDM authenticator service provider or other suitable entity such user identification information to identify a translucent identification member in memory containing a particular visual filtering pattern known to have been associated with such user. The method includes generating an expected identifier to be used as a second factor of authentication for the user associated with the received user identification information and generating a pattern of obscured user identifiers containing the expected identifier such that when the pattern of obscured user identifiers is combined with the visual filtering pattern on the identified translucent identification member associated with the user the expected identifier will be revealed. The method includes transmitting the pattern of obscured user identifiers to a display e.g. a displayed GUI and requesting entry of a revealed identifier and receiving data representing the revealed identifier. As noted above the TIDM authenticator for example or any suitable number of servers or devices act as the circuits to carry out the above operations.

The primary functionality of the disclosed apparatus methods and systems may be provided through application programming interfaces APIs that are executed by one or more processing devices that can be readily integrated into current infrastructures. In addition each translucent identification member in one embodiment is different and has seemingly different random information since the seemingly random information is typically but not necessarily generated from information unique to a recipient such as a password user name personal identification number or any other information. In each embodiment translucent identification members and or visual filters and or obscured identifiers can be pre manufactured and subsequently associated with a user. Additionally the obscured identifiers and or filtering patterns can be pre generated and subsequently applied to translucent identification members. Such subsequent application to translucent identification members may be done by the creator of the filtering patterns or obscured identifiers or may be done by the entity providing the service or by a third party contractor of the service provider. Since the manufacture of translucent identification members can be done with very simple materials such as transparent plastic it is also possible for the service provider to send the obscured identifiers or visual patterns to users who can then themselves apply the filtering pattern or obscured identifiers to a translucent identification member.

The same translucent identification member may be used a repeated number of times since there may be a plurality of different obscured identifiers thereon wherein each time authentication is requested a different one of the obscured identifiers is exposed through the visual filtering pattern. Hence the visually revealed identifier on the translucent identification member can change during each authentication session if desired. The translucent identification members described herein may be used for user authentication activating software applications or for any other suitable purpose. The different obscured identifiers may be characters images or any other suitable information.

Generally speaking the article if desired may be generated as described above with respect to the translucent identification member to generate for example the sender authentication information. However in addition the location information and also needs to be added in one embodiment. In addition it will be recognized that the translucent identification member may also be used as a sender authentication article and that the obscured identifiers may also serve as sender authentication information.

In addition in this embodiment there need not be recipient specific information if the system does not require it as the sender authentication information may be generated either independent from or based on recipient specific information if desired. This may occur when the recipient signs up for the service. In addition as used herein location information includes the information for example sent with a message or indexed by a message sent by the sender which indicates which sender authentication information on the article that the recipient is to verify. For example location information need not be row and column information but may merely be the terms such as upper left corner lower left corner third from the right or any other suitable information to notify the recipient which sender authentication information on the article is to be used as the authentication information for the given session transaction or other communication. Alternatively the sender authentication information can be a pointer to a location that contains the sender authentication information such as for example a universal resource locator URL that points to the sender authentication information for the given session transaction or other communication. Additionally the location information can be a pointer to a location that contains the actual location information which in turn indicates where to look on the article for the sender authentication information for the given session transaction or other communication. In another embodiment the location information is a visual filtering pattern.

For example the location coordinate information and corresponding sender authentication information could include electronically transmitted data for display on a display device such as a visual filtering pattern and sender authentication information. In this embodiment the article would be a transparent article to allow a user to place the article over an area of a display screen. The sent message would include the visual filtering pattern along with the desired sender authentication information that should appear visually to the user when the user overlays the article on a display screen. If the recipient visually recognizes or sees the sender authentication information that is revealed through the visual filtering pattern on screen with the sent desired sender authentication information and it matches then the user can trust the sender of the message. As such visual filtering techniques as previously described with respect to the translucent identification member for recipient authentication may be used in part to authenticate a sender.

Referring also to a specific example of a message and associated sender authentication information and location information is shown as . In a particular embodiment also referring to the message is appended with sender authentication information and in particular numbers 98413 and coordinate information of A E F H J . As such the sending unit sends the electronic message along with both desired sender authentication information and desired location information as shown. The user then uses the article and looks for example at coordinate location A and sees the number 9 looks at the location coordinate E and sees the number 8 looks at the coordinate location F and sees the number 4 looks at the coordinate location H and sees the number 1 and looks at the coordinate location J and sees the number 3. If the user sees the same sender authentication information on the article as was sent by the sending unit then the recipient trusts the sender as being an authentic message sender. In this example the sender authentication information visually represents sender authentication information that is identifiable by location coordinate information in the form of rows and columns. However it will be recognized that rows and column format need not be used and as such the cells as shown need not be employed. For example if objects are used as opposed to letters and numbers the objects may be located in upper left upper right middle or any other suitable location of the article and the sender authentication information which could be the object can be sent such as in the form of a graphic or other suitable object and the coordinate location information may actually be words that might read upper left corner . Any other suitable coordinate location information or sender authentication information may also be used.

The article as noted above may be for example a piece of paper a plastic card transparent plastic card sticker that can be affixed to existing plastic cards or any other suitable article. In this example each email recipient is provided with the article with its own randomly or seemingly randomly generated contents. When sending an email an originator s message transfer agent or other server component associates with each outbound email either directly or indirectly such as by a link to an HTML page using a URL or other suitable reference coordinates or other directions for locating one or more of the card s cells or locations. Also appended pre pended inserted or otherwise attached to the email are the contents at those locations. Upon receipt the user confirms the lookup results using their individual sender authentication article such as reading the coordinates listed in the email and looking them up on their own sender authentication article. In the embodiment where a translucent version of the authentication article is used the authentication article may be placed over a visual filtering pattern provided with the email and the revealed sender authentication information is compared by the recipient to the desired sender authentication information that is provided in the email. If the characters or other information do not match then the authentication has failed.

In an alternative embodiment instead of using a type of hard token e.g. article a soft token may be used wherein the representation may not be an actual image of a card for example or representation of an article may be sent electronically for display via a display screen to a user or for other electronic access by such user either during each session or once and the user may store the electronic sender authentication article in a file and may access it as necessary. As such the electronic representation of the article can be accessed by a software application so as to provide the recipient with the sender authentication information located at the location identified by the sent location information.

As shown in block the method also includes for example as described above with respect to determining such as by the sender at least one desired item of location information and corresponding sender authentication information to append pre pend insert or otherwise attach to the current message. Selection of the location information and authentication information may be done in any suitable manner such as randomly or in any other suitable fashion as desired. As shown in dashed block in an alternative embodiment location information and sender authentication information is effectively communicated in the form of a visual filtering pattern that may if desired cover up all row and column headings and instead just allow the sender authentication information to be visually displayed when the article is overlaid. As such the method may include sending a visual filtering pattern for display to the recipient to allow the recipient to visually determine whether the sender is authentic. The recipient may place at least a portion of the sender authentication information that is on the article over a visual filtering pattern that is displayed on the display screen to determine whether the sent sender authentication information with the message matches the sender authentication information made visible by the visual filtering pattern.

In one example the method includes appending at least one desired item of location information and corresponding sender authentication information to an electronic message for a recipient. The sender authentication information visually represents authentication information identifiable by the location coordinate information. As such the message itself may be appended pre pended inserted or otherwise attached to the information or may contain a reference to the information such as a website or any other suitable link or any other suitable representation of the sender authentication information and location coordinate information.

As shown in block the method includes sending the electronic message and data representing both the location coordinate information and the corresponding sender authentication information to a recipient. The recipient may then look at the information on the article and see if it matches that which was sent by the sending unit.

It will also be recognized that determining at least one location coordinate based on the location information and corresponding sender authentication information may be done for example dynamically as opposed to looking up the information stored in the database. For example the sender e.g. message sending unit may simply be programmed with a function to generate sender authentication information to send as opposed to looking up pre stored information.

Also if desired the sender authentication information may be information for example such as the ending balance on a bank statement any suitable information in a billing statement or account statement that the sender may have previously sent to the recipient that may contain the sender authentication information. The location information may be the date of a particular statement and the sender authentication information may be the current balance on a credit card account. Any other statement may also be used or any other information known to or provided by the sending unit that is in the possession of the recipient may be used.

The sending unit which may be a suitable server in a network node or any other suitable device includes one or more circuits which may be in the form of one or more processing devices that execute software instructions that are stored in memory or may be implemented using discrete logic or any suitable combination of hardware software or firmware to carry out the operations described herein. As such the sender unit includes circuits that are operative to carry out the steps as described above.

In another embodiment the use of the sender authentication article may be combined for example with the systems described above with respect to the translucent identification member such that the translucent identification member includes the location information and sender authentication information thereon. For example the obscured identifiers if desired may also serve as the sender authentication information or in an alternative embodiment the translucent identification member may have a portion that includes the obscured identifiers and another portion that includes the location information and sender authentication information. In any event use of a single article or member which is translucent as described herein can provide multi level authentication. For example for sender authentication the methods described above with respect to may be employed to confirm that the sender is authentic. Once a recipient for example is convinced that the sender of an email is authentic the recipient may then click on a URL sent in the email message and then be presented with a suitable HTML form to enter account information or other confidential information. However prior to entering this confidential information a second level of authentication may be carried out employing the translucent identification member and obscured identifiers so that the sending unit can authenticate the recipient at this stage of the session or transaction. It will also be recognized that any other suitable ordering of operations or combinations of the authentication schemes may also be employed.

In addition use of the claim terms includes any representation thereof. For example the term sender authentication information includes the data itself any index to the data any reference or pointer to the data or any other representation thereof.

Among other advantages there need not be any modification to a message transfer agent or email client of a recipient. Also if desired no recipient computers need to be registered allowing authentication to be performed from any computer if desired. The system may also be applicable to mobile devices where lookup coordinates can be easily displayed on a small display screen. Other authentication purposes may include web authentication interactive voice response authentication or any authentication scenario. In addition the system and methods offer a type of inexpensive mechanism such as the authentication cards that can be distributed versus more complex technologies that may require smart cards tokens or public key infrastructures. Other advantages will be recognized by those of ordinary skill in the art.

As noted above the system may include a sender authentication member issuer that produces the article based on for example recipient specific information i.e. user authentication information which may be but is not limited to for example a password and or user ID. The system also includes sender unit which may be a server or any suitable device as previously described and may also include as noted above a group of servers or circuits that carry out the operations described herein. The system also includes a database similar to the databases previously described which in this example also stores the user authentication information to allow a first level user authentication operation to be carried out. In addition as described above the database also stores the sender authentication information that is located on the article as well as the article identifier so that the sender unit may provide the second level authentication process as described herein.

The sender unit also includes for example memory that contains executable instructions that when executed by one or more processing devices operates as a first level user authenticator and a second level authenticator . As noted above it will be recognized however that these operations may be carried out by separate servers or other computing units located or accessible through the Internet an intranet or any suitable network. It will also be recognized that the communications described herein may be communicated wirelessly for example where the recipient unit is a wireless handheld device or other suitable portable wireless device.

Referring also to a method for providing mutual authentication between a user and a sender unit such as a target resource is described. The article as noted above may include a transaction card a card not having any transaction information a translucent card an electronic card e.g. visually displayed card that may be for example stored in memory on the recipient unit or any other suitable unit and then displayed to a user upon user request or automatically in response to receipt of the challenge or the article may take any other suitable form. Also the location information sent in the challenge includes for example electronically transmitted data for display in a display device. As noted above this may take the form of row and column information or any other suitable information that may be electronically transmitted and for example displayed on display for the user or audibly presented. It will be assumed that for this embodiment a user has received the sender authentication article and in this example it is not a translucent article so that no visual filter need be used in this example. However it will be recognized that the operations described herein may be suitably carried out for any suitable article including a translucent card or article. This method may be carried out for example by the system shown in or by any suitable system or structure. In this example article identification information need not be sent to the recipient unit by the sender unit . However it may be if desired. In this example the sender unit repeatedly checks to see whether a reply to a sent challenge includes sender authentication information that was identified by location information in a sent challenge matches expected e.g. that desired by the sender sender authentication information. If not the challenge is repeatedly sent multiple times during a session or over multiple sessions until the desired sender authentication information that is received by the sending unit matches the expected authentication information.

Although not shown in a first level authentication process may be initially carried out. For example this may include receiving user authentication information that may include for example a user password and user ID from the recipient unit and hence the user. This is received for example by the first level user authenticator . The first level user authenticator then authenticates the user based on the received user authentication information by using the user authentication information obtained for example from the database . If they match user authentication is successful. A yes indication is then sent to the second level authenticator indicating that a second authentication process may be carried out. It is preferable for example also that during the first level authentication process a lock out mechanism is implemented such as one that limits the number of authentication attempts during this first level authentication process preventing a brute force attack. Upon successful completion of the first step of authentication the user is prompted to authenticate with article specific information as described below.

As shown in block the method includes determining for a user that has been assigned the article desired sender authentication information that corresponds to sender authentication information that is embodied on the article. This may be done for example by the second level authenticator suitably selecting sender authentication information from the database that is located on the article based on the user authentication information . As noted above this indicia on the article is stored by the sender authentication member issuer in the database . The sender authentication information can be located on the article by a user by using the location information such as row and column identifiers or any other suitable location information as described above.

As shown in block the method includes sending such as by the sender unit a challenge for the user that includes at least location information that identifies the desired sender authentication information that can be located on the article . A challenge may include for example one or more coordinate sets that are for example displayed to a user via display . The challenge is preferably particular to each user and must be retrieved based on the identity or user authentication information from the first level user authentication process. This ensures that the user is presented with the same challenge until successful authentication is complete. The repeating of the same challenge can prevent an attacker from mounting a brute force attack based on knowledge of only a few of the user s card contents which for example may have been obtained using various potential attack mechanisms. The randomly generated challenge is then carried out and stored once the user has successfully authenticated through a second level authentication process. The challenge may be sent in any suitable manner and may take any suitable form including but not limited to an SSL communication or non secure communication if desired. As shown in block the method includes receiving a reply to the sent challenge. In this example a reply designated as is received from the recipient unit and is generated by the recipient unit under control of the user for example using the location information sent in the challenge such as a row and column ID to determine sender authentication information located on the card. The user enters this information through a suitable user interface in response to the challenge. As such with respect to the embodiment of the reply includes desired desired by the sender unit sender authentication information obtained from the article. This reply information although referred to as sender authentication information is actually used to authenticate the user by the sender unit or other entity since the reply contains information only obtainable by the holder of the authentication card.

As shown in block the method includes determining such as by the sender unit whether the received reply to the challenge includes the desired sender authentication information that was identified by the location information sent in the challenge. As shown in block if the received sender authentication information in the reply is not the desired sender authentication information that was identified in the challenge by the location information the sender unit in this example then resends the same challenge containing the same location information that was previously sent to the recipient unit . As shown in block the method includes repeating the steps of analyzing the received reply and if the reply does not include sender authentication information that was expected based on the location information sent in the challenge the sender unit sends the same challenge during the same session until the received reply includes the desired sender authentication information that is on the article or until a suitable number of tries have been attempted as set by the sender unit for example. The challenge is repeated until the reply includes the expected desired sender authentication information.

As shown in block the method includes authenticating the user based on a reply to the challenge wherein the reply includes sender authentication information obtained from the article based on the location information. In this example the user does not for example enter or send a reply to the challenge unless the user verifies that the article identification information sent in the challenge matches the article identification information on the article itself. As such the user may authenticate the sending unit based on the article identification information. As such in this example the challenge includes article identification information in addition to the location information. The reply includes the sender authentication information located on the article defined by the location information. If the article identifier in the challenge matches the article identifier on the article that is in the possession of the user then the user trusts the sending unit. As shown in block the method includes authenticating the user based on the reply to the challenge. In this example again a first level of authentication is preferably carried out that was previously described based on a user password and or user ID. If that level of authentication is successful then the method shown in may be suitably carried out. As also noted the article identification information may include a shared secret known to the user and to the sender or may be an article serial number or any other suitable information.

Among other advantages the described apparatus systems and methods provide secure authentication of both the end user and sending unit or target organization and may be relatively easy to use and relatively inexpensive to produce and distribute such as the authentication cards versus more complex technologies such as smart cards hardware tokens or public key infrastructures. In addition the system may be readily implemented using web clients across multiple communication channels for mobile devices non mobile devices voice activated devices or any other suitable devices.

In an alternative method of authenticating a user of a recipient unit is shown for when the user is off line. When the user is on line with a sender unit through a recipient unit one or a plurality of challenge reply sets can be stored in memory of the recipient unit . The memory may be any type of storage device that can store the challenge reply set . For example the memory may include one or more magnetic or optical storage devices or any other suitable memory device. The memory may be configured in any suitable manner such as a cache or non cache memory. Each challenge reply set is associated with an article based on prior on line communications of the recipient unit with the sender unit . Each challenge reply set includes at least a challenge reply pair and which is stored in the memory of the recipient unit during on line authentication of the user so that a particular resource on the recipient unit is available to the user. When the user is off line and if only one challenge reply set is stored in the memory the stored challenge reply set is selected for off line authentication of the user for the particular resource available through the recipient unit . When the user if off line and a plurality of challenge reply sets are stored in the memory at least one of the plurality of the stored challenge reply sets is selected for off line authentication of the user for the particular resource available through the recipient unit .

The article by which the user can reply to challenges by the sender unit may be any one of the authentication articles that are described above with respect to the various embodiments of the present disclosure. For example referring back to the article may be a translucent or non translucent film sticker card or any other suitable article. It will be recognized that the information shown on the article is shown as one example only and it will be recognized that any suitable information may be used. In the example shown in the article includes location information and shown as row and column indicia respectively and sender authentication information in the form of numbers that are addressable or locatable by the coordinate location information e.g. row and column information . In addition the article includes an optional article identifier such as a serial number generated e.g. assigned by the issuer of the article . However one of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the article may be any one of the authentication articles described with respect to the various embodiments of the present disclosure or any may take any suitable shape or form.

The sender unit which may be a suitable server in a network node or any other suitable device may include one or more circuits which may be in the form of one or more processing devices that execute software instructions that are stored in memory or may be implemented using discrete logic or any suitable combination of hardware software or firmware to carry out the operations described herein. As such the sender unit includes circuits that are operative to carry out the steps as described above and in the following. The sender unit may communicate directly with the recipient unit . Alternatively the sender unit may also include a network interface for communicating either directly or through the Internet an intranet or any suitable network with the recipient unit . The network interface may be operatively coupled to the processing device of the sender unit .

The sender unit may also include memory that contains executable instructions that when executed by one or more processing devices operates as a first level user authenticator and a second level authenticator . As noted above it will be recognized however that these operations may be carried out by separate servers or other computing units located or accessible through the Internet an intranet or any suitable network. It will also be recognized that the communications described herein may be communicated wirelessly for example where the recipient unit is a wireless handheld device or other suitable portable wireless device.

The recipient unit which may be a suitable server in a network node or any other suitable device may include one or more circuits which may be in the form of one or more processing devices that execute software instructions that are stored in memory or may be implemented using discrete logic or any suitable combination of hardware software or firmware to carry out the operations described herein. As such the recipient unit includes circuits that are operative to carry out the steps as described above and in the following. The recipient unit may communicate directly with the sender unit . Alternatively the recipient unit may also include a network interface for communicating either directly or through the Internet an intranet or any suitable network with the sender unit . The network interface may be operatively coupled to the processing device of the recipient unit .

The recipient unit may also include memory that contains executable instructions that when executed by one or more processing devices operates as a first level user authenticator and a second level authenticator . As noted above it will be recognized however that these operations may be carried out by separate servers or other computing units located or accessible through the Internet an intranet or any suitable network. It will also be recognized that the communications described herein may be communicated wirelessly for example where the recipient unit is a wireless handheld device or other suitable portable wireless device.

Referring to when a user wishes to login to the recipient unit to use one or more resources of the recipient unit such as but not limited to software applications device processes peripheral devices files other stored data or any entity that requires authentication of a user prior to gaining access a first level authentication process may be initially carried out. For example this may include receiving user authentication information that may include for example a user password and user ID from the recipient unit and hence the user. This is received for example by the first level user authenticator server . The first level user authenticator server then authenticates the user based on the received user authentication information by using the user authentication information obtained for example from the database . If they match user authentication is successful and a second level authentication of the user may be carried out.

During the second level authentication process the user may be provided with a number of challenges to which the user can provide a reply with the information contained on the article . For a user that has been assigned the article a challenge can be requested from the sender unit . The challenge may be a sender authentication challenge that may require a reply that contains information that can be found on the article in response to location information sent in a challenge. For example the sender authentication information can be located on the article by a user by using the location information such as row and column identifiers or any other suitable location information as described above.

The challenge reply set may include as described in detail in the foregoing second level user authentication such as a challenge for the user that includes at least location information that identifies the desired sender authentication information that can be located on the article . A challenge may include for example one or more coordinate sets that are for example displayed to a user via the recipient unit . The challenge may be particular to each user and must be retrieved based on the identity or user authentication information from the first level user authentication process. The randomly generated challenge is then carried out and stored in the memory of the recipient unit once the user has successfully authenticated through a second level authentication process. Thus when the user is on line one or a plurality of the challenge reply sets are stored i.e. stored on the memory of the recipient unit . The challenge may be sent in any suitable manner and may take any suitable form including but not limited to an SSL communication or non secure communication if desired. The challenge may also be based on cryptographic information prior to being sent to the user. For example the cryptographic information may be based on a hash function.

In addition to one or more challenge reply pairs each challenge reply set may include user identification information identification information of the article time entry data a flag to indicate whether the stored challenge reply set has been used off line the number of times the stored challenge reply set has been used off line and or an identification of the particular resource of the recipient unit that is accessible to the user upon completion of successful authentication of the user.

When a plurality of challenge reply sets are to be stored in the memory each time the recipient unit attempts a successful login with the sender unit and completes a successful challenge reply set the recipient unit can store the successful challenge reply set in the memory thereof. When only one challenge reply set is to be stored in the memory each time the recipient unit attempts a successful login with the sender unit and completes a successful challenge reply set the recipient unit can store the challenge reply set in memory. The storing of the challenge reply set may entail overwriting the previous challenge reply set stored in the memory .

Alternatively however the challenge reply sets that are stored in the memory may not be based on successful login attempts. Each time a user logs in to the recipient unit and the recipient unit is online with the sender unit the sender unit may send the recipient unit challenge reply sets to store in the memory that are not based on a successful login of the user. For example while the user is logged on to the sender unit one or a plurality of challenges and the corresponding replies based on the article that are not necessarily duplicative of any of the user s successful challenge reply sets can be stored in the memory .

The number of challenge reply sets that may be stored in the memory may be predetermined and limited by either the user of the recipient unit or the sender unit . For example as described previously only one challenge reply set may be stored in the memory for off line use. Accordingly the user may be provided with only one off line login to the recipient unit . For example if a plurality of challenge reply sets are to be stored a maximum number of ten successful challenge reply sets may only be stored in the memory of the recipient unit . When the number of challenge reply sets stored in the memory of the recipient unit is at the predetermined maximum the recipient unit may either stop storing additional challenge reply sets into the memory or continue storing successful challenge reply sets in the memory by overwriting the current stored challenge reply sets so as to not exceed the predefined maximum number of challenge reply sets that may be stored in the memory . However the number may not be predetermined and can be selected by the user through a suitable GUI interface from the recipient unit .

In the method for providing a particular resource available through the recipient unit to the user when the user is off line is described. At block the recipient unit determines whether the user is off line or online. If the user is online the recipient unit will follow the flow chart shown in at block . As described above when a plurality of challenge reply sets are stored in the memory the user of the recipient unit may be limited to only a predetermined number of logins to the sender unit when the user is off line. Accordingly if the recipient unit is off line the method will proceed to block where the recipient unit determines whether the challenge reply authentication attempts are greater than or equal to the predetermined allowed maximum limit. If the challenge reply authentication attempts are greater than or equal to the predetermined allowed maximum limit the method will proceed to block of . If the challenge reply authentication attempts are not greater than or equal to the predetermined allowed maximum limit the method will proceed to block of where the recipient unit will select one of the stored successful challenge reply sets stored in the memory thereof. If only one challenge reply set is stored in the memory the method may skip block and proceed directly from block to block where the recipient unit will select the stored challenge reply set stored in the memory . The recipient unit then allows the user to logon to the recipient unit based on one of the stored challenge reply set in the memory .

As shown in block the recipient unit presents to the user the selected challenge information from memory. The challenge information may be presented to the user visually and or audibly on a display of the recipient unit . The user responds to the challenge information by sending a reply as shown at block . At block the user s reply is compared to the stored reply that corresponds to the challenge to which the user responded. As shown by the decision block if the user s reply to the challenge is the same as the stored reply the user is granted access to the resources of the recipient unit as shown at block . Because the user has used a successful challenge reply set at block the recipient unit increments the usage counter i.e. the number of times a challenge reply set is used to indicate challenge reply set used and grant authorization. The maximum predetermined number of off line authentication attempts may be assigned to a flag i.e. a variable. If the challenge reply authentication attempts are greater than the predetermined allowed maximum limit i.e. the counter greater than the flag at block the user is notified by the recipient unit to take other action. The other action may simply entail the user contacting the administrator of the sender unit to receive a passphrase to access the resources of the recipient unit as will be described in the following.

When a user successfully completes an online authentication a random secret passphrase is generated by the sender unit optionally protected cryptographically e.g. hashed and automatically sent by the sender unit and stored in the memory of the recipient unit without the user s knowledge. The passphrase is also saved in the sender unit under the user s identification information along with the identity of the recipient unit on which the passphrase was also stored after a successful authentication. Should the user need to access the resources of the recipient unit but has exceeded the number of allowed offline authentication attempts the user can contact the administrator of the sender unit to receive the passphrase. The user can then use the passphrase to access the recipient unit after the passphrase given to the user by the administrator of the sender unit and the passphrase stored in the recipient unit match.

Referring to another method of providing authentication of a user of a the recipient unit when the user is off line is shown. In the method shown in the recipient unit may not store successful challenge reply sets into the memory each time the user is online with the sender unit . In the method shown in successful challenge reply sets are stored in the recipient unit only when the user requests such storage of the challenge reply sets into the memory of the recipient unit . For example if the user knows that he will be using the recipient unit without being online with the sender unit prior to going off line the user can request a group of challenge reply sets to be stored in the memory of the recipient unit as shown at block of . Such request is sent to the sender unit and received by the sender unit as shown by block . The sender unit responds to the request by sending to the recipient unit a group of challenge reply sets for storing into the memory . As shown by block the recipient unit receives the challenge reply sets and stores the challenge reply sets in the memory . Once the challenge reply sets are stored in the memory the recipient unit can go off line and the user is allowed to access the resources of the recipient unit while off line by responding to the challenge reply sets that are stored in the memory as described in detail in the foregoing. Each time such a request is made by a particular user of a recipient unit the sender unit triggers an on line refresh of the receive request and respond to request procedures shown at blocks and in accordance with store laws implemented at block for such receive and respond requests.

The recipient unit may be used by a single user to access the sender unit . The recipient unit may be any suitable device such as but not limited to a laptop computer a mobile phone a PDA or an email device that may be used offline such as when a user is traveling and cannot perform on line authentication. When the user is on line with the sender unit prior to the recipient unit storing a plurality of challenge reply sets in the memory of the recipient unit the recipient unit clears e.g. overwrites or removes data a portion of the memory of recipient unit where a plurality of challenge reply sets from a previous user had been stored. Accordingly each time a new user is on line with the sender unit the recipient unit may clear the memory prior to storing the number of challenge reply sets for the current user of the recipient unit .

The recipient unit may be used by multiple users to access the sender unit when the recipient unit is offline. When each user is online with the sender unit the recipient unit stores a plurality of challenge reply sets for that particular user in a segment of the memory . Accordingly challenge reply sets for each user are stored in segments of the memory that is allocated to that user. Therefore each segment of the memory cannot be overwritten with challenge reply sets of another user. The recipient unit may also include multiple memories such that each memory is allocated to each user. When each user desires to use the resources of the recipient unit offline the segment of the memory for that user is accessed and the second factor authentication of the user is performed as described herein. The administrator of the sender unit may select whether the recipient unit can be used offline by a single user or multiple users.

As described in the foregoing the challenge reply sets may be overwritten with new challenge reply sets . This occurs for example when the number of stored challenge reply sets is at the maximum allowed limit and any additional challenge reply sets overwrite the stored challenge reply sets . When the recipient unit overwrites a stored challenge reply set for the reasons described in the foregoing the replacing of the stored challenge reply set may be based on randomly replacing the challenge reply sets in the memory replacing the oldest challenge reply set replacing the newest challenge reply set replacing the most used challenge reply set and or replacing the least used challenge reply set .

When the user is being authenticated for off line use of the recipient unit one or more of the stored challenge reply sets stored in the memory of the recipient unit may be used for the authentication. The present disclosure provides for selection of the challenge reply sets for off line authentication based on randomly selecting selecting the oldest selecting the newest selecting the most used and or selecting the least used of the stored challenge reply sets .

To provide the above described functionality of the recipient unit for off line authentication of the user a set of executable instructions or a software program may be stored on the recipient unit that when executed provides the above described functionality. An example list of the functionality provided by the software program may be as follows provide the connectivity with the sender unit when the user is online to receive challenge reply sets for off line authentication keep track of the number of attempted off line authentications of the user by incrementing a flag variable when an off line authentication is attempted selecting the stored challenge reply sets for off line authentication based on any one of the methods described above and or managing different users off line and online authentication with the recipient unit .

The number of challenge reply sets stored in memory is typically less than all possible challenge reply sets from the article . Under certain circumstances the administrator of the sender unit may wish to allow the user of the recipient unit to access the recipient unit as many times as desired when the recipient unit is off line. Accordingly the number of challenge reply sets available in the memory of the recipient unit may not be limited to a predetermined number of challenge reply sets . Under such circumstances when the recipient unit logs into the sender unit all possible challenge reply sets from the article or a subset thereof may be stored in the memory of the recipient unit . When a user attempts to use the resources of the recipient unit when the recipient unit is off line a challenge reply set is generated for the user of the recipient unit based on one of all possible combinations of challenge reply sets based on the article . Accordingly the above described software program of the recipient unit may provide the on line challenge and reply procedure as described in the foregoing to authenticate the user based on all the stored challenge reply sets from the article . However when another user uses the recipient unit and logs into the sender unit and is online with the sender unit through a network or by communicating with the sender unit all challenge reply sets that were stored in the memory of the recipient unit will be automatically removed e.g. cleared or overwritten by the recipient unit so that all of less than all challenge reply sets for the new user based on the article of the new user can be stored in the memory .

The sender unit may include a Graphic User Interface GUI that allows the administrator of the sender unit to determine a desired offline authentication security scheme on a per user or group basis. For example the GUI may include pull down menus to allow the administrator of the sender unit to select one of a number of offline authentication security schemes to send to the recipient unit in response to a request from the recipient unit . The security schemes that can be selectable by the administrator of the sender unit may include the number of challenge reply sets that can be stored on the memory of the recipient unit . Additionally the security schemes that can be selectable by the administrator of the sender unit may include the types of challenge reply sets that can be stored on the memory of the recipient unit . For example the GUI of the sender unit may include a pull down menu by which the administrator of the sender unit can select the security scheme to send to the recipient unit . The selectable security schemes may include the recipient unit storing online previously successful challenge reply sets sending to the recipient unit a predetermined number of challenge reply sets all of the possible challenge reply sets that may be available on the article or less than all of the possible challenge reply sets that may be available on the article .

As described above the method and apparatus provides a second factor authentication for a recipient unit when the recipient unit is offline relative to a sender unit . The method and apparatus enables a recipient unit to respond to a unique one time authentication challenge issued by a sender unit which may be an authentication server when the recipient unit is not connected to a network and cannot access the authentication server .

The method and apparatus provides a secure method of offline authentication using a dynamic one time challenge reply sets while the sender unit is unavailable to the recipient unit . The method and apparatus does not have an inherent expiry based on time. The user can remain offline for undetermined periods of time while still allowing for the authentication method to function. Additionally the recipient unit can automatically take all the necessary steps to prepare for offline authentication. Accordingly should the sender unit inadvertently go offline because of network failures or other reasons the offline authentication method allows for the user to continue to use second factor to authentication. Even if the sender unit goes offline the security policies of an organization that employs the present method and system are still enforced and two factor authentication is maintained on the recipient unit . Other advantages will be recognized by those of ordinary skill in the art.

It is therefore contemplated that the present invention cover any and all modifications variations or equivalents that fall within the spirit and scope of the basic underlying principles disclosed above and claimed herein. For example the methods need not be used with two levels of authentication but may serve as a single level of authentication.

Persons of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that although the teachings of the invention have been illustrated in connection with certain embodiments there is no intent to limit the invention to such embodiments. On the contrary the intention of this application is to cover all modifications and embodiments fairly falling within the scope of the teachings of the invention.

