---

title: User interface to define and/or communicate space between objects
abstract: Briefly, in accordance with one embodiment of the invention, an object may be utilized to define, communicate, and/or control a spatial relationship between at least two other objects. Such an object may be somewhat analogous to a spring in that a minimum margin between the two other objects may be defined to allow the two other objects to approach one another until the minimum margin is reached, and a flexible margin may allow movement of the two other objects within the flexible margin relative to each other, optionally up to a maximum distance of separation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08839095&OS=08839095&RS=08839095
owner: Adobe Systems Incorporated
number: 08839095
owner_city: San Jose
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050819
---
In computer programs utilized to control the layout of a page and or displayed information for example a publishing type program a graphical user interface may be utilized to display edit and or manipulate objects contained in the page and or display where manipulate may mean for example control by and or in response to a user and or control by and or in response to software code instructions and or a command. Such objects may include for example text objects to contain and or control the layout and or appearance of text within the object graphic objects to contain and or control the layout and or appearance of graphics and or images within the object and or frames utilized as a border and or perimeter of another object. During editing one object may be moved within the layout and or resized which may result in the moved and or resized object encroaching upon another object or being moved too far away from another related object. Thus such manipulation of one object may invariable result in the user needing to manipulate one or more other objects to accommodate such changes for example in order to preserve the gist of the original layout and or the previously established relationship among the objects.

It will be appreciated that for simplicity and or clarity of illustration elements illustrated in the figures have not necessarily been drawn to scale. For example the dimensions of some of the elements may be exaggerated relative to other elements for clarity. Further if considered appropriate reference numerals have been repeated among the figures to indicate corresponding or analogous elements.

In the following detailed description numerous specific details are set forth to provide a thorough understanding of claimed subject matter. However it will be understood by those skilled in the art that claimed subject matter may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known methods procedures components and or circuits have not been described in detail.

Some portions of the detailed description that follows are presented in terms of algorithms programs and or symbolic representations of operations on data bits or binary digital signals within a computer memory for example. These algorithmic descriptions and or representations may include techniques used in the data processing arts to convey the arrangement of a computer system and or other information handling system to operate according to such programs algorithms and or symbolic representations of operations.

An algorithm may be generally considered to be a self consistent sequence of acts and or operations leading to a desired result. These include physical manipulations of physical quantities. Usually though not necessarily these quantities take the form of electrical and or magnetic signals capable of being stored transferred combined compared and or otherwise manipulated. It has proven convenient at times principally for reasons of common usage to refer to these signals as bits values elements symbols characters terms numbers and or the like. It should be understood however that all of these and or similar terms are to be associated with the appropriate physical quantities and are merely convenient labels applied to these quantities.

Unless specifically stated otherwise as apparent from the following discussions it is appreciated that throughout the specification discussion utilizing terms such as processing computing calculating determining and or the like refer to the action and or processes of a computer and or computing system and or computing platform and or similar electronic computing device that manipulate or transform data represented as physical such as electronic quantities within the registers and or memories of the computer and or computing system and or similar electronic and or computing device into other data similarly represented as physical quantities within the memories registers and or other such information storage transmission and or display devices of the computing system and or other information handling system.

Embodiments claimed may include apparatuses for performing the operations herein. This apparatus may be specially constructed for the desired purposes or it may comprise a general purpose computing device selectively activated and or reconfigured by a program stored in the device. Such a program may be stored on a storage medium such as but is not limited to any type of disk including floppy disks optical disks CD ROMs magnetic optical disks read only memories ROMs random access memories RAMs electrically programmable read only memories EPROMs electrically erasable and or programmable read only memories EEPROMs flash memory magnetic and or optical cards and or any other type of media suitable for storing electronic instructions and or capable of being coupled to a system bus for a computing device and or other information handling system.

The processes and or displays presented herein are not inherently related to any particular computing device and or other apparatus. Various general purpose systems may be used with programs in accordance with the teachings herein or it may prove convenient to construct a more specialized apparatus to perform the desired method. The desired structure for a variety of these systems will appear from the description below. In addition embodiments are not described with reference to any particular programming language. It will be appreciated that a variety of programming languages may be used to implement the teachings described herein.

In the following description and or claims the terms coupled and or connected along with their derivatives may be used. In particular embodiments connected may be used to indicate that two or more elements are in direct physical and or electrical contact with each other. Coupled may mean that two or more elements are in direct physical and or electrical contact. However coupled may also mean that two or more elements may not be in direct contact with each other but yet may still cooperate and or interact with each other. Furthermore the term and or may mean and it may mean or it may mean exclusive or it may mean one it may mean some but not all it may mean neither and or it may mean both although the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

In one or more embodiments an object may refer to an item that may be selected and or manipulated for example shapes pictures images text and or text boxes that may appear on a display as rendered by a computing platform coupled to the display. In one or more embodiments the term render may refer to displaying an object on a display coupled to a computing platform and or to manipulating the object on the display. In one or more embodiments a software entity may comprise computer code and or data to perform at least one or more functions when executed and or which may be tangibly embodied in computer code and or data stored at least temporarily on a computer and or machine readable medium and or in memory and which may include for example but is not limited to an object. In one or more embodiments graphic may refer to a pictorial and or image representation of an object and in one or more alternative embodiments may refer to an object itself. In one or more embodiments a graphic element may be single and or fundamental graphic object and or a portion thereof. In one or more embodiments a letterform may be a shape and or design of a letter of an alphabet. In one or more embodiments a font may refer to a design for a set of characters and or letters for printing and or displaying. In one or more embodiments text may refer to letters and or characters that may be manipulated and or combined as words lines and or pages. However these are merely example definitions of the above terms phrases and or concepts wherein other definitions may apply as well and the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects. In one or more embodiments to parse may refer to dividing computer code into elements that can be analyzed and or identified. In one or more embodiments file may refer to a collection of data code instructions and or other information that may be readable accessible and or able to be acted on by a computing platform and or the like. In one or more embodiments a format may refer to a predefined organizational structure for data code instructions and or other information that may be readable accessible and or able to be acted on by a computing platform and or the like.

In one or more embodiments a graphical user interface GUI may refer to a program interface that utilizes displayed graphical information to allow a user to control and or operate a computing platform and or the like. A pointer may refer to a cursor and or other symbol that appears on a display screen that may be moved and or controlled with a pointing device to select objects and or input commands via a graphical user interface of a computing platform and or the like. A pointing device may refer to a device used to control a cursor to select objects and or input commands via a graphical user interface of a computing platform and or the like. Pointing devices may include for example a mouse a trackball a track pad a track stick a keyboard a stylus a digitizing tablet and or similar types of devices. A cursor may refer to a symbol and or a pointer where an input selection and or actuation may be made with respect to a region of in a graphical user interface. In one embodiment content reflow may refer to where the contents of a document may be rearranged to alter the layout order and or readability of the content of the document. In one or more embodiments transient may refer to being in a state for a brief and or temporary period of time and or passing with time and or a temporary state of being. In one or more embodiments an icon may refer to a smaller sized picture that may represent an object a file and or a program and in some embodiments an icon may be a thumbnail wherein a thumbnail may refer to a smaller sized image and or picture of an object a file and or a program and or a portion thereof. However these are merely example definitions of terms relating to graphical user interfaces and or computing platforms and or the like and the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

In one or more embodiments a database may refer an organization of information created stored accessed edited and or otherwise utilized by a computing platform. In one or more embodiments a tag may refer to a command contained in a file object and or document that may specify how the file object and or document and or a portion thereof may be formatted. In one or more embodiments metadata may refer to information pertaining to data contained in a file object and or document for example formatting information date of creation date of editing date saved how data was obtained and or from where data was obtained. Such metadata for example may be utilized in for database management purposes and or for data warehousing of multiple databases although the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. In one or more embodiments an application programming interface API may refer to a set of routines protocols and or tools utilized to cause a program to operate in conjunction with an operating system. In one or more embodiments an operating system may refer to a program to execute on a computing platform to handle input and or output commands file management printing displaying storing and or communicating of information for the computing platform. However these are merely examples of database and or operating system functions and the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

Referring now to a diagram of a computer program having a user interface to define and or communicate space between objects in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. As shown in computer program may include graphical user interface GUI to display edit and or manipulate information including but not limited to for example object and or object . In accordance with one or more embodiments an additional object spring may be utilized to define and or communicate space between object and object . Computer program may be for example Adobe InDesign CS2 available from Adobe Systems Incorporated of San Jose Calif. USA or similar type of computer program although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. In at least one or more embodiments as one or more of object and or object are moved repositioned resized reflowed and or otherwise manipulated by a user using graphical user interface spring may define a distance D between object and or object as part of defining and or communicating such a spatial relationship. In one or more embodiments such an object and or frame may be manipulated by a user via graphical user interface . In an alternative embodiment such an object and or frame may be manipulated by an automated process executed for example by computer program a server a servlet an applet an application program interface API and or a process and so on that may automatically insert content into and or manipulate content contained in such an object and or frame for example according to a template. In one or more embodiments spring and or any spring like object may be defined as an item that may define a space and or a spatial relationship between objects for example between object and or object . In one or more embodiments a spring such as spring may be an object having properties to define and or communicate a relationship between objects for example object and or object . One or more of object and or object may be a frame which may be defined as an object that may contain information for example text graphics and or nothing at all. A text frame may be utilized for example to determine an area to be occupied by text and or how text will be placed within a layout. A graphics frame may be utilized for example as a border and or background and further may be utilized to crop and or mask a graphic and or image. In one or more embodiment a frame may be utilized as an empty place holder and in one particular embodiment an empty graphics frame may display a crossbar to indicate that the graphics frame is empty. In one particular embodiment a frame and or object may have an attribute to define space in a penumbral region surrounding a perimeter of the frame and or object where such attribute may be referred to as a bumper. However these are merely examples of a spring object and or frame and or bumper and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

In accordance with one or more embodiments spring may define a spatial relationship between objects such as object and or object when at least one of the objects is manipulated to decrease distance between object and or object . Furthermore spring may define a spatial relationship between objects such as object and or object when at least one of the objects is manipulated to increase distance between object and or object . Additionally spring may define a spatial relationship between objects such as object and or object when at least one of the objects is manipulated to increase and or decrease distance between object and or object in combination. In one or more such embodiments spring may be analogized to a mechanical spring. For example for increasing distance between object and or object spring may allow distance to increase up to a predefined limit. In such a mechanical spring analogy the tensile stretching of the spring may have a mechanical limit beyond which mechanical failure and or deformation of the spring may occur which may provide at least a practical operating limit on the distance between apart two ends of the spring may be stretched. For another example for decreasing distance between object and or object spring may allow such decrease in distance between object and or object until a minimum distance between object and or object is reached. In such a mechanical spring analogy the compression of the spring may have a mechanical limit beyond mechanical failure and or deformation of the spring may occur which may provide at least a practical operating limit on the minimum distance two ends of the spring may be brought together. Although a mechanical spring analogy may be useful to provide a description at least in part of operation of spring such an analogy is merely an example and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. For example since spring may be defined in software for graphical user interface of computer program spring may be programmed to have one or more attributes that may not have any corresponding mechanical and or physical analogy and or may be programmed in some embodiments to have no corresponding mechanical and or physical analogy and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Referring now to a diagram of various versions of a spring to define and or communicate space between objects in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. As shown in spring may be defined having various attributes to define one or more of various versions of spring . In one or more embodiments the various versions of spring may be visually and or graphically depicted by graphical user interface for example when spring is optionally displayed in graphical user interface . Version of spring may define a minimum distance m between object and or object where such minimum distance may be represented by margin element of version . Further with version outwardly pointing arrows may represent besides minimum distance of margin element that flexible margin element may be defined where objects and or may still be manipulated to increase distance between the objects. Likewise version of spring may include similar attributes of version however as shown in version distance between object and or object has reached a maximum defined distance and distance between the objects may not be increased. Such a maximum distance may be indicated for example by inwardly pointing arrows of flexible margin element . Version of spring may include minimum margin element where distance between object and or may not be further decreased however outwardly pointing arrows may indicate flexible margin may be available to allow for an increase in distance between object and or object . Version of spring may indicate a minimum margin represented by minimum margin element and the absence of arrows at either end of minimum margin element may indicate the absence of any flexible margin. Thus in one embodiment version of spring may represent that distance between element and or element may be a fixed distance. Version version version and or version of spring are merely examples of how one or more attributes of spring may be defined and or graphically represented using graphical user interface and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects. Similarly other versions of spring may be utilized for example where spring may comprise margin element on one side coupled to one object and a flexible margin element represented by a single arrow on another side coupled to another object and or where spring may comprise flexible margin element or being centrally disposed and flanked on either side by two of margin element each coupled to a respective one of the objects and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited by these respects.

In one or more embodiments spring may allow for an unlimited distance of separation between objects with a minimum margin of separation. In one or more alternative embodiments spring may have no minimum margin of separation but a maximum distance of separation between objects. In another embodiment spring may have both a minimum margin of separation and a maximum distance of separation between objects. In yet another embodiment spring may have a fixed amount of separation between objects. Such attributes of spring may be selected by a user for example using graphical user interface and furthermore such attributes may be changed by the user as desired. However these are merely example attributes of spring and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

Referring now to a diagram of a spring to define and or communicate space between objects with respect to at least another object in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. As shown in in embodiment in some instances an object such as object by be interposed between two objects such as object and or object where the two objects may utilize spring to define and or communicate a spatial relationship between the two objects. In such an embodiment at least one of object and or object may be manipulated to increase and or decrease distance between object and or object where a spatial relationship between object and or object may be defined communicated and or otherwise controlled without regard to any relationship between object and or object and or without regard to any relationship between object and or object . For example spring may provide a minimum margin between object and or object wherein object and or object may be prevented from being disposed apart at a distance closer than the minimum margin. However spring may not prevent either of object and or object from being disposed apart at any distance and may even end up encroaching and or overlapping object . In one embodiment graphical user interface may provide one or more alternative mechanisms to control a relationship between object and or object for example using bumpers where such an alternative mechanism and or mechanism may operate independently of the operation of spring although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Referring now to a diagram of a spring to define and or communicate space between objects where the objects may overlap at least in part in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. As shown in in embodiment object may overlap at least in part with object . In such an embodiment spring may be utilized to define and or communicate and or otherwise control a spatial relationship between object and or object . In one or more embodiments such distance D between object and or object may be defined as having a negative value in an overlap situation. In other words if a distance between object and or object is defined as having a positive value in the event where there is some space disposed between object and or object then when object and or object overlap at least in part a distance of separation provided by such overlap may be defined as having a negative value. In such an embodiment a spatial relationship between object and or object may be defined and or communicated and or otherwise controlled by spring . For example an amount of overlap between object and or object may be limited to a minimum value where for example the absolute value of distance D may be a minimum value and furthermore may provide an amount of flexibility to increase distance D to a maximum absolute value. However these are merely examples of how spring may define and or communicate and or otherwise control a spatial relationship between objects when the objects overlap at least in part and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Referring now to a diagram of a spring to define and or communicate space between objects where at least one of the objects may include a frame in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. As shown in embodiment of at least one of the objects for example object may include frame . Optionally spatial relationship between object and or object may be defined communicated and or controlled via coupling of spring to object itself as shown using spring and or to frame as shown using spring . For example where frame may be a decorative border framing a graphic contained in object it may be desirable to define communicate and or control the spatial relationship between object and or object by taking into account the presence of frame around object . This may be helpful for example to ensure that object does not unintentionally overlap frame event though spring otherwise might be arranged to prevent object from overlapping object . Thus a user may optionally select to couple a spring such as spring directly to object and or may optionally select to couple a spring such as spring to frame that may be associated with object . In one particular embodiment a user may optionally select to couple a first spring such as spring between object and object and to couple a second spring such as spring between object and frame . For example a user may wish to do so where it may be desirable to provide a different relationship between object and or object and between object and or frame .

In one or more embodiments spring may couple to object and or object to any one or more points corresponding to object and or object . For example predefined points along perimeter of object and or perimeter of object may allow for an end of spring to couple to any one of the predefined points. In another embodiment at least one of object and or spring may allow an end of spring to couple to any one of a continuous number of points along perimeter of object and or perimeter of object . In yet another embodiment object and or object may be arranged to allow an end of spring to couple to central point disposed in an interior region of object and or object . In an alternative embodiment object and or object may be arranged to allow an end of spring to couple to any point of and or corresponding to object and or object . In one or more alternative embodiments spring may connect one or more objects to other elements that may not be objects. For example at least one end of spring may couple to a specified coordinate in a page of computer program for example were a user specifies an x y coordinate to which an end of spring may connect or alternatively may use graphical user interface to manipulate a coordinate to which an end of spring may couple. Likewise an end of spring may couple to a margin a page edge and so on and or to any other feature or element of a page of computer program and or any other element specified by graphical user interface . However these are merely examples of how and or where spring may couple to object and or object and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

Referring now to a diagram of two or more springs to define and or communicate space between two or more objects in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. As shown in embodiment of a first spring such as spring may couple between object and or object as discussed herein. Similarly a second spring such as spring may couple between object and or object . Similarly a third spring such as spring may couple between object and or object . In such an arrangement at least one or more of the springs may operate separately and independently with respect to the other springs based at least in part on one or more attributes ascribed to the springs by the user for example. In one particular embodiment one or more of the springs may be ascribed an attribute corresponding to an angle of rotation of the spring for example angle with respect to a reference for example reference . Such an angle of rotation may be fixed and or may be flexible within a minimum and or a maximum amount of rotation. In yet another alternative embodiment at least one or more of the springs may be ascribed an attribute corresponding to an angle of rotation of the spring with respect to at least one other of the springs. Such an angle of rotation may be fixed and or may be flexible within a minimum and or a maximum amount of rotation. Thus one or more such arrangements of objects as shown in may be defined wherein spatial relationships between multiple objects such as object object and or object may be defined communicated and or controlled either independently independently at least in part and or in combination. Furthermore although as shown at least in a distance relationship and or an angular relationship may be defined for example in a two dimensional plane wherein such relationship definition communication and or control may be provided in any dimensional environment provided by graphical user interface for example in a three dimensional environment of a computer graphics game and or computer aided design CAD computer program. However these are merely examples of how one or more springs may be utilized to define communicate and or control a relationship between two or more objects and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

Referring now to a flow diagram of a method to define and or communicate space between objects in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. Method as shown in is merely one example of how a spring may be utilized in a graphical user interface to define communicate and or control a spatial relationship between objects in accordance with one or more embodiments of the invention. The blocks of method may be arranged in one or more alternative orders and method may include fewer or more blocks than shown in and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects. Method may include block at which a spring such as spring may be generated by a user using graphical user interface . Spring may be connected between two or more objects at block . The user may define a margin of spring as being fixed or flexible at block . If the margin is flexible a user may optionally select a minimum margin at block . Likewise a maximum margin may be optionally selected at block . In the case where the margin is fixed as selected at block the minimum margin and the maximum margin would be the same fixed margin. At block a user may toggle the display of spring . For example during editing and or arranging of the objects in graphical user interface a user may wish to view one or more springs to help understand how manipulation of one object may affect one or more other objects. When editing and or arranging is complete the user may toggle the display of the springs wherein the springs may be hidden from view in graphical user interface . Alternatively a user may toggle the display of the spring to be hidden from view during editing and or arranging of the objects and merely determine a spatial relationship between the objects due to the springs based on observation of an effect that manipulation of one object may have on another object. In any event objects may be edited and or arranged at block using graphical user interface where graphical user interface may control a spatial relationship among one or more of the objects at block . Method is merely one example of how one or more springs may be utilized to define communicate and or control space between objects in accordance with one or more embodiments for example using a graphical user interface and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. Although a graphical user interface such as graphical user interface may be utilized for such definition communication and or control it should be noted that other mechanisms and or interfaces may likewise be utilized for example an audio user interface a keyboard user interface and so on and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Referring now to a block diagram of an information handling system able to define and or communicate space between objects in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. Information handling system may be utilized to tangibly embody computer program and or graphical user interface of by providing hardware components on which computer program and or graphical user interface may be executed. As shown in information handling system may be controlled by processor . Processor may comprise a central processing unit such as a microprocessor or microcontroller for executing programs performing data manipulations and controlling the tasks of information handling system . Communication with processor may be implemented via bus for transferring information among the components of information handling system . Bus may include a data channel for facilitating information transfer between storage and other peripheral components of information handling system . Bus further may provide a set of signals utilized for communication with processor including for example a data bus and address bus and or a control bus. Bus may comprise any bus architecture according to promulgated standards for example industry standard architecture ISA extended industry standard architecture EISA Micro Channel Architecture MCA peripheral component interconnect PCI local bus standards promulgated by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE including IEEE 488 general purpose interface bus GPIB IEEE 696 S 100 and so on although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Other components of information handling system may include for example main memory and or auxiliary memory . Information handling system may further comprise auxiliary processing processor which may be another processor a digital signal processor and so on. Main memory may provide storage of instructions and data for programs to be executed by processor . Main memory may be for example semiconductor based memory such as dynamic random access memory DRAM and or static random access memory SRAM and or the like. Other semi conductor based memory types may include for example synchronous dynamic random access memory SDRAM Rambus dynamic random access memory RDRAM ferroelectric random access memory FRAM and so on. Auxiliary memory may be utilized to store instructions and or data that to be loaded into main memory before execution. Auxiliary memory may include semiconductor based memory such as read only memory ROM programmable read only memory PROM erasable programmable read only memory EPROM electrically erasable read only memory EEPROM and or flash memory and or any block oriented memory similar to EEPROM. Auxiliary memory may also include any type of non semiconductor based memories including but not limited to magnetic tape drum floppy disk hard disk optical laser disk compact disc read only memory CD ROM write once compact disc CD R rewritable compact disc CD RW digital versatile disc read only memory DVD ROM write once DVD DVD R rewritable digital versatile disc DVD RAM and so on. Other varieties of memory devices are contemplated as well. Information handling system optionally include auxiliary processor which may be an auxiliary processor to manage input output an auxiliary processor to perform floating point mathematical operations a digital signal processor and or any special purpose microprocessor having an architecture suitable for fast execution of signal processing algorithms a back end processor and or any slave type processor subordinate to processor an additional microprocessor and or controller for dual and or multiple processor systems and or a coprocessor and or additional processor. Such auxiliary processors may be discrete processors and or or may be arranged in the same package as processor for example in a multicore and or multithreaded processor however the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

Information handling system further may include display system for connecting to display and further may include input output I O controller to connect to one or more I O devices including for example I O device I O device up to an Nth I O device I O device . Display system may comprise a video display adapter having components for driving display including for example video memory a buffer and or a graphics engine. Such video memory may be for example video random access memory VRAM synchronous graphics random access memory SGRAM windows random access memory WRAM and or the like. Display may comprise a cathode ray tube CRT type display such as a monitor and or television and or may comprise an alternative type of display technology such as a projection type CRT type display a liquid crystal display LCD projector type display an LCD type display a light emitting diode LED type display a gas and or plasma type display an electroluminescent type display a vacuum fluorescent type display a cathodoluminescent and or field emission type display a plasma addressed liquid crystal PALC type display a high gain emissive display HGED type display and so forth. Input output controller may comprise one or more controllers and or adapters to prove interface functions between one or more of I O device I O device and or I O device . For example input output controller may comprise a serial port parallel port universal serial bus USB port and IEEE 1394 serial bus port infrared port network adapter printer adapter radio frequency RF communications adapter universal asynchronous receiver transmitter UART port and or the like to interface between corresponding I O devices such as a keyboard mouse trackball touchpad joystick trackstick infrared transducers printer modem RF modern bar code reader charge coupled device CCD reader scanner compact disc CD compact disc read only memory CD ROM digital versatile disc DVD video capture device TV tuner card touch screen stylus electroacoustic transducer microphone speaker audio amplifier and or the like. Input output controller and or I O device I O device and or I O device may provide and or receive analog and or digital signals to communicate between information handling system and external devices networks and or information sources. Input output controller and or I O device I O device and or I O device may implement industry promulgated architecture standards including for example Ethernet IEEE 802 type standards such as IEEE 802.3 for broadband and or baseband networks IEEE 802.3z for Gigabit Ethernet IEEE 802.4 for token passing bus networks IEEE 802.5 for token ring networks IEEE 802.6 for metropolitan area networks and or the like Fibre Channel digital subscriber line DSL asymmetric digital subscriber line ASDL frame relay asynchronous transfer mode ATM integrated digital services network ISDN personal communications services PCS transmission control protocol Internet protocol TCP IP serial line Internet protocol point to point protocol SLIP PPP and so on. Information handling system of is merely one example of an information handling system and or computing platform and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Although the claimed subject matter has been described with a certain degree of particularity it should be recognized that elements thereof may be altered by persons skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and or scope of the claimed subject matter. It is believed that a user interface to define and or communicate space between objects and or many of its attendant advantages will be understood by the forgoing description and it will be apparent that various changes may be made in the form construction and or arrangement of the components thereof without departing from the scope and or spirit of the claimed subject matter or without sacrificing all of its material advantages the form herein before described being merely an explanatory embodiment thereof and or further without providing substantial change thereto. It is the intention of the claims to encompass and or include such changes.

