---

title: Integrated fiber, sensor and lens arrays and their applications for optical networks
abstract: Fiber, lens and sensor arrays and their precision alignment for optical devices with free space light propagation is disclosed. Fabrication methods of arrays and their assembly are also proposed. In one implementation, a device includes a fiber alignment module holding fibers in parallel to form a fiber array. The fiber alignment module includes first and second alignment plates, and a spacer plate engaged between the first and second alignment plates. Each alignment plate includes an array of through holes to respectively hold the fibers. A lens array can be engaged to the fiber alignment module to align lenses to their corresponding fibers. Passive alignment features may be formed at interfacing surfaces of different layers to assist the alignment. Applications of these integrated fiber, lens and sensor arrays to optical cross-connect switches and reconfigurable add-drop multiplexers are also disclosed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07058253&OS=07058253&RS=07058253
owner: 
number: 07058253
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050408
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 403 259 filed Aug. 13 2002 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 384 150 entitled Integrated Fiber Sensor and Lens Arrays and Their Applications for Optical Networks filed Mar. 6 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 950 570 both of which applications are incorporated herein.

This application relates to optical communication devices and systems and more particularly to integration of fiber arrays lens arrays and sensor arrays to optical processing modules such as reconfigurable optical add drop multiplexers cross connect optical switching arrays wavelength division multiplexers or demultiplexers wavelength routers or free space propagation fabric in optical networks.

Advances in information technologies and their applications such as Internet have increased the demand for communication bandwidth. For example the transmission of data over a telephone trunk lines the transmission of images or video over the Internet or other networks the transfer of large amounts of data as might be required in transaction processing or videoconferencing implemented over networks such as a public telephone network typically require the high speed transmission of large amounts of data. As applications such as these become more prevalent the demand for communications bandwidth capacity increases accordingly.

Optical fiber is a transmission medium and is well suited to meet this increasing demand for communication bandwidth. Optical fiber has an inherent bandwidth that is much greater than metal based conductors such as twisted pair or coaxial cable and protocols such as the SONET and Ethernet optical carrier OC protocols have been developed for the transmission of data over optical fibers.

Optical fiber has been widely used to form optical networks that carry data voice and video over optical fibers using multiple wavelengths of light in parallel. Light is routed through the network from its originating location to its final destination. Since optical networks do not generally have a single continuous optical fiber path from every source to every destination the light is switched as it travels through the optical network. Previously this switching was accomplished using optical electrical optical OEO systems where the light signal was converted to an electrical signal switched electrically and the switched electrical signal was converted back to an optical signal.

However because in OEO systems the signal must be converted from the optical domain to the electrical domain switched then converted back into the optical domain the OEO systems for such operations in general can be relatively large complex and expensive. Moreover many electrical systems have slower performance than optical systems and they are not transparent to wavelengths and communication protocol. Hence the use of an OEO system can create a bottleneck in the optical network.

All optical cross connect switching systems have been investigated and developed based on a variety of different technological approaches to optical switching such as movable mirrors acousto optic diffraction electro optic refraction magneto optic switching movable bubbles and liquid crystal addressable arrays. Each of these and other optical switching technologies has its own performance characteristics advantages and disadvantages. One issue associated with optical switching is the variation in the optical intensities of different signals after switching. For example in the system where an optical cross connect switch resides at nodes in a ring mesh network light signals received at the node may be of widely varying intensity. In many optical cross connect switches insertion loss is dependent on the optical path. It is typically desirable to equalize the intensity levels of the different signals before they are amplified or routed to another node.

Thus there is a need for an optical cross connect switching system to switch optical signals in the optical domain without converting the optical signals to electrical signals. In particular there is a need for an effective mechanism to integrate fiber arrays lens arrays and position sensing arrays to an optical processing module such as an optical cross connect switch.

This application includes various implementations of a fiber alignment module for integrating an array of fibers to other optical components or modules and optical systems incorporating such a module. In one implementation a device includes a fiber alignment module holding fibers in parallel to form a fiber array. The fiber alignment module includes first and second alignment plates and a spacer plate engaged between the first and the second alignment plates. Each alignment plate includes an array of through holes to respectively hold the fibers. Each hole is configured to include a neck portion that is approximately the same dimension as the fiber to define a position of the fiber and a tapered portion whose dimension is greater than the fiber to assist insertion of the fiber. The spacer plate has an array of through holes in alignment with the arrays of through holes in the first and the second alignment plates to respectively hold the fibers.

In one application the above fiber alignment module may be implemented in a device which has an optical processing module to process light and to direct light to or receive light from the fiber array held by the fiber alignment module. A lens array is included in this device at a position between the fiber alignment module and the optical processing module and is engaged to an opening in the optical processing module. The lens array has an array of lenses formed on a single substrate to collimate light from the fibers in the fiber array and to focus light to the fiber array.

In another application the position sensitive detector arrays are included in addition to fiber and lens arrays.

This application also includes methods for fabricating assembling and operating various optical devices disclosed herein. In one implementation a method includes the following operations. Alignment feature grooves are formed on at least one surface of the substrate where each alignment feature grove is dimensioned to hold an alignment fiber member. An array of through holes are formed in the substrate to hold fibers where each through hole has a cylindrical neck portion on one side of the substrate to tightly hold a corresponding fiber and a tapered funnel portion on another one side of the substrate with an opening greater than each fiber. The substrate is engaged to a surface of another object with matching alignment features by aligning each alignment feature in the substrate to a corresponding matching alignment feature in the surface with the alignment member positioned there between.

Another device of this application includes a fiber alignment module holding fibers in parallel to form a fiber array. The fiber alignment module includes first and second alignment plates and a spacer plate engaged between the first and the second alignment plates. Each alignment plate has an array of through holes to respectively hold the fibers and each through hole is configured to include a neck portion that is approximately the same dimension as the fiber to define a position of the fiber and a tapered funnel portion whose dimension is greater than the fiber to assist insertion of the fiber. The spacer plate is configured to have an array of through holes in alignment with the arrays of through holes in the first and the second alignment plates to respectively hold the fibers.

This application further describes a device to include first and second fiber arrays of fibers respectively held by first and second fiber alignment modules and first and second lens arrays to collimate light for the first and the second fiber arrays respectively. Each lens array includes lenses that are monolithically formed on a substrate. This device also has an optical processing module located between the first and the second lens arrays to provide optical communication between the first and the second fiber arrays and two position sensitive detector arrays. The first position sensitive detector array has detectors respectively corresponding to fibers in the second fiber array and each detector is configured to measure a position of a beam relative to a corresponding fiber. The second position sensitive detector array has detectors respectively corresponding to fibers in said first fiber array and each detector is configured to measure a. position of a beam relative to a corresponding fiber as well. A control unit is further included to control the optical processing module to reduce a position deviation measured at each detector in the first and the second position sensitive detector arrays.

In this device each fiber alignment module includes first and second alignment plates and a spacer plate engaged between the first and the second alignment plates. In each fiber alignment module there is an array of through holes to respectively hold fibers. Each through hole is configured to include a cylindrical neck portion that is approximately the same dimension as each fiber to define a position of the fiber and a tapered funnel portion whose dimension is greater than the fiber to assist insertion of the fiber.

These and other features implementations applications and associated fabrication techniques are described in detail in the following description the drawings and the claims.

Exemplary implementations of this application include optical switches that optically couple light from a first array of fibers to a second array of fibers. In general such a switch is designed in a way that a light beam from any incoming fiber can be switched to any outgoing fiber with minimum light intensity loss and minimum cross talk. illustrate various aspects of the techniques and devices.

An optical cross connect switch system can be designed to switch an optical signal carried by a light beam from any incoming fiber to any outgoing fiber. For purposes of clarity and ease of illustration some of the figures and description portray the data as traveling one way from incoming fibers to outgoing fibers. However it should be understood that data travel can also be bidirectional where data travels both ways through the switch with each fiber acting as both an incoming fiber and as an outgoing fiber although not at the same time.

To accomplish this the system may have a symmetrical functionality where some elements of the switching system on only one side incoming or outgoing side are illustrated and described in this application while duplicate counterparts of such elements on the other side may not be shown or described.

Assuming there are N incoming fiber lines and M outgoing fiber lines the optical cross connect switch is referred to as an N M switch. For some short haul applications N and M may be less than 32. For long haul applications N and M are generally large e.g. in the range from 1024 to 4096 in certain applications. For wavelength management N and M may be between 40 and 160 at present time.

The following description addresses the switching of a light beam from one of the fibers in array to fibers in array . However the description is equally applicable to switching a light beam between any fiber in array to any fiber in array or from any fiber in array to any fiber in array .

As illustrated in a beam of light is carried on a given individual incoming fiber in the incoming fiber array . The beam of light may include multiple parallel streams of optical data signals at multiple wavelengths. The beam of light is also capable of containing streams of optical destination signals carrying information identifying the destination for each optical data signal within the beam.

In this example the optical destination signal includes instructions on routing of data signals and configuration of the whole switching array. The optical destination signal is carried on one data channel in one selected incoming fiber . The light beam on the selected incoming fiber is split by using an optical splitter such as a fiber coupler into two parts with one main part continuing in the fiber into the switch and another part to the switch configuration controller . The part to the switch configuration controller may be a small fraction of the input signal and is converted into the electrical signals by the controller . The controller interprets the instructions on the routing of data. Within the switch configuration controller the single channel wavelength division demultiplexer selects the channel Containing the instructions and directs the selected channel to the photodetector with amplifier which converts the optical signals into electrical signals. These electrical signals in turn are decoded by the decoder . The decoded signal provides information for the proper configuration of the switch system . The system controller uses this information to configure the mirrors in the mirror array to perform the desired switching.

In one implementation the single channel demultiplexer may be a Fiber Bragg grating. Other demultiplexers can be used in other implementations. The switching system may be part of one node in a larger network with e.g. a mesh or mesh ring type architecture. In this case wavelength division demultiplexer is generally needed only on one side such as in the incoming side but for redundancy reasons can be included on the outgoing side also. Decoded signals from the decoder within the controller are fed into digital signal processor within the switch configuration controller that provides instructions to servo electronics . The servo electronics then position the mirrors in the mirror array to correctly route the data signals. In alternate implementations the instructions for routing data may be obtained in other manners for example by providing configuration instructions electrically using electrical communication between nodes of the cross connect switching system. Also in some implementations the system controller may include an application programming interface for controlling and monitoring performance of the whole cross connect switching system.

In general the beam of light exits the fiber in a diverging manner. To mitigate effects of this divergence a lens in the first lens array is positioned and used to collimate the beam of light so that the beam propagates to the mirror array without significant divergence to a first mirror in the mirror array . The first mirror has been positioned by the mirror servo electronics to direct the beam of light along a first optical path to a second lens in the second lens array . The second lens focuses and couples most of the light into the outgoing fiber in the outgoing fiber array . This way the optical loss is minimized as the light passes through the switching system and insertion losses can also be minimized.

Position sensitive detector within the position sensitive detector array are designed to detect the position of the light beam entering the outgoing fiber in the outgoing fiber array . Implementations of position sensitive detectors include but are not limited to bilateral photodetectors quadrant photodetectors charge coupled device imaging arrays complementary metal oxide semiconductor device imaging arrays or infrared imaging arrays. The position sensitive detectors may be placed in several alternative locations in alternative implementations to act as the position sensitive detector arrays and and generate position error feedback signals for the system controller that controls mirror positioning.

In operation the position sensitive detector provides signals that indicate the position of the light beam with respect to the core of the outgoing fiber . Similar position sensitive detectors are implemented at other fibers in the fiber array . In some implementations the position detectors detect the light beams that carry the optical data signals. In other implementations the position detectors detect registration light beams that have a different wavelength than the light beams that carry the optical data signals but which propagate along the identical optical path as the light beams that carry the optical data signals. The position detectors generate a feedback signal that drives the servo electronics in the system controller for each set of two mirrors within the mirror array . In response to this feedback signal the servo electronics provides the initial alignment after switching and maintains this alignment continuously and dynamically until the instructions for reconfiguration are received through demultiplexer receiver system.

More specifically in one implementation the light beam is positioned over the core of the outgoing optical fiber for the maximum light to enter the outgoing optical fiber. Deviation of the light beam from the optimized position over the core of fiber causes a deviation in the feedback signal that is generated by the position sensitive detector array and fed into the switch configuration controller . The mirror servo electronics within the system controller receives the feedback signal and in response controls the deflection of the mirror to align the light beam into the outgoing fiber . shows the position sensitive array as being directly in front of the outgoing fiber array . However in other implementations the position sensitive array is placed in alternate locations in the optical cross connect switching system .

In this implementation the digital signal processor within the system controller generates a new destination signal or other signal to provide information on the status of the optical cross connect switching system . This signal allows proper switching at other switches or a network manager on the network. The digital signal processor sends this signal to the transmitter which converts the signal to an optical signal. The transmitter then couples the optical destination signal to the one selected outgoing fiber in the outgoing fiber array via a multiplexer .

When light beam is to be switched into a second outgoing fiber the switch configuration controller receives a destination signal identifying the new destination outgoing fiber . The switch configuration controller sends the new destination to the system controller which repositions the mirror in the mirror array so that beam follows the optical path to the lens in the second lens array . The lens focuses and couples most of the light into the outgoing fiber in the outgoing fiber array using feedback from the position sensitive array as described above.

In a similar manner the light beam can be directed to any outgoing fiber in the outgoing fiber array . The switch configuration controller determines the destination for light carried by all the incoming fibers. The system controller controls the deflection of the mirrors in the mirror array to direct the light to the destination outgoing fiber. The position sensitive detectors in the position sensitive array provide feedback to optimally position the light beam over the core of the outgoing fiber.

In bidirectional implementations light beams also travel from the outgoing fibers in the outgoing fiber array to incoming fibers in the incoming fiber array . This is done in the same way as light beams traveling from incoming fibers in the incoming fiber array to outgoing fibers in the outgoing fiber array . The switch configuration controller receives the optical destination signal from the fibers the system controller positions the mirrors in the mirror array to direct the light beams to th appropriate fibers and the position sensitive array provides feedback to optimally position the light beam over the core of the fibers .

The fiber arrays and alignment structures and position sensitive detector arrays and lens arrays and and mirror array are shown as one dimensional in the implementation of for clarity. In preferred implementations the arrays may be two dimensional. For example in an implementation with a two dimensional mirror array there are rows and columns or some other two 20 dimensional arrangement of mirrors. The other arrays and alignment structures are similarly two dimensional in some implementations. In addition the overall system is shown as two dimensional in . In preferred implementations the system can have a three dimensional structure as the additional dimension in and out of the plane of the paper can be advantageously used to position the various components.

The feedback from the position sensitive arrays can also be used to intentionally and controllably misalign a light beam with respect to the core of its outgoing fiber. This controlled misalignment can be used to introduce variable optical attenuation in the switching system to control the output power levels of the signals. The attenuation can be set to different levels using the feedback to maintain the attenuation at the desired level. If the mirror array is used simply to vary this attenuation but not to switch between fibers then the result is a variable optical attenuator VOA If both the switching and variable attenuation capabilities are utilized the result is an optical switch with equalization.

For simplicity depicts only one incoming fiber one outgoing fiber the fibers associated lenses and and position sensitive detectors and one mirror in the first mirror array and one mirror in the second mirror array. It is understood that the principles illustrated are also applicable to arrays as described with respect to .

The position sensitive detector generates position error signals in two directions and these two signals are amplified with amplifiers processed to determine two position errors and fed into the servo electronics that provides closed loop control of position as is well known to those skilled in the art of the feedback servo control. Feedback from the detector is used to control both mirror and mirror . In one implementation the mirror deflection angles are correlated and they are moved as a couple with substantially identical deflection angles. This provides the advantages of coupling the maximum light intensity into the outgoing fiber and minimizing optical insertion losses.

In addition the fiber in is included to provide alternative registration light source at wavelength r that is different than data wavelengths 1 . . . n. The registration light source at wavelength r may be guided by the fiber which is coupled to the incoming fiber through a fiber coupler. Thus within the switching the registration light travels the same path as the wavelengths Carrying the data signals. Consequently the position sensitive detector can detect the position of either the data signals or the registration light signal at wavelength r. When data beams are used for position sensing the position sensitive detector has high sensitivity at infrared communication wavelengths. Registration light beam with wavelength r may operate in the infrared range or in the visible range as long as its wavelength r is different from the data wavelengths. In this case detectors are selected with high sensitivity at the registration light wavelength r.

The optical cross connect switching system in is bi directional. At one time period the data traffic flows from fiber to the fiber . At another time period traffic flows in the opposite direction i.e. from fiber to fiber . Consequently additional devices are included in the system. The position sensitive detector and amplifier are additional devices included in the system to allow bi directional data flow. The position sensitive detector and amplifier play the same role for traffic from fiber into fiber as components and do for traffic from fiber into fiber . Similarly registration light source and fiber are additional devices included in the system to allow bi directional data flow. The function of registration light source and its fiber is the same as light source and fiber except that registration light source and its fiber are active when traffic travels from fiber to fiber . Switch configuration controller and system controller operate in the same manner as in .

When the light from fiber is supposed to be directed into fiber beam is collimated with a lens in lens array reflected from mirror in mirror array to follow path onto mirror in mirror array and from mirror onto lens in lens array that focuses the light into fiber . When light from fiber is to be switched to fiber mirror is deflected so that the light beam follows path and travels to mirror in mirror array and then after appropriate deflection from mirror it travels along path to lens in lens array and fiber . With the two mirror arrangement central rays of the light beam are directed to follow optical paths such as paths and from any incoming fiber to any outgoing fiber that are parallel with the axes of outgoing fibers to . This allows the beam to couple into the outgoing fiber with minimum insertion losses. If the light beam drifts from the optimized position on cores of the outgoing fibers position sensitive detectors in the position sensitive detector array provide a position error signal to servo electronics that corrects position of mirrors in mirror arrays and .

Mirror arrays can be either one or two dimensional depending on whether the fiber array is one or two dimensional. Typically smaller fiber arrays are one dimensional and large systems are two dimensional.

Several different technologies for driving and fabricating the mirror arrays and controlling the deflections of the mirrors in the arrays are employed in different implementations. Exemplary riving technologies include electrostatic electromagnetic piezoelectric thermally activated mirrors and other types of driving technologies. One implementation is based on two directional macroscopic electromagnetic galvanometer actuators fabricated with discrete mirrors coils and magnets such as those used in optical recording drives. Two independent electric currents pass through two separate current loops and two sets of magnetic fields are applied so that the current magnetic field and resulting torque vectors are all perpendicular to each other. Electromagnetic galvanometer mirrors fabricated with multiple electrical turns around the mirror and the inner frame and two sets of magnets represent one implementation of two dimensional rotating actuator. Use of Micro Electro Mechanical Systems MEMS in the mirrors can provide improved performance and low cost.

More specifically through show one implementation of a controllable MEMS mirror system controlled by electrostatic driving technology. shows a top view shows a side view and shows a bottom view. The MEMS mirror system includes a mirror . In the implementation illustrated in the mirror has a circular shape. In other implementations the mirror may have other shapes such as rectangle square or other suitable geometrical shapes. In the MEMS mirror system has two sets of hinges and that are placed perpendicularly to each other so that each hinge pair allows angular deflection around their respective axes. The outer set of hinges allows one directional rotation of the inner frame with respect to the outer frame . The inner set of hinges allows one directional rotation of the mirror with respect to the inner frame around axis that is perpendicular to the outer rotation axis.

The length width thickness and cross sectional shape of hinges determine the stiffness and consequently the voltages required to achieve desired deflections. The torsional hinge stiffness is proportional to the hinge width and the third power of hinge thickness and inversely proportional to hinge length. The hinge thickness is optimized so that the stiffness is minimized but the structure is not too fragile so that it would not survive separation after fabrication handling during assembly and shock and vibration in typical environment. In some implementations the hinges are single double triple or quadruple serpentine hinges. This provides the advantage of allowing relatively narrow hinge width and long hinge length to minimize stiffness.

The reflecting surface of the mirror is covered with materials that have very high reflectivity in the operating wavelength range of the switch. For optical communications the operating range may be from about 900 nm to about 1600 nm. Most metal films have higher than 95 reflectivity in this range and with two reflections about 90 of the signal can be preserved. In one implementation a gold film may be used because it has a reflectivity greater than 90 at optical communication wavelengths and long term stability due to its resistance to corrosion and other degradation.

The mirror and inner frame may be made of electrically conducting material e.g. doped silicon or of nonconducting material e.g. undoped silicon that is coated with electrically conducting film on the bottom side light is reflected from the top side of mirror . This bottom conductive side is connected to a common electrode that is typically kept at the electrical ground. Film material and thickness on the top and bottom of the mirror and inner frame are typically substantially the same in order to avoid distorting the mirror by differential stress. Metals such as Cr Ta Ti and other suitable metals may be used below the optically reflecting film to improve adhesion of metals such as Au to the mirror surfaces. The driving electrode structure is defined below the mirror with an air gap that is adjusted according to mirror dimensions desired deflection angles torque constants of hinges and voltages planned for full deflections typically equal to 30 of the air gap between two plates of parallel capacitor to avoid snapping instability of the mirrors .

Four fixed electrodes and together with movable mirror and movable inner frame form four parallel plate capacitors. Hence mirror and inner frame are part of the common movable electrode that is typically held at ground. Based on the position of the light with respect to the outgoing fiber a voltage difference Vij1 is applied to electrode to obtain a deflection aij1 of the mirror around a first axis. A voltage difference Vij2 is applied to the electrode in order to obtain a deflection aij2 of the mirror around a second axis. The indices i and j represent the row and the column of the mirror in the mirror array respectively. In implementations with two mirror arrays such as shown in another pair of voltages Vk11 and Vk12 are applied to two electrodes of a second mirror actuator in the second mirror array. The pair of voltages Vk11 and Vk12 provides deflections bk11 and bk12 in the second mirror. In one implementation typically aij1 is substantially equal to bk11 and aij2 is substantially equal to bk12.

In some implementations the actuators are two directional electrostatic rotational comb actuators. One such rotational comb actuator is described below with respect to and . In electrostatic rotational comb actuators rotational motion is generated by attractive forces between oppositely charged combs of an edge capacitor. Two sets of hinges are employed to provide rotational motion in two directions. Up to six leads connect electrical voltage sources with combs. For large arrays leads are routed along the walls of the top wafer onto the lower wafer that contains driving electronics. Rotational comb designs have leads incorporated on fixed comb electrodes and the ground potential is applied to movable comb electrodes. The leads are brought along the walls toward the bottom wafer that contains driving electronics. The interconnections between the top and bottom wafers may be fabricated with flip chip packaging technology using solder reflow or conductive epoxy.

In implementations with large arrays the electrodes preferably are addressed by a row or column of mirrors at the same time and then held at the addressing voltages on these electrodes until the same line is re addressed again. This approach requires matrix addressing with at least one transistor and one storage capacitor for each pair of top and bottom electrodes e.g. see the discussion with respect to below . The capacitor plates and can be connected to electrical driving circuitry with vias .

In one implementation bulk and surface micromachining methods are used to build these structures. The material for the mirror and hinges is a single crystal silicon with very low concentration of impurities and defects which provides a long lifetime for the hinges. Alternative materials are polysilicon metals or metal alloys such as beryllium copper. In some implementations the mirror and hinges are fabricated with different thickness which provides the advantage of avoiding excessive wavefront distortions of light reflected from the mirror.

In one implementation the fabrication process for structures with different hinge and mirror thicknesses is based on bulk micromachining of double layer silicon on insulator SOI wafers. The double layer structure is produced by oxidation of silicon wafers their lamination internal silicon dioxide layer will be referred to as the first silicon dioxide layer grinding to reduce the thickness of the silicon layer to the desired thickness of hinges deposition of another silicon oxide layer the second silicon dioxide layer lamination of another silicon wafer and then repeating the process of grinding the wafers to the desired thickness equal to approximately to mirror thickness. Alternatively epitaxial growth of single crystal silicon is substituted for grinding for one or both silicon layers. The epitaxial option provides good control of thin layers with good thickness uniformity.

In operation driving voltages are applied between 15 electrodes and and the movable plate in a manner similar to that described in through When rotational deflection in which the gap on the right hand side of post is supposed to be reduced the same voltage is applied to electrodes and while electrodes and and the movable mirror are kept at ground. The electrostatic force pulls the right side of the movable mirror towards electrodes and and generates electrostatic torque that bends the post thus allowing the desired mirror deflection. Other mirror deflections are generated by selecting two electrodes out of four electrodes and applying two different voltages to them while keeping two remaining fixed electrodes at ground together with the top movable mirror electrode.

In alternative implementations electromagnetic actuators are built to drive the mirror with one central torsional post. Electrical coils with single or multiple turns are placed on the bottom of the mirror and magnets are located on the sides of mirror assembly. Two or more independent coils and corresponding two or more sets of magnets generate electromagnetic torques in two directions. In yet another implementation the placement of coils and magnets are reversed with magnets on the mirror and coils on the base.

A fabrication method for these types of torsional post actuators relies on LIGA Lithography Electroplating Molding . In one implementation the following fabrication steps may be performed photolithography electroplating or vacuum deposition of the first material removal of photoresist deposition of the second material by electroplating or by vacuum deposition planarization and repetition of the preceding steps for as many layers as needed. The final fabrication step normally involves removal of sacrificial material in order to release the structure.

As seen in in some implementations the position sensors can be placed directly in front of the outgoing fibers. In other implementations position sensors may be placed in positions that are not directly in front of the outgoing fibers. In these implementations beamsplitters can be positioned in the optical path to capture and redirect a fraction of the light in the optical path. Implementations with beamsplitters result in the loss of light coupled into the fiber. However these losses are typically small e.g. only in a range of about 5 to about 10 . show two implementations that use beamsplitters and position sensors located away from the fibers.

In the switch of instead of 20 placing the position sensing detector arrays and in front of fibers data or registration light beams are split with beamsplitters and before they enter into lens arrays and . The beamsplitters and are selected so that they allow high transmission typically above 95 while reflection is limited to about 5 range. Position sensing detector arrays and are high spatial resolution sensitive arrays such as bilateral or quadrant detector arrays or imaging arrays such as charged coupled devices CCD or complementary metal oxide semiconductor CMOS arrays. These imaging arrays preferably have high sensitivity at monitoring wavelengths in order to minimize insertion losses from placement of the beamsplitter into the optical paths.

For transmission of data from incoming fibers into 10 outgoing fibers only beamsplitter and position sensitive detector array are needed. For reverse transmission beamsplitter and position sensitive detector array are used. The data or registration light beams that exit from fibers propagate from lens array to mirror arrays and in the manner similar to the way described earlier. After light beams are reflected from the mirror array a small fraction of light is reflected by beamsplitter towards position detector array . The remaining light is transmitted toward output lens array and outgoing fibers . In some implementations the size of the position beams is adjusted to match size and pitch of individual detectors by optional lens arrays and placed in front of position sensitive detector arrays and respectively.

When a registration light signal in visible or near infrared e.g. around 980 nm wavelength r is used silicon based CCD CMOS quadrant detectors or bilateral detectors are appropriate choices for position sensitive detectors. When data light at standard optical communication wavelengths e.g. 1290 1610 nm or registration light at infrared wavelengths e.g. 1480 nm is used for position sensing these detector arrays are typically based on InGaAs GaAs Ge or other infrared photosensitive materials.

In implementations that include a beamsplitter and position sensing detectors outside the normal optical path between incoming and outgoing fibers as well as implementations where the position sensing detectors are in front of the fibers positioning calibration of detectors is performed with respect to the center cores of optical fibers. The calibration is done by measuring the light intensity that reaches the outgoing fibers. When the light intensity is at its maximum the two dimensional light beam positions on position sensitive detectors are recorded. This provides initial reference mirror positions that result in the maximum light intensity coupled into the outgoing fibers.

For implementations where the position sensors are not in front of fibers the determination of reference positions of mirrors and position sensors may be done at the same time. The reference position of position sensors is recorded when reference position of mirrors is determined with maximized light intensity coupled into outgoing fibers. The pairs of mirrors from mirror arrays and are moved in small incremental rotational steps while the light intensity coupled into a selected fiber is continuously monitored. When the maximum light intensity is reached reference mirror position is recorded in terms of two voltages required to attain the optimum position of the mirror pair. At the same time two coordinates representing the position of beamsplitted light beam on the position sensitive detector is recorded.

In the switch of light beams are split with beamsplitters and . However in this case the light beams travel from the incoming fibers are reflected off the two mirror arrays and travel to the outgoing fibers and are back reflected from the reflective surface on the outgoing fibers. Light falling onto fiber cores is not reflected. The back reflected light from the outgoing fibers is split by the beamsplitters or onto position sensitive arrays or .

For example the beam of light out of the incoming fiber is collimated by lens and is then reflected off mirrors and . Next the light beam is focused by lens . The part of the focused light beam that does not enter the core of the outgoing fiber is reflected from the reflecting surface that surrounds the core of the outgoing fiber . This reflected light returns to beamsplitter where it is split and sent to the position sensitive detector array . The position sensitive detector array detects the position of the light beam and provides feedback to the system controller .

When bilateral and quadrant position sensitive detectors are used in the position sensitive detector arrays and in apparent beam positioning is obtained and corrections are applied to determine actual positions. When imaging arrays are used an image of the aperture around the fiber core and back reflected light are both recorded in the image. This implementation provides the advantage that both fiber cores and light beams are imaged so no referencing calibration is needed.

For bi directional traffic two more position sensitive detectors and are included in the system. They are functional for beams along the path going from the fiber array to the fiber array . The beamsplitter is used to operate with the similar functionality in the backward direction along the path as the beamsplitter in the forward direction along the path . The lens arrays and are optionally employed in front of position sensitive detectors and respectively.

Hence two position sensitive detector arrays may be implemented for unidirectional transmission and four position sensitive detector arrays may be implemented for bidirectional transmission.

Detailed front and side views of the single quadrant photodetector that is used in some implementations where the position sensitive detector array is in front of the fiber array are shown in and respectively. The detector is divided into four quadrants and . Each quadrant contains a separate detector such as a photosensitive p n junction or photosensitive pin diode . Each of these detectors and covers about a 90 degree region. The detectors do not cover the center of the fiber over an area that corresponds to the core of the fiber . This area contains material that is transparent at the operational wavelength or an opening without any material. Consequently this implementation is suitable for use with the implementation shown in . The cross section of an implementation of a pin diode is shown in . The electrode is a common electrode and the four detector regions provide four separate signals into four single ended or two differential amplifiers.

In some implementations quadrant photodetectors in are substituted by bilateral detectors similar to those described above in . When bilateral sensor arrays are placed in front of fibers then one sensor with an opening over the core of the fiber is used. The sensor has four electrodes positioned on the outside edges of a photosensitive multilayer structure as in above. Signals collected from these four electrodes reflect the two directional position of the light beam.

In some implementations imaging CCD or CMOS arrays are used for beam positioning instead of quadrant or bi lateral arrays in the locations for the position sensor arrays shown in . Readout of the CCD or CMOS array provides data to servo control.

The fiber alignment structures and in and in can be one or two dimensional depending on the size of the optical cross connect switch. Both one and two dimensional fiber arrays have to have precise fiber positioning and beam directionality. One implementation of one dimensional fiber arrays uses a structure of V grooves in a single crystal silicon substrate. Two dimensional fiber alignment structures and for incoming and outgoing fibers are formed from a micromachined array of holes in silicon.

An implementation with a neck funnel neck funnel going from the surface of the fiber array towards the fiber buffer arrangement and an even or odd number of alignment layers is shown in . In alternate implementations with a neck funnel funnel neck arrangement both an odd number of alignment layers are used. Alignment layers and and fiber are secured together with glass or glue bonds so that a hermetic seal is formed between the fiber and alignment layers and . Glass bonding provides the advantages of having a thermal coefficient match between the fiber glass and bonding glass and an environmentally stable glass seal. Since glass bonding is usually performed at relatively high temperatures special insulation spacers may be included in the alignment structures to thermally isolate buffer from alignment layers and during glass bonding.

The multiple constricted channels or necks in the alignment layers and define the fiber positions and also the direction of light exiting from the fiber . The alignment layers and are usually fabricated from single crystal silicon. The funnel regions are defined with wet etching while neck regions are fabricated with deep reactive ion etching of silicon.

The buffer is configured to provide crude positioning and strain relief for fiber . In some implementations a buffer alignment block with cylindrical holes serves as a positioner and holder of buffer coatings. Alternatively an approach similar to that used with fiber alignment layers is followed with buffer alignment layers. Openings in the buffer alignment block are larger than the funnels and bottlenecks in the fiber alignment layers and to accommodate the larger buffer diameter. Buffer and buffer alignment block are glued together to mechanically stabilize the structure and further seal it for hermetic isolation from outside environment.

The overall structure contains alignment features on each top and bottom surface of each alignment chip. In some implementations these alignment layers are formed by two sided photolithography so that alignment down to the micron is possible. V grooves formed in single crystal silicon as outlined above present an example of an alignment structure. Fibers having precise diameter and circular cross sections are inserted into V grooves and they self align bottom surface of one chip and the top surface of another chip. Multiple stack of chips can be aligned this way and achieve chip to chip alignment with precision down to about one micron. The structure can include vias that go through the buffer layer and at least one alignment layer. Mechanical pins of a controlled diameter and concentricity can be inserted into these vias to align the alignment layer and buffer block.

Lens arrays in this application including Lens arrays in or lens arrays and in are one or two dimensional matrices of lenses. Examples of the fabrication processes of microlens arrays are placing spherical ball lenses in one or two dimensional array of precisely micromachined cylindrical or tapered holes and lens matrices fabricated with gray scale lithography with embossing or ink jet formation of glass or polymer. Both refractive optical elements such as microlens arrays and graded index lens arrays and diffractive optical elements may be used to form the lens arrays. The material for the lens arrays may be a glass material a semiconductor material such as silicon or other suitable materials.

It is contemplated that a fiber array alignment module with necks and funnels can be fabricated with molding techniques. For example a molding material such as ceramic materials e.g. alumina may be used to form the substrate plate. The alignment plate is molded with pins that are placed in the molding material at desired positions. Each pin has one end widened to have the desired neck funnel profile. After mild sintering at a desired sinter temperature pins are pulled out and the structure is fully sintered. Shrinkage is taken into account by using pins of somewhat larger diameter than the final desired diameter. The voids left behind in the shaped molding material after removal of pins with cylindrical profile and conical ends are through neck funnel features that allow insertion and positioning of fibers. Pins can be made of a high melting temperature material such as tungsten stainless steel etc. The melting temperature of the pin material should be higher than the molding material for the substrate plate.

The following description of the operation of the actuator only deals with one rotational deflection of the mirror . However the other deflections of mirror and inner frame are generated in the similar manner. In order to rotate the mirror around the axis defined by inner hinges so that the top part of the mirror moves down and consequently the bottom part of the mirror moves up the voltage is applied to electrode while all other electrodes and are kept at ground. The electrostatic attraction between inner movable teeth and inner fixed teeth generates rotation around an axis going through two inner hinges . In order to generate rotational motion in two directions two different voltages are applied. One voltage is applied as described above between top ground plate and teeth and another voltage is applied between the ground plane and outer fixed teeth .

The electrostatic rotational comb actuator has the 20 advantage of generating significantly greater torque than some other actuators. Consequently higher rotational angles can be obtained with rotational comb drive than with other types of drives such as parallel plate drive at the same driving voltages. Alternatively when the same driving voltages are used a MEMS mirror system with rotational comb drive can have much higher hinge stiffness than parallel plate drive and still obtain the same rotational angles.

The servo system for the above optical cross connect switches may be designed to operate in the following manner. The electronics continuously scans through the whole system sequentially typically one row of photodetectors and one row of mirrors at a time with an overall cycle period Tc. When there are N fibers present time to detect signals from a single row of photodetectors will be about tu Tc N . Once the signals from the photodetectors are acquired the driving voltages to all mirrors in a given column are adjusted and kept at this level until the photodetectors are re addressed Tc time later. In the following update period tu the next row of photodetectors is sensed and voltages for the second set of mirror electrodes are re adjusted. The updating time tu depends on the time necessary to acquire signals with an acceptable signal to noise ratio. The overall cycle period Tc depends on the number of mirrors in the array but is typically kept below a specified period e.g. 1 msec even for large arrays. The drifts and environmental changes have a time scale that is much longer than the update time. Shock and vibration disturbances are also minimized through closed loop servo control.

Many optical devices and systems in optical networking applications are configured with free propagation of light carrying various information such as data video and voice. Examples of such devices and systems include among others optical cross connect switches wavelength division multiplexers optical add drop multiplexers and wavelength routers. Typically light may be brought or received from an array of fibers collimated through a lens array subsequently propagated through the switching or multiplexing de multiplexing device and then focused by a lens array to couple back into another array of fibers. In some cases an additional array of optical sensors may be needed between the fibers and lenses. In bi directional systems these sensor arrays have to be placed on both the incoming and outgoing sides of the systems.

Assembly and alignment of fibers sensors and lenses can be particularly challenging for large arrays that are typically used in long distance and metro applications where the number of fiber channels exceeds a certain number of channels e.g. 32 channels. In many of these cases one dimensional 1D arrays can be inadequate for accommodating the large capacity and thus a two dimensional 2D array may be desirable. In 1D arrays V grooves fabricated on silicon wafers with lithography and wet etching of bulk silicon are used. Precise spacing and directionality of light can be achieved when the lens array and fiber array have identical pitch and are aligned translationally and rotationally. Such techniques may not be applicable to fabrication of 2D arrays built by stacking 1D arrays because thickness tolerances from one array to the next array add in the stacking direction.

Novel approaches to alignment and assembly of 1D and 2D arrays of fibers lenses and sensors are disclosed in the following sections. Such approaches can be used to achieve alignment precision limited only by photolithographic tolerances e.g. about few hundreds of nanometers variations of diameter and concentricity of fibers e.g. typically a fraction of one micron for some specialized fibers and passive alignment features between fiber lens and sensor arrays e.g. below one micron .

The fiber arrays and are engaged to and are held by fiber alignment modules and respectively. Each fiber alignment module may be implemented based on the structure in which has two or more alignment layers and fabricated with fiber holding channels with funnels and necks. The structure accurately defines the lateral positions and angular directions of fibers in the fiber array with respect to one another. After the fibers are adjusted to desired positions along respective fiber holding channels the fibers are fixed in the fiber holding channels. The end facets of the fibers in each fiber array point to one side of the fiber alignment module which faces the corresponding interfacing surface or .

It is desirable to keep optical axes of all fibers parallel with one another in order to maintain pointing accuracy of all fibers. Moreover it is desirable for the end facets of the fibers to be substantially perpendicular to the optical axes of the fibers. Such perpendicular end facets may be formed by first placing fibers in a linear array of V grooves in a substrate and holding the fibers in place by mechanical clamping. Next wire lapping or dicing may be used to cut the fibers to form the desired end facets. Alternatively laser cutting e.g. with a short wavelength laser such as an excimer F2 laser may also be used to cut the fibers. In other cases cleaving of fibers before assembly into fiber alignment module is adequate. The perpendicular end facet ensures that the optical axis of the fiber is also the optical axis of light after light exits from the fiber so that the lens array can collimate light beams to be parallel to one another.

In general optical coupling into a fiber needs a collimator lens to achieve a high coupling efficiency. Conversely the output beam from a fiber that is directed through free space to a receiving element also needs a collimator lens to correct the divergence of the beam exiting the end facet of the fiber to allow for free space propagation to the receiving element. Therefore the fiber system includes two collimator lens arrays a first lens array located between the first fiber array engaged to the fiber alignment module and the first interfacing opening of the module and a second lens array located between the second fiber array engaged to the fiber alignment module and the second interfacing opening of the module . The lens arrays and may be formed of either refractive optical elements or diffractive optical elements.

Additionally position sensing detector arrays and may be optionally positioned relative to the fiber alignment modules and to measure a position of each beam incident onto the receiving facet of a receiving fiber. Each detector array has an array of position sensing detectors respectively corresponding to the fibers in a respective fiber array. Both detector arrays and are needed for a bi directional system where signals can be received either from the fiber array or . If the system is a unidirectional system with light propagating from fibers to fibers then only one detector array on the receiving side with the fiber array is needed and the other detector array may be omitted. In operation each position sensing detector responds to the received optical beam to produce a detector output signal with spatial information of the beam on the detector surface. This detector output signal is fed into a servo control module for the optical processing module to adjust the optical elements of the module that affects the direction of the received beam to align the beam to the center of the receiving facet. In the example of a cross connect switch reflectors in optical switches in the signal path are adjusted. Hence the position sensing detector array allows implementation of an active feedback control of optical alignment of the output beam to ensure consistent performance and reliable operation of the system such as minimized insertion losses and cross talk. Each detector array may be located in the optical paths of the signals as shown in or located out of the optical paths of the signals by using a beam splitter to split a small fraction of the signals to the detector array as shown in .

The optical processing module generally interfaces with the fiber arrays and via free space through the interfacing openings and . Side surfaces such as and can be hermetically sealed with transparent surfaces and to protect the internal components of the module such as mirrors and actuators or optical filters. The interfacing surfaces and are transparent to the data light and registration light when it is used.

One aspect of this application is the use of two 20 monolithic lens arrays and to close up and hermetically seal the interfacing openings and respectively in certain implementations. Each lens array may be formed on a planar substrate or plate e.g. lenses may be etched from a substrate of a glass silicon GaP ZnSe or other suitable materials. The edges of the lens array may be shaped to conform to or to cover the edges of the corresponding opening or . The hermetical seal may be formed between the edges of the lens array and the opening. In one implementation the material for the housing of the module and the material for the lens arrays and may be selected for hermetic sealing. For example the housing of the module may be formed of a metallic material such as KOVAR for matching the thermal expansion coefficient with a glass material and the lens arrays and may be formed of a glass material so that the glass to metal hermetic seal may be formed.

Alternatively the fibers may be metallized and are hermetically sealed to metallized silicon plates by soldering. The metallized silicon plates are then bonded by soldering to the hermetic housing of the module to form the hermetic seal.

In some situations it may be desirable to hermetically seal only module and in those cases glass windows and can be hermetically attached to the walls of the module while fiber arrays and and lens arrays and are kept outside of the hermetic box . In other situations hermetic sealing is not required.

Another example of the use of fiber sensor lens array structures is the wavelength router that combines the features of the optical cross connect OXC and the WDM by splitting light into individual wavelengths and then directing them into selected outgoing fibers with the use of 2D or 3D OXC S. Multiple units of fiber and WDM can be combined with OXC lens array and optional sensor array to form wavelength router in which individual output fibers can each carry up to n wavelengths.

The lens array may be formed from a single piece of optically transparent material in the wavelength of interest such as a silica glass plastic silicon gallium phosphide zirconium oxide etc. by well known methods of photoresist reflow or gray scale photolithography and dry etching. One surface A or the two opposite surfaces A and B may be shaped to form the lens array. In the illustrated implementation the top surface A is shaped to have an array of curved and protruded areas to form and define individual convex lenses while the opposite surface B is substantially planar. The spacer may be used to provide a desired spacing between the lens array and the array of fibers to ensure the end facet of each fiber is approximately at or near the focal plane of the corresponding lens in the lens array . The spacer may be formed between the planar bottom surface B of the lens array to create a space between the lens array and the fiber alignment module . This space may be used to accommodate the fibers that extend beyond the fiber alignment module . Since the lensing effect of the lens array of the illustrated implementation is effectuated by the top surface A an index matching dielectric material such as an index matching liquid may be filled in the space between the fiber alignment module and the planar bottom surface B to reduce optical reflection at the bottom surface B. The top surface A may be coated with an anti reflective coating to reduce the reflection. Alternatively space is left unfilled and fiber facet surface and two lens surfaces A and B are coated with antireflective films. Also the surfaces of fibers are normally coated with antireflective layers in order to minimize back reflections and reduce insertion loss.

One technical issue in assembling the structure in is lateral alignment of fibers to the optic axes of the corresponding lenses respectively. In the illustrated implementation this lateral alignment may be achieved by using pre formed alignment marks e.g. and grooves e.g. and . Alignment marks may be formed in the lens array and the fiber alignment module as alignment references. The lateral positions of the lens array and the fiber alignment module may be adjusted relative to each other to align up the alignment marks. When alignment features such as grooves and are present passive alignment is achieved between fiber array and lens array .

Passive alignment of fiber and lens arrays can be accomplished by using alignment features and in fiber array plate and the spacer between lens array assembly and fiber array assembly respectively. Alignment features and can be in plane V grooves that are photolithographically defined and etched in the silicon or other substrates with high precision. Fiber array plate the spacer and the lens array can be aligned by inserting bare alignment fibers into the common grooves formed by aligned alignment features in two opposing surfaces of two different layers. For example the alignment feature V groove on the bottom surface of the spacer is aligned with the alignment feature V groove on the top surface of the plate with the neck funnel features to form a channel for inserting an alignment fiber to force the alignment between the spacer and the plate . Similar alignment features on the lens array and the spacer are used along with alignment fibers to facilitate alignment between the lens array and the spacer . As a result the lens array and the fiber array fixed in the plate are aligned with respect to each other.

In the illustrated implementation the top surface A of the fiber alignment module is designed to have triangular cross section grooves or pyramidal holes e.g. V grooves or holes formed in silicon substrates with precisely defined angles which are sized to receive a portion of a cylindrical rod with precise uniform diameter and minimal eccentricity such as optical fiber or uniform diameter spheres while exposing another portion of the same rod or sphere above the surface A. The spacer which is engaged to and is affixed to the lens array and fiber array is designed to have grooves on the top surface that match the grooves in the lens array and grooves on the bottom surface that match the grooves in the fiber array. Top and bottom alignment grooves and are formed in the spacer using double sided photolithography.

In the alignment process an alignment rod can be bonded or mechanically clamped to each alignment groove on the surface A. The assembly of the lens array and the spacer is positioned over the fiber alignment module to overlap the corresponding matching fiber groove to the alignment rod . Since a portion of the alignment rod protrudes above the surface A the protruded portion of the alignment rod can be received by the groove to force the assembly of the lens array and the spacer into the preset aligned position. Alignment of grooved spacer and the lens array can be automatically accomplished by bonding silicon spacer with V grooves to plate . This can simplify the alignment process reduce the assembly time and ensure alignment accuracy. Alternatively precise silicon balls may be used to replace the alignment rods. Another alternative relies on active alignment of fiber array and lens array using photolithographically defined alignment marks on surfaces A and B.

The lens array in is different from the lens array in that the bottom surface is also shaped to have curved and protruded areas to effectuate the focusing effect. This design with two curved surfaces can be used to achieve a long focal length to place the beam waist of a Gaussian beam at the center of the optical path within the optical processing module shown in and the distance between each lens array to the beam waist is within the Rayleigh length so that the divergence of the Gaussian beam does not exceed the optical aperture of each lens. This design can reduce the optical loss. Note that the index matching liquid may not be filled in the space between the fiber alignment module and the lens array because this would nullify the focusing effects of the curved areas on the bottom surface of the lens array but antireflective coating may be used.

The above use of alignment grooves for lateral alignment may be extended to alignment of different substrates or chips associated with the array of fibers. Referring back to where a neck funnel alignment structure is illustrated different layers with fiber guiding channels or through holes must be aligned with respect to one another with a high accuracy especially when the number of layers is large.

Notably the alignment design in by using two or more alignment plates with the neck funnel structures is only one exemplary design. Other arrangements of alignment plates with the neck funnel structures are also possible and may be used. shows four different exemplary arrangements having at least two alignment plates with the neck funnel structures. shows two alignment plates and are directly stacked over each other in a funnel neck funnel neck arrangement when viewed from the plate towards the plate . No spacer is used between the two alignment plates and . shows a funnel neck funnel neck arrangement with a spacer between the two alignment plates and . This design is a simplified design in comparison to the design in . shows a three layer design with a funnel neck funnel neck funnel neck arrangement from the plate to plate and to plate without any spacers. Finally shows three alignment plates and in a funnel neck neck funnel funnel neck arrangement going from the plate to the plate and to the plate .

In addition to laterally positioning the fibers in the fiber array the position of each fiber along the fiber channel can be individually adjusted to ensure the proper focusing distance between the fiber end facet and the corresponding lens in the lens array. This is because fabrication of the individual lenses in the lens array usually has inherent inaccuracies in focal length and other variations from one lens to another. Optical collimation essentially requires each fiber end facet to be at or near the focal plane of its collimator lens. Therefore different fibers may be adjusted to have their end facets at different positions from the lens array. This adjustment may be achieved after the lateral alignment of the lens array with fiber array is completed.

In operation each fiber is individually adjusted by applying a force to slide its position in the fiber channel of the fiber alignment module. The degree of collimation is optically monitored to determine whether the end facet of each fiber is set to the desired position. Referring back to different fibers may be set to have different amounts of protrusion out of the fiber alignment module as a result of this adjustment. A high resolution imaging camera may be used to monitor the alignment.

In a 1 Dimensional fiber array at least two fibers may be adjusted together at a time until all fibers are adjusted to be at their desired focus positions. In a 2 Dimensional fiber array at least three fibers may be adjusted together at a time until all fibers are adjusted to be at their desired focus positions.

When a lens array has lenses with very tightly controlled focal lengths adjustment of fiber positions along their optical axes is not necessary and fibers can be bonded to fiber alignment structure before fiber array and lens array are aligned and attached together.

Referring back to and a position sensitive detector array may be formed on the fiber end facets to measure positions of beams. illustrate one implementation with quadrant detectors.

Referring back to the alignment design in the above alignment layer may be used to form a multilayer stack for accurate positioning of fiber cores and guiding of fibers during insertion incorporation of fiber taper angles in two dimensional array and self alignment of fiber lens and sensor arrays during their assembly. Micron positioning accuracy is achieved with low fabrication and assembly cost.

The fiber contains the section of exposed fiber cladding and the section where the buffer is present. Fiber cladding is aligned and held with precision of few microns by a series of alignment layers and . These layers have guiding and aligning regions. The neck regions define the positions of the fibers and the funnel regions provide a guide for massive parallel insertion of many fibers into the structure. Alignment layers and fiber may be secured together with glass or glue bonds so that a hermetic seal is formed between the fibers and alignment plates and . Glass bonding may be preferable because of thermal coefficient match between the fiber glass and bonding glass and the environmental stability of glass seal. Even low temperature glass bonding requires relatively high temperatures compared with thermal or ultraviolet curing of epoxies and therefore special insulation spacers have to be included in the alignment structures to thermally isolate buffer from alignment layers during glass bonding. Multiple constricted channels or necks in the alignment layers define the fiber position and also the direction of light exiting from the fiber .

Properly positioned buffer provides crude positioning and strain relief for fiber . Buffer alignment block with tapered cylindrical holes can serve as a positioner and holder of buffer coatings. Alternatively an approach similar to that used with fiber alignment layers can be used with buffer alignment layers. Openings in the buffer alignment block are significantly larger than the funnels and bottlenecks in the fiber alignment layers in order to accommodate the larger buffer diameter. Buffer and buffer alignment block are glued together to mechanically stabilize the structure and further seal it for isolation from outside environment. Note that preferable hermetic seal is at switching core surfaces or are formed by lens surfaces.

The overall structure can include alignment vias that go through all alignment and buffer layers. Mechanical pins of a controlled diameter and concentricity can be inserted into these vias to align the multilayer structure of alignment layers and buffer alignment block.

The lens array may be formed by photolithographic and etching processes from a single piece of a substrate. The lens is array can be designed to have alignment features that match alignment features in the fiber alignment structure so that passive alignment can be employed to assemble these two structures in a self aligning manner.

Another method of out of plane alignment between fiber alignment plates and lens array plate is shown in . The top view of alignment features is shown along with positions of fibers and lenses . Alignment features can be formed by vias with cylindrical neck regions and tapered funneled regions as described above. The fabrication of these vias can be also as described earlier. Cylindrical rods such as optical fibers that are not part of optical fiber array can be used for alignment. Further alignment can be facilitated when light is input into these dummy optical fibers.

Apart from using the above described arrays as cross connect switches other applications include the following 

Only few implementations are disclosed. However it is understood that variations and enhancements may be made without departing from the spirit of and are intended to be encompassed by the following claims.

