---

title: System and method for offering seamless connectivity across multiple devices in a communications environment
abstract: An apparatus for providing connectivity is provided that includes a mobility server operable to coordinate a communication session between a first and a second end-user device. The first end-user device is associated with a first call leg and the second end-user device is associated with a second call leg. A handoff is executed in transferring the communication session from the first end-user device to the second end-user device. In more particular embodiments, the mobility server is operable to receive signal strength information from the first end-user device and to execute the handoff based on the signal strength information. In addition, the handoff is executed based on an end-user preference that is provided in a subscription that is accessed by the mobility server.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07650143&OS=07650143&RS=07650143
owner: Cisco Technology, Inc.
number: 07650143
owner_city: San Jose
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050511
---
The present invention relates generally to communications and more particularly to a system and a method for offering seamless connectivity across multiple devices in a communications environment.

Networking architectures have grown increasingly complex in communications environments. In recent years a series of protocols and architectures have been developed in order to accommodate a diverse group of end users having various needs. Some of these protocols relate to issues associated with dynamically changing connectivity.

As both public and private network systems grow in size and in sophistication proper routing and efficient management of communication sessions and data flows becomes even more critical. In cases where protocols are unable to accommodate a given service device or feature an end user is precluded from enjoying the benefits of a given component or a network. Advances in technology have resulted in the deployment of various types of wireless networks. However while most of these wireless networks often provide service to adjacent and or overlapping physical spaces through the use of proprietary handover techniques most cellular and Internet Protocol IP network protocols are incompatible. Moreover an end user is somewhat encumbered or confined in existing architectures because optimum connectivity does not exist across a wide array of consumer devices. Accordingly the ability to provide an effective mechanism to properly process and direct communications for an end user seeking to realize the benefits provided by multiple network environments and by a plethora of devices offers a significant challenge to network operators component manufacturers and system designers.

In accordance with some of the teachings of the present invention techniques for providing optimal connectivity support are offered in the context of achieving an effective dynamic connectivity between a plurality of devices across a plurality of networks. According to some embodiments these techniques enable an end user to maintain an uninterrupted communication session that can be readily switched between devices and or networks. In particular these techniques can allow an end user to manage or to execute a call across a given set of end user devices.

According to a particular embodiment an apparatus for providing connectivity is provided that includes a mobility server operable to coordinate a communication session between a first and a second end user device. The first end user device is associated with a first call leg and the second end user device is associated with a second call leg. The mobility server is operable to optimally manage the call legs including session bi casting across multiple legs or leg transfer. A leg transfer is executed in transferring the communication session from the first end user device to the second end user device.

In more particular embodiments the mobility server is operable to receive signal strength information from the first and second end user devices and to execute the communication leg transfer based on the signal strength information. In addition the communication leg transfer is executed based on an end user preference that is provided in a subscription that is accessed by the mobility server and may be supplemented by receiving additional preference information from the first or second end user device.

Embodiments of the invention provide various technical advantages. For example the architecture of the present invention provides improved flexibility for an end user who can employ various devices to facilitate a given session. The present invention also offers a solution that allows a user to be provided with service continuity as the user switches access networks.

Moreover the present invention puts the core message routing functionality within the network and not with the client . Such an optimization further allows the operator to control the transition between devices and between access networks. It should also be noted that such an architecture is equally compatible with access solutions that combine the use an Internet Protocol IP and circuit switched technology for transporting end to end voice transport e.g. 3GPP 23.899 logic .

Certain technical advantages of the present invention may be readily apparent to one skilled in the art from the following figures descriptions and claims. Moreover while specific advantages have been enumerated above various embodiments may include all some or none of the enumerated advantages.

Communication system also includes a mobile station which may communicate with a remote device through cellular network using base station and or through IP network using a wireless local area network access point WLAN AP . Communication system allows for a communication session e.g. video voice data etc. to move amongst any number of devices. Mobile station represents a wireless telephone in one example and mobile station can achieve connectivity via WLAN AP IP network or cellular network . Television represents a device that is connected to IP network in a residential setting. Desk phone represents a fixed device that is wired to a fixed architecture e.g. an Intranet the Internet etc. . Desk phone resides in a hosted business environment in this particular example. The elements of communication system can operate to permit end user devices e.g. mobile station television business telephone etc. to maintain a communication session that is transferred between various networks e.g. cellular network and IP network . 

Prior to discussing the following FIGURES the problems or situations that are being addressed by the proposed flows should be understood. There is an industry consensus that 3GPP s IP multimedia subsystem IMS offers the ability to provide ubiquitous access to session initiation protocol SIP based multimedia services. While 3GPP has defined the IMS for delivering SIP based multimedia applications for cellular operators ETSI Tispan has recently adopted IMS as the basis for their next generation network architecture. 3GPP IMS roaming architecture is generally based on IMS SIP based application peering.

In a multi access environment while much of the emphasis has been on the recent availability of dual mode handsets a mobility solution is needed to accommodate a multi terminal solution i.e. providing multi device flexibility for a given end user . Consider an example in which an end user 1 starts one or more media sessions via a home television set 2 switches all or selective components of the media session to a cellular phone as the user moves out of his living room and walks to his car 3 switches all or selective components of the media session s to the in vehicle communications equipment e.g. an interactive radio and 4 drives to work and occasionally switches the media session s back to a cellular phone before finally transferring the media session s to the end user s enterprise handset when the user enters his office.

A solution to the above scenario ideally should involve the use of a make before break communication leg management solution. Additionally such a solution should offer the ability for the home service provider to control the transition between access networks. This is analogous to the mobile assisted handover MAHO that is currently specified in cellular systems where the mobile station reports the signal strength of the received neighbor cells to the network and the radio resource management functionality in the network determines when to make a cell transition.

In accordance with the teachings of the present invention communication system offers an application based mobility solution that can accommodate decomposed and converged multi access devices. An application specific technique is defined to allow mobility server which resides in a given network to trigger the reporting of signal strength data from a client to the application in the network. An application specific technique is defined to allow a network based application server to trigger the reporting of a user s access network preference from a client to the application. An application specific technique is defined to allow a network based application server to trigger the reporting of a user s access network preference from a client to the application on a per media component basis.

A signal strength events package is offered by communication system for realizing signal strength and preference data in a multimedia or a multi access environment. A signal strength events package is defined which allows an application to indicate how measurements and preferences should be reported. Such a package could be SIP based or based on any other communications platform. The signal strength parameter allows the requested periodicity of measurements to be different when the user agent has established a media session as opposed to when the user agent has no session established.

The present invention can offer a user interface defined through the end user devices whereby the interface allows a user to interact with the preference information sent within the received signal strength events package. This would in turn allow the user to override normal preference data.

Further said user interface can allow a user to interact with the preference information on a per media component sent within the received signal strength events package. This would in turn allow the user to request transfer of only selective components of a multi media session.

Thus communication system provides a given end user with service continuity as the end user switches access networks. The tendered architecture also positions the core message routing functionality within the network instead of the client. The operator can readily control the transition between access networks.

In operation of an example embodiment a multi access multimedia capability is offered to provide service continuity as the user switches access mechanisms. A make before break approach is used to allow a given end user to establish parallel sessions with the home service provider. One application of such a feature is in a SIP environment whereby parallel SIP dialogues are established between the subscriber and the home service provider. While such a embodiment uses SIP the techniques defined are equally applicable to other call control protocols and to other scenarios where a plurality of call control protocols exist e.g. a combination of signaling connection control part SCCP in the enterprise network and SIP in the service provider network .

In this example embodiment a SIP events package is defined for supporting reports from a user agent of the received signal strength measurements towards a third party call control entity. Mobility server is configured to act as a third party call control server. Mobility server can receive e.g. from an IMS S call session control function S CSCF a third party registration whenever a user registers with the S CSCF. The registration will indicate which SIP events packages are supported by the subscriber s SIP user agent. The registration will also indicate through already standardized techniques the capabilities of the SIP user agent. The reception of this registration triggers mobility server to subscribe to the received signal strength events package of the user.

When a user has a plurality of devices each will be independently registered with the S CSCF and be subsequently registered with a SIP enabled mobility server. The SIP mobility server will subscribe to each SIP user agent received signal strength events package. When a user has a single device comprising a converged access devices e.g. cellular and WLAN the converged device may register once with the S CSCF in the case that it implements mobile IP or twice with the S CSCF if mobile IP is not implemented . In both cases both received signal strengths are reported either in a single notify message if mobile IP is implemented or in multiple notify messages if mobile IP is not implemented .

In the subscription to the received signal strength events package the SIP mobility server can request the frequency of received signal strength measurements. Furthermore the SIP mobility server can differentiate the requested frequency of reports between when the user agent is active within media session and when it is not e.g. reporting every 300 seconds when outside a session and every 10 seconds when in session . Additionally the SIP mobility server may indicate how the user agent should average received signal strength measurements over the reporting period e.g. average over the duration of the reporting period .

The SIP notify message is defined to transport the reported signal strengths to the SIP mobility server. The SIP notify message can include a list of one or more standardized techniques for reporting signal strength e.g. corresponding to the modems supported for example GSM 05.08 and IEEE 802.11k support . For each reported technique the SIP user agent will include one or more signal reports e.g. RXLEV and RXQUAL for a report corresponding to GSM 05.08 . For each reported technique the user agent can also send a normalized signal strength indication that can be used by mobility server which does not recognize the standardized technique indicated in the notify message. For each reported technique the user agent will also send a preference indicator for the access network which that was used to generate the received signal strength measurement report. Further for each reported technique the user agent can also provide an indication of the type of sessions which can be supported. This may be a subset of those sessions for which the user agent has a capability to support and which have already been reported to mobility server at registration.

In one embodiment mobility server is a SIP server acting as a back to back user agent B2BUA for the duration of the call and the pre call. During pre call establishment mobility server can use the reported received signal strength measurements to determine how to handle the routing of the Invite message. For example mobility server can use the one or more received signal strength reports to determine whether to forward the Invite to one both or neither of the user instances the latter corresponding to a voice mail type service when the user is out of coverage .

During mid call mobility server can use the received signal strength reports to trigger a third party call control function which will cause the call leg to be moved from one access leg to another. For example if a user initiates or receives a call when operating purely in the cellular domain mobility server will route the Invite message to the registered user agent. Then if the user moves into an area of WiFi coverage and has a converged device that is not operating mobile IP the converged device will first authenticate to the WiFi network and register to the S CSCF with the IP address allocated by the WiFi network. The S CSCF can provide third party registration to mobility server which is currently controlling the users session. Mobility server can then subscribe to the users WiFi received signal strength events package. The converged device can then start reporting WiFi received signal strengths e.g. including IEEE 802.11k measurement reports of AP signal strength . Mobility server can compare the received signal strength measurements and possibly reference user preferences and then according to business logic determine when a communication leg transfer should be initiated. Mobility server can then use 3PCC for transferring the call leg from cellular to WLAN.

The home service provider supporting a plurality of SIP dialogues is able to receive signal strength measurements corresponding to the access networks that are supporting the individual SIP dialogues. While the above description relates to a converged device the exact same operation can be used to transfer the legs between access devices. In order for such an implementation to be realized the user should be authenticated on each access device. While these authentication credentials may be different it may be the responsibility of the S CSCF in one embodiment together with subscriber database to associate the two authentications to the same subscriber. The S CSCF in its third party registration to mobility server can then include the unique subscriber identity allowing mobility server to correlate the measurement reports as being associated with the same user. In this way a dialogue can be successfully moved from one device to another.

In order to force a switch of access devices for example where automatic switching is not possible the received signal strength notify message may include preference information which may be used to force a switch in legs to an alternate access mechanism. This can be the case where the user is consuming content on a television but wants to switch to a cellular phone. Because the television s signal strength reported will always be high quality such a trigger would not normally occur.

Via user interface interaction either on the device currently being used or on a device that will be used at a future time the user can indicate a request to switch legs. This information is included in the preference information within the notify message which is sent to mobility server where it is used to determine whether the communication leg transfer can occur.

In one embodiment a preference of 0 on an already established leg may indicate that the user is requesting mobility server to transfer the leg to any other access network as soon as possible. A preference of 255 on a new access network can indicate that the user wants to trigger a transfer of an on going dialogue from another access network to this access network. Values between 0 and 255 can be used to indicate some user preference for an access network. For example a value of 128 may indicate no particular user preference for an access network. Additional details related to these features and operations are provided below with reference to .

Cellular network represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing wireless telephony services using cellular protocols and technology. Various cellular protocols and technologies may be used by cellular network including but not limited to global system for mobile communications GSM time division multiple access TDMA code division multiple access CDMA and any other appropriate analog or digital cellular protocol or technology. Furthermore cellular network may utilize signaling system 7 SS7 protocol for signaling purposes. Cellular network may include any number of base stations as well as base station controllers mobile switching centers and other appropriate communications equipment for use in communicating with mobile station and PSTN . Thus as illustrated cellular network may couple to base station to receive and to transmit wireless signals to and from mobile station

IP network represents a generic network which is capable of communicating data using an IP protocol and which can accommodate VoIP. IP network may include communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for interconnecting elements included in an Internet environment. Thus IP network may represent a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN a metropolitan area network MAN and or any other appropriate network architecture. Furthermore elements within IP network may utilize circuit switched and or packet based communication protocols to provide for wireline telephony services. In addition elements within IP network may utilize wireless standards such as the 802.11 family of wireless standards to provide for wireless telephony services. Note that the 802.11 family of wireless standards includes among others 802.11a 802.11b and 802.11g. IP network may also utilize interactive voice response IVR . IP network may include any number of wireless network devices gateways Call Managers and other appropriate communications equipment for use in communicating with end user devices and PSTN . In the embodiment illustrated IP network includes access point gateway Call Manager and mobility server . Access point represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing wireless access to IP network . Access point may utilize one or more of the 802.11 standards. However any appropriate wireless standard or protocol may be used.

Gateway represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for interconnecting IP network with cellular network and or PSTN . Gateway may be used to convert communications between different communication protocols. For example gateway may convert communications received from cellular network in SS7 protocol to any of various other protocols that may be used by IP network such as protocols associated with the an integrated services digital network ISDN standard in the case of circuit switched trunking and H.323 SIP or other appropriate protocols in the case of IP based trunking.

Call Manager represents communications equipment or a communications platform including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing telephony services over IP network . For example Call Manager may support VoIP communications using any of various protocols such as SIP SCCP protocol media gateway control protocol MGCP H.323 and or any other appropriate protocol for VoIP. Furthermore Call Manager may act as an IP PBX and support PBX functions.

Business Intranet represents a virtual private network VPN in one embodiment. The VPN serves one or more employees and further offers connectivity to any number of devices e.g. business telephone personal digital assistants PDAs personal computers PCs etc. . Business Intranet is coupled to IP network in order to offer additional services and capabilities to a group of end users. In other embodiments business Intranet is a LAN WLAN MAN WAN or any other suitable architecture that offers connectivity to a group of end users.

Mobility server represents any appropriate device e.g. a router a switch a bridge a gateway a server etc. that facilitates the operations detailed herein. Mobility server includes any suitable collection of hardware software algorithms and controlling logic to support a communication leg transfer between networks and to process the signal strength data and account for user preferences as further detailed below.

It should be noted that the internal structure of mobility server and end user devices e.g. mobile station television business telephone a PDA a PC an interactive radio system any vehicular device for example an interactive radio etc. are malleable and can readily be changed modified rearranged or reconfigured in order to achieve their intended operations as they pertain to the communication leg transfer function the preference invocation and the communication of signal strength data. Software and or hardware may reside in these elements or in just one in order to achieve the teachings of the present invention. Hence software and or hardware is provided in a given end user device which knows how to initiate a preference switch and which autonomously sends signal strength information.

However due to their flexibility these elements mobility server and end user devices may alternatively be equipped with or include any suitable component device application specific integrated circuit ASIC processor microprocessor algorithm read only memory ROM element random access memory RAM element erasable programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable programmable ROM EEPROM field programmable gate array FPGA or any other suitable element or object that is operable to facilitate the operations thereof. Considerable flexibility is provided by the structures of mobility server and end user devices in the context of communication system and accordingly they should be construed as such.

PSTN represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic through which cellular network and IP network may communicate. PSTN may include switches wireline and wireless communication devices and any other appropriate equipment for interconnecting cellular network and IP network . PSTN may include portions of public and private networks providing network transport services between various geographic areas and networks.

Mobile station represents a mobile device including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic capable of communicating with devices through cellular network IP network and business Intranet . Mobile station may communicate through cellular network using base station and through IP network using access point . Furthermore mobile station may interact with Call Manager and or mobility server when appropriate to trigger a preference or to communicate signal strength information. Television and business telephone may also perform similar operations as they are equipped in the same fashion. All of these components may be referred to as end user devices as used herein in this document and are inclusive of a myriad of potential elements. Any device that is operable to relay information voice video data etc. to the end user should be included in the broad rubric of the term end user device. 

In operation of one example embodiment involving a cellular telephone mobile station may initiate and receive telephone calls through cellular network and or IP network to establish communication sessions. As used herein a communication session refers to the transfer of voice video data and or other information between two or more entities. At any point in time a communication leg transfer decision may be initiated which could be due to a preference provided in a subscription accessed by mobility server . In another example after establishing a communication session mobile station may lose or begin to lose connectivity with base station or WLAN access point . Signal degradation may occur due to various causes e.g. mobile station may begin to lose wireless connectivity due to physical movement . When this degradation occurs and based on end user preferences mobility server will coordinate the existing session across multiple devices such that a communication leg transfer is achieved in a seamless fashion.

Other communication leg transfer scenarios may occur when mobile station travels from an area serviced by cellular network to an area serviced by IP network which is illustrated in . Communication leg transfers may also occur in the opposite direction when mobile station travels from an area serviced by IP network to an area serviced by cellular network . However communication leg transfers may occur at other appropriate times and may involve a period of coexistence of parallel communication legs. For example handoff may occur when mobile station is located in an area serviced by both network types due to a predetermined preference of one type of network due to a spontaneous choice of a user of mobile station or in response to analyzing error rates or other data associated with signaling provided by one or both types of networks. For example error rates may be associated with signal strengths of base station and access point and may be dependent upon a location of mobile station

After receiving a telephone call intended for mobile station Call Manager and or mobility server may include itself in a signaling path associated with the resulting communication session whether the signaling path proceeds through cellular network or IP network .

Note that communication system represents only one embodiment of a system that supports communication session transfer between cellular IP hosted enterprise and wireless networks. Various alternative embodiments are possible. For example while in the illustrated embodiment IP network couples to cellular network through PSTN using gateway various other embodiments may include IP network coupling to cellular network in other ways. For example IP network may couple to cellular network using a service provider that supports VoIP. Thus in alternative embodiments cellular network and gateway may not be included in communication system .

In operation of an example embodiment mobility server uses a SIP received signal strength events package to provide application mobility. Mobility server can determine how to route SIP Invite messages and mid call leg transfers. Processor controls the operation and administration of elements within mobility server . For example processor operates to process information received from network interface and memory . Processor includes any hardware and or logic elements operable to control and process information. For example processor may be a programmable logic device a microcontroller a microprocessor and or any other suitable processing device.

Network interface communicates information to and receives information from devices coupled to IP network . For example network interface may communicate with gateway Call Manager and access point . Additionally the signal strength reporting can reside in a proxy user agent. For example a call terminating on a VoIP gateway may be able to generate signal strength reports according to the real time protocol RTP jitter and packet error ratios observed on the link. Furthermore network interface may receive information from and transmit information to remote devices as well as end user devices. Thus network interface includes any suitable hardware or controlling logic used to communicate information to or from elements coupled to mobility server .

Memory stores either permanently or temporarily data and other information for processing by processor and communication using network interface . Memory includes any one or a combination of volatile or nonvolatile local or remote devices suitable for storing information. For example memory may include random access memory RAM read only memory ROM magnetic storage devices optical storage devices or any other suitable information storage device or a combination of these devices. As illustrated memory may include one or more memory modules such as code and further include information relating to user preferences and or user subscriptions.

Code includes software executable files and or appropriate logic modules capable when executed to control the operation of mobility server . For example code may include executable files capable of supporting communication leg management and signal strength processing. Code may also include instructions to enable mobility server to utilize any number of mobile features.

Note that mobility server may use any appropriate protocol to communicate with other elements of communication system . For example mobility server may utilize Java telephony application programming interface JTAPI to interact with Call Manager .

While this example includes specific functional components for mobility server and end user devices these elements may include any collection and arrangement of components including some or all of the enumerated functional components for supporting signal strength processing and user preference invocation. Moreover mobility server contemplates implementing each of the functional components using any suitable combination and arrangement of hardware and or logic and implementing any of the functionalities using a computer program stored on a computer readable medium. Furthermore mobility server may be implemented as a stand alone device or aspects of mobility server may be distributed among various devices within IP network . Alternatively in some embodiments mobility server may be incorporated into Call Manager .

Turning now to is a simplified flowchart associated with a method for providing seamless connectivity across multiple devices in communication system . In operation of an example flow consider a scenario where a given end user has a relationship with Comcast Cable Television. The end user is receiving video and audio sports programming which has been streamed to the end user and which is being displayed on the television because the end user has invited himself or subscribed to the particular session. This is illustrated by step . The session is being displayed by a given device such as television or an Internet enabled display etc. . Thus a SIP session is occurring and is being facilitated by a SIP proxy not shown that has established the session. In this scenario Comcast Cable Television particularly the SIP proxy has recognized that this particular end user has a mobility capability. A third party registration is thus sent to mobility server to inform it when the user has first registered. Furthermore the SIP proxy has been configured e.g. due to subscription preferences to route session establishments through mobility server to allow the mobility server to function as a back to back user agent B2BUA .

Following session establishment mobility server can communicate with television and request that television forward signal quality information to mobility server . This is illustrated by step . In this example because a simple television architecture with wireline connectivity is present signal quality or signal strength is not necessarily an issue. In other scenarios that involve WLAN AP the signal strength could be less certain e.g. due to interference .

The end user now elects to leave the room where the television resides and activates his mobile station at step . In this example mobile station is video enabled such that the end user can continue to receive the audio and video sports programming on his mobile telephone. The activation of mobile station will trigger a registration with Comcast Cable Television particularly the SIP proxy . This SIP proxy has recognized that this particular end user has a mobility capability. A third party registration is thus sent to mobility server to inform it that the user has registered now over the cellular network. This registration can also include the capabilities of the user agent e.g. in this case that the mobile station is equipped to receive audio and video streaming . There are now two distinct registrations for the end user one registration that corresponds to the television session and a second registration that corresponds to the mobile telephone as is indicated by step . Both registrations can be managed and coordinated by mobility server . Note that some business cooperation would exist between the cable provider and the cellular provider to achieve this transitioning.

In a similar fashion to that described above mobile station will now begin reporting its signal strength information to mobility server at step . This can be sent through cellular network or it could readily propagate through WLAN AP in other embodiments. Thus when the end user is ready to make this switch in devices he can interact with a registered device either his phone or Internet enabled television whereby a simple notify message is sent to mobility server indicating that the user now has a preference for receiving both streams on the new device. Mobility server can implement third party call control operations in order to switch from one leg to a second leg mimicking a make before break scenario such that the end user can continue to receive the video and audio streams of the sports programming in an uninterrupted fashion as illustrated by step .

Note the mobile telephone may be WLAN enabled in addition to being readily accommodated by cellular network such that there may be two independent registrations e.g. one IP address for cellular network and one IP address derived from WLAN AP . Therefore signal strength may be reported from both networks. In this example the end user roams into a hot spot that is covered by WLAN AP . Based on his subscription which is maintained or accessible by mobility server a preference for hot spot connectivity is identified in the subscription. When the end user comes within range of the hot spot a session is initiated and propagates through the hot spot. This switch over is autonomous as it can automatically switch over based on user preferences. Mobility server would transfer the stream from the cellular environment to the WLAN architecture.

Continuing with this example the end user now decides to migrate to work at step . The business phone resides in a hosted environment. The end user registers on desk phone when he arrives at work. The desk phone registration would also propagate to the same SIP agent that was highlighted above and similarly a third party registration would then be transmitted to mobility server . Mobility server acknowledges this subsequent registration. In addition mobility server can reference the end user s preferences and recognizes that in this example the end user has a preference for his desk phone over all other devices as evidenced by step . Once the registration was initiated from the desk phone signal strength information begins propagating to mobility server . This is illustrated by step . Because the signal strength was adequate to transfer the stream to the desk phone and thereby accommodate the end user s eminent preference mobility server switches the stream from mobile station to desk phone . This is illustrated by step .

Note that during each of these transitions user agent capabilities can be considered such that session make up can be altered. Hence capabilities associated with video voice and text can be evaluated in the course of executing these switchovers. For example the original video broadcast from television may have been dropped when the stream moved to mobile station but then the video stream was able to resume once the end user arrived at work and registered with his desk phone

In this fashion the present invention can accommodate sessions or streams using any number of devices which may or may not have certain capabilities. Note that mobility is generally thought of as device centric in most systems. The present invention surpasses such boundaries in offering a flexible solution that offers seamless transitions between devices while the session remains relatively unchanged i.e. in a seamless fashion . In one sense mobility is redefined to be user centric which is far more adaptable to the user s specific needs. By employing such an architecture the user is no longer confined to a single device and can instead just indicate his preference for a given device or environment.

This achieves mobility across devices whereby signal strength is constantly being relayed to a single point. Note that ordinarily signal strength information would propagate to multiple pieces of equipment and not be consolidated in such an efficient manner as outlined herein. The present invention offers a mobile assisted handoff scenario which is in contrast to a mobile initiated arrangement of other architectures.

Thus the present invention allows the routing decision to be between different devices with a means for indicating the required change of device by the user. Furthermore the invention supports heterogeneous deployments of SIP based control of circuit switched bearers which is being standardized by 3GPP.

Note that while the preceding examples include specific functional components for end user devices end user devices may include any collection and arrangement of components including some or all of the enumerated functional components for communicating using cellular network business Intranet and or IP network in effecting seamless handoffs between devices. The preceding discussions illustrate particular methods for effecting optimal call leg management and for providing appropriate signal strength support. However these discussions illustrate only exemplary methods of operation. Additionally many of the steps in the discussions may take place simultaneously and or in different orders than as shown. In addition the devices may use methods with additional steps or fewer steps so long as the methods remain appropriate. Moreover other equipment of communication system may perform similar techniques to achieve signal strength support and communication leg transfer between various networks.

It is critical to note that the stages and steps in the FIGURES illustrate only some of the possible scenarios and operations that may be executed by or within the present system. Some of these stages and or steps may be deleted or removed where appropriate or these stages and or steps may be modified enhanced or changed considerably without departing from the scope of the present invention. In addition a number of these operations have been described as being executed concurrently with or in parallel to one or more additional operations. However the timing of these operations may be altered. The preceding example flows have been offered for purposes of teaching and discussion. Substantial flexibility is provided by the tendered architecture in that any suitable arrangements chronologies configurations and timing mechanisms may be provided without departing from the broad scope of the present invention. Accordingly communications capabilities data processing features and elements suitable infrastructure e.g. GGSNs SGSNs a POTS etc. and any other appropriate software hardware or data storage objects may be included within communication system to effectuate the tasks and operations of the elements and activities associated with executing seamless communication leg transfer across multiple end user devices.

Although the present invention has been described in detail with reference to particular embodiments it should be understood that various other changes substitutions and alterations may be made hereto without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. The illustrated network architecture of has only been offered for purposes of example and teaching. Suitable alternatives and substitutions are envisioned and contemplated by the present invention such alternatives and substitutions being clearly within the broad scope of communication system . For example the use of gateway could be supplanted by bridges switches routers or any other suitable devices that are conducive to network communications. Additionally it should also be noted that such an architecture is compatible with access solutions that do not use IP for transporting end to end voice transport where a combinational service is created which uses SIP for signaling but legacy circuit switched technology for optimized voice transport across a cellular network e.g. 3GPP 23.899 logic .

Numerous other changes substitutions variations alterations and modifications may be ascertained to one skilled in the art and it is intended that the present invention encompass all such changes substitutions variations alterations and modifications as falling within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

