---

title: Advertising with audio content
abstract: The serving of advertisements with (e.g., on) audio documents may be improved in a number of ways. For example, a system may (a) accept information defining at least one ad spot associated with at least one instance of an audio document, (b) accept offers to have advertisements served in the ad spot(s), and (c) arbitrate among competing advertisements, using at least the offers, to determine at least one advertisement to be served in that ad spot(s). As another example, a system may (a) accept relevance information for an advertisement, (b) determine at least one audio document using the accepted relevance information, (c) present information about the audio document(s) to an advertiser associated with the advertisement, and (d) accept, from the advertiser, an offer to have its advertisement served with at least one of the audio document(s) accepted. As yet another example, a system may (a) accept relevance information for an audio document, (b) determine a plurality of advertisements relevant to the audio document using the relevance information and serving constraints of the advertisements, and (c) select at least one of the determined relevant advertisements to be served with the audio document. Examples of documents include radio programs, live or recorded musical works with lyrics, live or recorded dramatic works with dialog or a monolog, live or recorded talk shows, voice mail, segments of an audio conversation, etc.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08626588&OS=08626588&RS=08626588
owner: Google Inc.
number: 08626588
owner_city: Mountain View
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050930
---
The present invention concerns advertising such as online advertising for example. In particular the present invention concerns improving the utility of advertisements such as cost per impression advertisements for example to end users.

Advertising using traditional media such as television radio newspapers and magazines is well known. Unfortunately even when armed with demographic studies and entirely reasonable assumptions about the typical audience of various media outlets advertisers recognize that much of their ad budget is simply wasted. Moreover it is very difficult to identify and eliminate such waste.

Recently advertising over more interactive media has become popular. For example as the number of people using the Internet has exploded advertisers have come to appreciate media and services offered over the Internet as a potentially powerful way to advertise.

Interactive advertising provides opportunities for advertisers to target their ads to a receptive audience. That is targeted ads are more likely to be useful to end users since the ads may be relevant to a need inferred from some user activity e.g. relevant to a user s search query to a search engine relevant to content in a document requested by the user etc. . Query keyword targeting has been used by search engines to deliver relevant ads. For example the AdWords advertising system by Google Inc. of Mountain View Calif. referred to as Google delivers ads targeted to keywords from search queries. Similarly content targeted ad delivery systems have been proposed. For example U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 314 427 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 427 application titled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR SERVING RELEVANT ADVERTISEMENTS filed on Dec. 6 2002 and listing Jeffrey A. Dean Georges R. Harik and Paul Buchheit as inventors and Ser. No. 10 375 900 incorporated by reference and referred to as the 900 application titled SERVING ADVERTISEMENTS BASED ON CONTENT filed on Feb. 26 2003 and listing Darrell Anderson Paul Buchheit Alex Carobus Claire Cui Jeffrey A. Dean Georges R. Harik Deepak Jindal and Narayanan Shivakumar as inventors describe methods and apparatus for serving ads relevant to the content of a document such as a Web page for example. Content targeted ad delivery systems such as the AdSense advertising system by Google for example have been used to serve ads on Web pages.

As can be appreciated from the foregoing serving ads relevant to concepts of text in a text document and serving ads relevant to keywords in a search query are useful because such ads presumably concern a current user interest. Consequently such online advertising has become increasingly popular. Moreover advertising using other targeting techniques and even untargeted online advertising has become increasingly popular.

Currently ads delivered with audio content such as Internet audio streams e.g. podcasts or Internet radio stations for example are typically based on a reservation model. That is an advertiser reserves a spot in the audio stream for a fixed fee. Unfortunately however the reservation model doesn t necessarily maximize revenue for the audio publisher because many advertisers that don t have the resources to negotiate agreements for such ad spots don t compete for those ad spots. Further from the perspective of the end user i.e. the person or persons to whom the audio content is delivered the ad could be totally irrelevant or not as useful as it could be.

Existing advertising systems such as systems that insert ads into audio content e.g. audio streams or more generally an audio document could be improved. For example it would be useful to improve the relevancy of ads served in or with an audio document. It would also be useful to improve the value in terms of potential advertising revenue of such an audio document. It would be especially useful to improve the value in terms of potential advertising revenue of an aggregate of multiple instances of an audio document.

Embodiments consistent with the present invention may improve the serving of advertisements with e.g. on audio documents. For example at least some embodiments consistent with the present invention may a accept information defining at least one ad spot associated with at least one instance of an audio document b accept offers to have advertisements served in the ad spot s and c arbitrate among competing advertisements using at least the offers to determine at least one advertisement to be served in that ad spot s .

At least some embodiments consistent with the present invention may a accept relevance information for an advertisement b determine at least one audio document using the accepted relevance information c present information about the audio document s to an advertiser associated with the advertisement and d accept from the advertiser an offer to have its advertisement served with at least one of the audio document s accepted.

At least some embodiments consistent with the present invention may a accept relevance information for an audio document b determine a plurality of advertisements relevant to the audio document using the relevance information and serving constraints of the advertisements and c select at least one of the determined relevant advertisements to be served with the audio document.

Examples of documents consistent with the present invention include radio programs live or recorded musical works with lyrics live or recorded dramatic works with dialog or a monolog live or recorded talk shows voice mail segments of an audio conversation etc.

The present invention may involve novel methods apparatus message formats and or data structures for improving advertising with audio content. The following description is presented to enable one skilled in the art to make and use the invention and is provided in the context of particular applications and their requirements. Thus the following description of embodiments consistent with the present invention provides illustration and description but is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the present invention to the precise form disclosed. Various modifications to the disclosed embodiments will be apparent to those skilled in the art and the general principles set forth below may be applied to other embodiments and applications. For example although a series of acts may be described with reference to a flow diagram the order of acts may differ in other implementations when the performance of one act is not dependent on the completion of another act. Further non dependent acts may be performed in parallel. Also as used herein the article a is intended to include one or more items. Where only one item is intended the term one or similar language is used. In the following information may refer to the actual information or a pointer to identifier of or location of such information. No element act or instruction used in the description should be construed as critical or essential to the present invention unless explicitly described as such. Thus the present invention is not intended to be limited to the embodiments shown and the inventor regards his invention to include any patentable subject matter described.

In the following definitions of terms that may be used in the specification are provided in 4.1. Then environments in which or with which the present invention may operate are described in 4.2. Exemplary embodiments of the present invention are described in 4.3. Thereafter specific examples illustrating the utility of exemplary embodiments of the present invention are provided in 4.4. Finally some conclusions regarding the present invention are set forth in 4.5.

Online ads such as those used in the exemplary systems described below with reference to or any other system may have various intrinsic features. Such features may be specified by an application and or an advertiser. These features are referred to as ad features below. For example in the case of a text ad ad features may include a title line ad text and an embedded link. In the case of an image ad ad features may include images executable code and an embedded link. In the case of an audio ad ad features may include audio content. The ad features may also include executable code e.g. encoded as tones provided in non audio packets of an audio stream etc. . Depending on the type of online ad ad features may include one or more of the following text a link an audio file a video file an image file executable code embedded information etc. In devices that can render more than one type of media devices that have different outputs some ad features may pertain to one type of media rendered to the user over one output while other ad features may pertain to another type of media rendered to the user over another output. For example if an MP3 player includes a display an ad to be rendered on such a player can have an audio component and or a text component. As another example if a mobile telephone includes a speaker a display and telephony means an ad to be rendered on such a telephone can have one or more of an audio component a text component an image component and executable code for dialing an encoded telephone number. Naturally other types of ad features are possible.

When an online ad is served one or more parameters may be used to describe how when and or where the ad was served. These parameters are referred to as serving parameters below. Serving parameters may include for example one or more of the following features of including information on a document on which or with which the ad was served a search query or search results associated with the serving of the ad a user characteristic e.g. their geographic location the language used by the user the type of browser used previous page views previous behavior user account any Web cookies used by the system user device characteristics etc. a host or affiliate site e.g. America Online Google Yahoo that initiated the request an absolute position of the ad on the page on which it was served an ad spot in which the ad was served e.g. a position spatial or temporal of the ad relative to other ads served an absolute size of the ad a size of the ad relative to other ads an absolute volume of the ad a volume of the ad relative to other ads an absolute temporal length of the ad a relative temporal length of the ad a color of the ad a number of other ads served types of other ads served time of day served time of week served time of year served etc. Naturally there are other serving parameters that may be used in the context of the invention.

Although serving parameters may be extrinsic to ad features they may be associated with an ad as serving conditions or constraints. When used as serving conditions or constraints such serving parameters are referred to simply as serving constraints or targeting criteria . For example in some systems an advertiser may be able to target the serving of its ad by specifying that it is only to be served on weekdays no lower than a certain position only to users in a certain location etc. As another example in some systems an advertiser may specify that its ad is to be served only if a page or search query includes certain keywords or phrases. As yet another example in some systems an advertiser may specify that its ad is to be served only if a document on which or with which the ad is to be served includes certain topics or concepts or falls under a particular cluster or clusters or some other classification or classifications e.g. verticals . In some systems an advertiser may specify that its ad is to be served only to or is not to be served to user devices having certain characteristics. Finally in some systems an ad might be targeted so that it is served in response to a request sourced from a particular location or in response to a request concerning a particular location.

 Ad information may include any combination of ad features ad serving constraints information derivable from ad features or ad serving constraints referred to as ad derived information and or information related to the ad referred to as ad related information as well as an extension of such information e.g. information derived from ad related information .

The ratio of the number of selections e.g. clickthroughs dial throughs etc. of an ad to the number of impressions of the ad i.e. the number of times an ad is rendered is defined as the selection rate or clickthrough rate or CTR of the ad.

A conversion is said to occur when a user consummates a transaction related to a previously served ad. What constitutes a conversion may vary from case to case and can be determined in a variety of ways. For example it may be the case that a conversion occurs when a user clicks on an ad is referred to the advertiser s Web page and consummates a purchase there before leaving that Web page. Alternatively a conversion may be defined as a user being shown an ad and making a purchase on the advertiser s Web page within a predetermined time e.g. seven days . In yet another alternative a conversion may be defined by an advertiser to be any measurable observable user action such as for example downloading a white paper navigating to at least a given depth of a Website viewing at least a certain number of Web pages spending at least a predetermined amount of time on a Website or Web page registering on a Website dialing a telephone number sending a product or service inquiry etc. Often if user actions don t indicate a consummated purchase they may indicate a sales lead although user actions constituting a conversion are not limited to this. Indeed many other definitions of what constitutes a conversion are possible.

The ratio of the number of conversions to the number of impressions of the ad i.e. the number of times an ad is rendered and the ratio of the number of conversions to the number of selections or the number of some other earlier event are both referred to as the conversion rate or CR. The type of conversion rate will be apparent from the context in which it is used. If a conversion is defined to be able to occur within a predetermined time since the serving of an ad one possible definition of the conversion rate might only consider ads that have been served more than the predetermined time in the past.

A property is something on which ads can be presented. A property may include online content e.g. a Website an MP3 audio program a Webcast a podcast online games etc. offline content e.g. a newspaper a magazine a theatrical production a concert a sports event a radio broadcast etc. and or offline objects e.g. a billboard a stadium score board an outfield wall the side of truck trailer etc. . Properties with content e.g. magazines newspapers Websites email messages audio programs etc. may be referred to as media properties. Although properties may themselves be offline pertinent information about a property e.g. attribute s topic s concept s category ies keyword s relevancy information type s of ads supported etc. may be available online. For example an outdoor jazz music festival may have entered the topics music and jazz the location of the concerts the time of the concerts artists scheduled to appear at the festival and types of available ad spots e.g. spots in a printed program spots on a stage spots on seat backs audio announcements of sponsors etc. . An audio property is a property that can be heard.

A document is to be broadly interpreted to include any machine readable and machine storable work product. A document may be a file a combination of files one or more files with embedded links to other files etc. The files may be of any type such as text audio image video etc. Parts of a document to be rendered to an end user can be thought of as content of the document. A document may include structured data containing both content words pictures sound conversations etc. and some indication of the meaning of that content for example e mail fields and associated data HTML tags and associated data embedded song title and artist information etc. Ad spots in the document may be defined by embedded information or instructions. In the context of the Internet a common document is a Web page. Web pages often include content and may include embedded information such as meta information hyperlinks etc. and or embedded instructions such as JavaScript etc. . In many cases a document has an addressable storage location and can therefore be uniquely identified by this addressable location. A universal resource locator URL is an address used to access information on the Internet.

A Web document includes any document published on the Web. Examples of Web documents include for example a Website a Web page a Webcast etc.

An audio document is a document that can be heard when played or decoded. An audio document may include audio content regardless of whether or not that content is ultimately stored on a tangible medium. An audio document may include for example a live or recorded radio program a live or recorded musical work e.g. with lyrics a live or recorded dramatic work including a dialog or a monolog a live or recorded talk show voice mail a conversation voice messages etc. Each of different forms or formats of the same audio content e.g. original compressed packetized streamed etc. may be considered to be an audio document e.g. the same audio document or different audio documents . Embodiments consistent with the present invention may work with various audio and music file formats such as for example Compressed Audio Interchange Format File AIFC Audio Interchange Format File Spec AIFF Microsoft Advanced Streaming Format ASF Windows Media Audio WMA Sun Audio File linear m law or A law AU CD Audio Track CDA Standard MIDI song track information MID Moving Picture Experts Group MPEG Audio Layer I II and III compressed audio MP3 RealNetworks RealAudio compressed streaming data RA Audio for Windows WAV etc. Embodiments consistent with the present invention may work with other audio and music file formats.

 Document information may include any information included in the document information derivable from information included in the document referred to as document derived information and or information related to the document referred to as document related information as well as an extensions of such information e.g. information derived from related information . An example of document derived information is a classification based on textual or audio content of a document. Examples of document related information include document information from other documents with links to the instant document as well as document information from other documents to which the instant document links.

Content from a document may be rendered on a content rendering application or device . Examples of content rendering applications include an Internet browser e.g. Explorer Netscape Opera Firefox etc. a media player e.g. an MP3 player a streaming audio file player from Microsoft Corporation of Redmond Wash. or from RealNetworks Inc. of Seattle Wash. etc. a viewer e.g. an Abobe Acrobat pdf reader etc.

A content owner is a person or entity that has some property right in the content of a media property e.g. document . A content owner may be an author of the content. In addition or alternatively a content owner may have rights to reproduce the content rights to prepare derivative works of the content rights to display or perform the content publicly and or other proscribed rights in the content. Although a content server might be a content owner in the content of the documents it serves this is not necessary. A Web publisher is an example of a content owner.

 E mail information may include any information included in an e mail also referred to as internal e mail information information derivable from information included in the e mail and or information related to the e mail as well as extensions of such information e.g. information derived from related information . An example of information derived from e mail information is information extracted or otherwise derived from search results returned in response to a search query composed of terms extracted from an e mail subject line. Examples of information related to e mail information include e mail information about one or more other e mails sent by the same sender of a given e mail or user information about an e mail recipient. Information derived from or related to e mail information may be referred to as external e mail information. 

The ad server may be similar to the one described in the 900 application. An advertising program may include information concerning accounts campaigns creatives targeting etc. The term account relates to information for a given advertiser e.g. a unique e mail address a password billing information etc. . A campaign or ad campaign refers to one or more groups of one or more advertisements and may include a start date an end date budget information geo targeting information syndication information etc. For example Honda may have one advertising campaign for its automotive line and a separate advertising campaign for its motorcycle line. The campaign for its automotive line may have one or more ad groups each containing one or more ads. Each ad group may include targeting information e.g. a set of keywords a set of one or more topics etc. and price information e.g. cost average cost or maximum cost per impression per selection per conversion etc. . Therefore a single cost a single maximum cost and or a single average cost may be associated with one or more keywords and or topics. As stated each ad group may have one or more ads or creatives That is ad content that is ultimately rendered to an end user. . Each ad may also include a link to a URL e.g. a landing Web page such as the home page of an advertiser or a Web page associated with a particular product or server . Alternatively or in addition each ad may include embedded information for initiating a telephone call e.g. to facilitate providing product or service information or to facilitate completing an order . Alternatively or in addition each ad may include information for initiating a message e.g. facilitate providing product or service information or to facilitate completing an order . Naturally the ad information may include more or less information and may be organized in a number of different ways.

As discussed in the 900 application ads may be targeted to documents served by content servers. Thus one example of an ad consumer is a general content server that receives requests for documents e.g. articles discussion threads music audio e.g. musical works dramatic works voice mail talk shows etc. video graphics search results Web page listings etc. and retrieves the requested document in response to or otherwise services the request. The content server may broadcast content as well e.g. not necessarily responsive to a request . The content server may submit a request for ads to the ad server . Such an ad request may include a number of ads desired. The ad request may also include document request information. This information may include the document itself e.g. a page a music file an audio file a segment of an audio stream etc. a category or topic corresponding to the content of the document or the document request e.g. arts business computers arts movies arts music etc. part or all of the document request content age content type e.g. text graphics video audio mixed media etc. geo location information document information etc.

The content server may combine the e.g. requested document with one or more of the advertisements provided by the ad server . This combined information including the document content and advertisement s is then forwarded towards the end user device that requested the document or that configured itself to receive the document for presentation to the user. Finally the content server may transmit information about the ads and how when and or where the ads are to be rendered e.g. ad spot position selection or not impression time impression date size temporal length volume conversion or not etc. back to the ad server . Alternatively or in addition such information may be provided back to the ad server by some other means.

The offline content provider may provide information about ad spots in an upcoming publication and perhaps the publication e.g. the content or topics or concepts of the content to the ad server . In response the ad server may provide a set of ads relevant the content of the publication for at least some of the ad spots. Examples of offline content providers include for example magazine publishers newspaper publishers book publishers offline radio broadcasts offline music publishers offline video game publishers a theatrical production a concert a sports event etc.

Owners of the offline ad spot properties may provide information about ad spots in their offline property e.g. a stadium scoreboard banner ad for an NBA game in San Antonio Tex. . In response the ad sever may provide a set of ads relevant to the property for at least some of the ad spots. Examples of offline properties include for example a billboard a stadium score board and outfield wall the side of truck trailer etc.

Another example of an ad consumer is the search engine . A search engine may receive queries for search results. In response the search engine may retrieve relevant search results e.g. from an index of Web pages . An exemplary search engine is described in the article S. Brin and L. Page The Anatomy of a Large Scale Hypertextual Search Engine Brisbane Australia and in U.S. Pat. No. 6 285 999 both incorporated herein by reference . Such search results may include for example lists of Web page titles snippets of text extracted from those Web pages and hypertext links to those Web pages and may be grouped into a predetermined number of e.g. ten search results.

The search engine may submit a request for ads to the ad server . The request may include a number of ads desired. This number may depend on the search results the amount of screen or page space occupied by the search results the size and shape of the ads etc. In one embodiment the number of desired ads will be from one to ten and preferably from three to five. The request for ads may also include the query as entered or parsed information based on the query such as geolocation information whether the query came from an affiliate and an identifier of such an affiliate and or information associated with or based on the search results. Such information may include for example identifiers related to the search results e.g. document identifiers or docIDs scores related to the search results e.g. information retrieval IR scores such as dot products of feature vectors corresponding to a query and a document Page Rank scores and or combinations of IR scores and Page Rank scores snippets of text extracted from identified documents e.g. Web pages full text of identified documents topics of identified documents feature vectors of identified documents etc.

The search engine may combine the search results with one or more of the advertisements provided by the ad server . This combined information including the search results and advertisement s is then forwarded towards the user that submitted the search for presentation to the user. Preferably the search results are maintained as distinct from the ads so as not to confuse the user between paid advertisements and presumably neutral search results.

Finally the search engine may transmit information about the ad and when where and or how the ad was to be rendered e.g. position selection or not impression time impression date size conversion or not etc. back to the ad server . Alternatively or in addition such information may be provided back to the ad server by some other means.

The e mail server may be thought of generally as a content server in which a document served is simply an e mail. Further e mail applications such as Microsoft Outlook for example may be used to send and or receive e mail. Therefore an e mail server or application may be thought of as an ad consumer . Thus e mails may be thought of as documents and targeted ads may be served in association with such documents. For example one or more ads may be served in under over or otherwise in association with an e mail. Although not shown a voice mail server may be thought of generally as a content server.

The audio server may be thought of generally as a content server in which a document served is simply an audio document such as an audio stream or an audio file for example. Further audio player applications such as RealNetwork s Real media player Microsoft s Media Player Apple s Quicktime player etc. may be used to render audio files. Therefore an audio server or application may be thought of as an ad consumer . Thus ads may be served in association with audio documents. For example one or more ads may be served before during or after an audio song program program segment etc. Alternatively one or more ads may be served in association with an audio song program program segment etc.

Finally the telephone service provider facilities may also consume ads such as ads relevant to a topic or topics of a telephone conversation.

Although the foregoing examples described servers as i requesting ads and ii combining them with content one or both of these operations may be performed by a client device such as an end user computer for example .

Relevancy information determination and or extraction operations may accept audio content and perhaps an audio document identifier and generate audio document relevancy information . Exemplary methods for performing such relevancy information determination and or extraction operations are described below with reference to . Exemplary data structures for storing such audio document relevancy information are described below with reference to .

Ad spot determination operations may accept audio content and or audio publisher provided ad spot information and may generate ad spot information . Exemplary methods for performing such ad spot determination operations are described below with reference to . Exemplary data structures for storing such ad spot information are described below with reference to .

Relevant ad determination operations may use audio document relevancy information ad spot information and ad information and perhaps other relevancy information to generate one or more relevant ads . Exemplary methods for performing relevant ad determination operations are described below with reference to . Exemplary data structures for storing ad information are described below with reference to .

Ad arbitration operations may use ad information to score the relevant ads and to generate associations of relevant ads to ad spots. Exemplary methods for performing ad arbitration operations are described below with reference to .

Ad delivery operations may accept ad ad spot associations and serve the ads in association with e.g. insert the ad into audio content . For example a mixer may be used to combine an audio ad with an appropriate portion e.g. an ad spot of an audio document. Such insertion may occur for example at the audio content server and or at the client device.

Advertiser accounting billing operations ad information entry and management operations and ad user feedback tracking operations may be performed using techniques described in the 427 application and in the 900 application and or may use techniques known to those skilled in the art.

Referring back to block textual information may be derived from audio information by performing speech recognition on various audio feeds producing hypothesized words annotated with confidence scores or producing a lattice which contains many hypotheses therefore less likely to miss a keyword . Converting audio to text can be achieved by known automatic speech recognition techniques. See e.g. Kai Fu Lee Automatic Speech Recognition The Development of the SPHINX System Kluwer Academic Publishers Norwell Mass. 1989 incorporated herein by reference. 

Once a e.g. rough transcription is available relevance information e.g. terms weighted terms concepts weighted concepts categories e.g. vertical categories weighted categories etc. may be derived from the transcription and used to select relevant ads. Even if current speech recognition technology is not accurate enough for certain end user applications it may be good enough to provide a rough transcription from which a gist or topic s of an audio document can be determined.

Referring back to block the textual information may be analyzed to generate relevancy information using various techniques such as those described in the 427 and 900 applications and those described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 112 716 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 716 application filed on Apr. 22 2005 titled CATEGORIZING OBJECTS SUCH AS DOCUMENTS AND OR CLUSTERS WITH RESPECT TO A TAXONOMY AND DATA STRUCTURES DERIVED FROM SUCH CATEGORIZATION and listing David Gehrking Ching Law and Andrew Maxwell as inventors etc. Relevancy information may include for example one or more of term vectors weighted term vectors clusters weighted clusters categories e.g. vertical categories weighted categories etc. The clusters may be probabilistic hierarchical inferential learner referred to as PHIL clusters such as those described in U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 416 144 referred to as the 144 provisional and incorporated herein by reference titled Methods and Apparatus for Probabilistic Hierarchical Inferential Learner filed on Oct. 3 2002 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 676 571 referred to as the 571 application and incorporated herein by reference titled Methods and Apparatus for Characterizing Documents Based on Cluster Related Words filed on Sep. 30 2003 and listing Georges Harik and Noam Shazeer as inventors. Such PHIL clusters may be generated for example using the techniques described in the 144 provisional and the 571 application. The source of the textual information may be that derived from an analysis of the audio content such as in block .

Alternatively or in addition the audio publisher or some other entity may have annotated the audio document with textual information or encoded textual information in the audio content e.g. in packets portions of packets portions of streams headers footers etc. . For example a radio broadcaster may provide in their broadcast a station identifier a song identifier an artist identifier an album identifier a program identifier location information etc. In this case genre and location information might be derived from the audio broadcast. Such relevance information may be used to target relevant ads. As another example compact disks may encode information about an album an artist a list of songs etc. Genre information may be derived from the artist album and or songs. Further such information may be used to lookup textual lyrics of the songs. As yet another example a voice message may have an associated IP address or a telephone conversation may have an area code from which location information can be derived. As yet another example a program may be annotated with keywords topics etc. Such relevance information may be used to target relevant ads.

Alternatively or in addition the audio information may be analyzed to generate other types of relevancy information. For example the gender e.g. due to pitch tone etc nationality and or ethnicity e.g. due to language accent etc. of a speaker in voice audio content e.g. a participant in a conversation may be determined from audio analysis. See e.g. M. A. Siegler U. Jain B. Raj and R. M. Stern Automatic Segmentation Classification and Clustering of Broadcast News Audio Harriman N.Y. 1996 and Greg Sanders Metadata Extraction for EARS Vienna Va. both incorporated herein by reference . 

Referring back to block the audio publisher or some other entity may provide absolute or relative times when ad spots are to start. The publisher or some other entity may further provide duration or times when the ad spots are to stop. For example an audio publisher may specify that a first ad spot is to start at 8 20 AM EST and last two 2 minutes a second ad spot is to start at 8 40 AM EST and last four 4 minutes and a third ad spot is to start at 8 52 and last six 6 minutes. As another example an audio publisher may specify that a three 3 minute ad spot is to occur every 30 minutes starting at 8 00 AM EST. As yet another example an audio publisher may specify that a two 2 minute ad spot is to occur every 15 minutes after the start of an audio program and a four 4 minute ad spot is to occur 50 minutes into the audio program.

Referring back to block the audio document itself may be analyzed to determine ad spot information. That is ad spot information may be carried in the audio document itself. For example audio tones embedded within an audio program may encode that an X second ad spot is to start in Y seconds. As another example data carried in packets of an audio stream may specify ad spot information.

The ad spot information may also include information such as for example one or more of the source location of the audio program including the ad spot the destination location of the client device receiving the audio program including the ad spot a client device type receiving the audio program including the ad spot etc.

Although some of the exemplary ad spots described above had a definite length ads needn t have a fixed or determined length. For example in the context of a media player with a display screen a text ad may be displayed e.g. for a time period defined by the advertiser for a period of time defined by the audio publisher until the next ad spot etc. without interrupting the audio program.

Referring back to block the ad information may include targeting information provided by the advertiser. Alternatively or in addition the ad information may include targeting information derived from the ad creative and or information associated with the ad such as an ad landing page. Such targeting information may include one or more of keywords vertical categories genres concepts audio program identifiers audio server identifiers user identifiers user types locations times dates client devices other serving constraints etc.

Referring back to block the price information may be for example a price per impression a maximum price per impression a price per selection a maximum price per selection a price per conversion a maximum price per conversion etc. The performance information may be for example a selection rate a conversion rate end user ratings etc.

Referring back to block the candidate ads may be scored using for example techniques described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 112 656 incorporated herewith and referred to as the 656 application titled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR ORDERING ADVERTISEMENTS BASED ON PERFORMANCE INFORMATION filed on Mar. 29 2002 and listing Georges R. Harik Lawrence E. Page Jane Manning and Salar Arta Kamangar as inventors U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 112 654 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 654 application titled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR ORDERING ADVERTISEMENTS BASED ON PERFORMANCE INFORMATION AND PRICE INFORMATION filed on Mar. 29 2002 and listing Salar Arta Kamangar Ross Koningstein and Eric Veach as inventors U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 452 791 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 791 application titled SERVING ADVERTISEMENTS USING USER REQUEST INFORMATION AND USER INFORMATION filed on Jun. 2 2003 and listing Krishna Bharat Stephen Lawrence Mehran Sahami and Amit Singhal as inventors U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 610 322 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 322 application titled RENDERING ADVERTISEMENTS WITH DOCUMENTS HAVING ONE OR MORE TOPICS USING USER TOPIC INTEREST INFORMATION filed on Jun. 30 2003 and listing Krishna Bharat as the inventor U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 877 790 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 790 application titled COST DISCOUNTING TO PROVIDE DOMINANT PARTICIPATION STRATEGY ARBITRATION FOR ONLINE ADVERTISING AND ARBITRATIONS SUPPORTING OFFERS FROM DIFFERENT COST DISCOUNTING METHODOLOGIES filed on Jun. 25 2004 and listing John Lamping Robert Shillingsburg and Eric Veach as inventors U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 169 323 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 323 application titled USING THE UTILITY OF CONFIGURATIONS IN AD SERVING DECISIONS filed on Jun. 28 2005 and listing Amit Patel and Hal Varian as inventors U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 026 507 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 507 application titled GENERATING AND OR SERVING LOCAL AREA ADVERTISEMENTS SUCH AS ADVERTISEMENTS FOR DEVICES WITH CALL FUNCTIONALITY filed on Dec. 30 2004 and listing Shumeet Baluja and Henry A. Rowley as inventors U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 184 053 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 053 application titled SELECTING AND OR SCORING CONTENT RELEVANT ADVERTISEMENTS filed on Jul. 18 2005 and listing Darrell Anderson Alexander Paul Carobus Giao Nguyen and Narayanan Shivakumar as inventors and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 228 583 incorporated herein by reference and referred to as the 583 application titled FLEXIBLE ADVERTISING SYSTEM WHICH ALLOWS ADVERTISERS WITH DIFFERENT VALUE PROPOSITIONS TO EXPRESS SUCH VALUE PROPOSITIONS TO THE ADVERTISING SYSTEM filed on Sep. 16 2005 and listing Sumit Agarwal Gregory Joseph Badros and John Fu as inventors.

The one or more processors may execute machine executable instructions e.g. C or C running on the Solaris operating system available from Sun Microsystems Inc. of Palo Alto Calif. or the Linux operating system widely available from a number of vendors such as Red Hat Inc. of Durham N.C. to perform one or more aspects of the present invention. At least a portion of the machine executable instructions may be stored temporarily or more permanently on the one or more storage devices and or may be received from an external source via one or more input interface units .

In one embodiment the machine may be one or more conventional personal computers. In this case the processing units may be one or more microprocessors. The bus may include a system bus. The storage devices may include system memory such as read only memory ROM and or random access memory RAM . The storage devices may also include a hard disk drive for reading from and writing to a hard disk a magnetic disk drive for reading from or writing to a e.g. removable magnetic disk and an optical disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable magneto optical disk such as a compact disk or other magneto optical media.

A user may enter commands and information into the personal computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device e.g. a mouse for example. Other input devices such as a microphone a joystick a game pad a satellite dish a scanner or the like may also or alternatively be included. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit s through an appropriate interface coupled to the system bus . The output devices may include a monitor or other type of display device which may also be connected to the system bus via an appropriate interface. In addition to or instead of the monitor the personal computer may include other peripheral output devices not shown such as speakers and printers for example.

Referring back to one or more machines may be used as end user client devices content servers audio content servers telephone service provider facilities search engines e mail or v mail servers and or ad servers .

Referring back to operations of relevancy information may be provided by the audio publisher before the audio document is served e.g. broadcast multicast unicast transferred etc. . If the audio document has been previously saved e.g. previously recorded it can be analyzed before it is served. If the audio document is being served live the audio document may be analyzed as it is being served perhaps shortly before it is decoded and played at a client device .

Referring back to operations of ad spots may be provided separate from the audio document by the audio publisher before the audio document is served. Alternatively or in addition ad spots may be determined based on information encoded in the audio document e.g. well before the occurrence of the ad spot or just before the ad spot . Thus for example an audio document may early on encode the fact that there are three 3 two minute ad spots at 20 minutes 40 minutes and 55 minutes into the document. As another example an audio document may encode the fact that there is a two minute ad spot in 10 seconds 19 minutes and 50 seconds into the document. Such encoding may be in the form of audible or non audible audio tones text information in audio packets or audio stream packets executable code e.g. Javascript to call an ad server etc.

Note that since in some cases audio documents can be downloaded on demand the length of the audio document may be varied to accommodate more or less ad spots. For example if there are a lot of very relevant ads and or the advertisers are willing to spend a lot for impressions more ad spot time may be provided. Thus a ratio of audio content time to ad time may be decreased or increased depending on one or more of A a degree of ad relevancy B a revenue benefit of having more ad spots C a decrease in user utility e.g. user annoyance at having more ad spots D a level of user demand for the content E an extent of end user funding of the content etc. Thus end user utility can be balanced against advertising revenues.

If the audio document has been previously saved e.g. previously recorded an arbitration to determine ads to be served in various ad spots may occur before the audio document is served e.g. broadcast multicast unicast transferred etc. . If the audio document is being served live the arbitration may take place as it is being served perhaps shortly before it is decoded and played at a client device . If the audio document is downloaded e.g. using some transfer protocol such as FTP the document may include executable code to initiate an ad arbitration when the audio document is played e.g. when a play is initiated . In either case ads may be provided with e.g. inserted into the audio document e.g. a stream carrying the audio content after the arbitration. If the audio document has been previously saved all ad spots in the audio document may be arbitrated one time. In this way ad spots at parts of the audio document in higher demand e.g. the start of the audio document may be filled with higher scoring ads.

An audio document may be divided into segments each including ad spots. In such an embodiment each segment may be considered to be an audio document itself. Relevant ads may be determined on the basis of a particular audio segment or both the particular audio segment e.g. weighted more and the audio document as a whole e.g. weighted less .

The ad information may include whether or not the advertiser wants or consents to its ad being served more than one time in a given audio document instance . For example an advertiser might specify that its ad is to be served no more than N times with an instance of an audio document e.g. a unicast audio stream . Alternatively or in addition the advertising network and or the audio document publisher may implement policies which limit the number of times a given advertisement can be served with an instance of an audio document.

Although many of the examples were described in the context of offers or maximum offers per impression embodiments consistent with the present invention may consider other offers such as offers or maximum offers per user selection or call or messaging etc. offers or maximum offers per conversion e.g. telephone call item purchase item order etc. . Similarly scoring may be a function of one or more offers and perhaps the likelihood of one or more user actions. Although ad scoring may reflect an expected cost per impression e.g. bid per impression bid per selection selection rate or probability bid per conversion conversion rate or probability etc. other techniques for scoring ads may be used. Such techniques may consider end user utility e.g. relevance annoyance factor etc. of an ad.

Although some of the embodiments consistent with the present invention described inserting an audio advertisement within an audio document the advertisement may be in other formats and may be served with an audio document. For example a text advertisement might be served before during or after an MP3 file is played on an MP3 player with a display screen. As another example a video or animated advertisement might be played before an MP3 file is played on a multimedia player. Thus although the format of the ad may match that of the audio document with which it is served the format of the ad need not match that of the audio document.

Although described determining relevant ads for a given audio document embodiments consistent with the present invention may be used to determine audio documents or ad spots thereof relevant to a given ad. For example an advertiser may be presented with documents considered to be relevant to its ad. The documents may be ordered using such relevance. The advertiser may elect to try to have its advertisement served with a document or documents or with an ad spot s thereof . The advertiser may express such an election s as an offer to have its ad served with the document s . Other advertisers may do the same. When the audio document is served contention among ads that are eligible to be served with the audio document may be arbitrated e.g. using an auction .

Ad based revenue may be shared between the ad serving network and the audio publisher. The audio publisher may collect money from end users on a subscription basis on a per download basis and or a per rendering basis. Ad revenue shared with the audio publisher may be used to subsidize e.g. reduce or eliminate user costs. In fact ad revenue e.g. ad network s share and or audio publisher s share may be used to pay users to download or render audio documents including ads. For example if a user normally pays 1.00 to download an MP3 song the user might be charged less or nothing or actually paid to download the MP3 song with one or more advertisements. Advertising revenues may be used to subsidize other content and or services such as voice mail live chat ring tones song downloads song plays audio program downloads audio program plays telephone services walkie talkie services etc.

Arbitrations in embodiments consistent with the present invention may be performed on a per broadcast or per multicast basis or on a per serve or per download basis. Performing arbitrations on a per serve or per download basis has the potential to generate more revenue. For example under a per broadcast agreement on an audio document with 100 000 ad spots if advertiser A is willing to pay 5.00 impression with a budget limit of 50 000.00 advertiser B is willing to pay 2.00 impression with a budget limit of 60 000.00 and advertiser C is willing to pay 1.00 impression with a budget limit of 100 000.00 ad C would be served 100 000 times netting 100 000.00. On the other hand under a per ad spot arbitration ad A would be served 10 000 times ad B would be served 30 000 times and ad C would be served 60 000 times netting 170 000.00 50 000.00 60 000.00 60 000.00 .

An advertiser may log into a system consistent with the present invention and enter targeting information e.g. language term s category country of user etc. . Recall e.g. of . In response the advertiser may be shown a list of audio streams that match their criteria. The list may be presented to the advertiser in an order based on a degree of relevance. The advertiser may then enter a maximum cost per download offer on one or more of the audio streams.

The advertising network may host the serving of audio streams participating in the advertising network. When a user downloads an audio stream an arbitration may be run at the time of the download to determine which ads to serve with e.g. insert into the audio stream. In this simple example the arbitration might simply compare the maximum cost per download offers of all ads that bid on the audio stream to determine one or more winning ads.

The winning e.g. audio ads are served with e.g. inserted into the audio stream at the right spots e.g. specified by the audio publisher and delivered to the user. For example the audio publisher could specify ad spots in the beginning of the stream 10 minutes into the stream 20 minutes into the stream and so on.

The advertiser may be provided with e.g. real time reports on the number of ad serves and other related statistics e.g. country from where download request came etc. .

If the advertising network will not host the serving of the audio document it may be more challenging to run a real time arbitration. One solution would be to avoid the real time arbitration altogether. For example an auction could end e.g. at a fixed time before the audio stream starts. This is particularly useful for audio streams broadcast at set times rather than those downloaded on demand although it may be useful if the arbitration is performed after a user request but prior to a streaming . That is an online auction could be held in which advertisers bid on an audio program. Consequently instead of a real time arbitration there could be an online auction which ends before the audio stream starts. It this way ads to be served with the audio stream will be known before the start time. Such an exemplary embodiment consistent with the present invention is more useful where an aggregation of streams is to be bid on e.g. an audio document broadcast since it might not be efficient for advertisers to bid on a per audio document instance e.g. per unicast audio stream basis.

In the previous two examples advertisers targeted particular audio document by associating offers with such audio documents. Unfortunately however this may become inconvenient when the number of audio documents increases and advertisers mainly care about serving their ads with relevant audio documents and to relevant users without regard to the particular audio document with which the ad is served.

Assume that an audio document is a weekly Pregame Show e.g. as a radio broadcast a television broadcast a cable broadcast an Internet broadcast an Internet multicast or unicast a digital video recorder replay etc. for the Oakland Raiders NFL football team that is generated during the NFL football season. Assume that the audio publisher has provided the following relevancy information for its weekly show 

Assume further that for a given show previewing a game in which the Oakland Raiders will face the St. Louis Rams the following relevancy information is extracted and or generated from the audio document 

keywords game St. Louis Rams Randy Moss Kerry Collins injuries defense offense score special teams Oakland Raiders football Marc Bulger NFL . . . .

For a 30 second ad spot 10 minutes into an audio document the following ads are relevant matching targeting information is underlined 

The following ad or combination of ads could be served in the 30 second ad spot A BC BD and CD. Serving ad A alone would generate 0.070 serving ads B and C would generate 0.090 serving ads B and D would generate 0.085 and serving ads C and D would generate 0.065. If the ads or combinations of ads are scored based on their revenue the serving scenarios would be ordered BC BD A and CD. Thus ads B and C would be served in the 30 second ad spot under the foregoing example.

Recognizing that some devices that can play audio documents can actually play enhanced advertisements including video or animation for example suppose that ad D had an additional offer of 100 per 1000 impressions for audio video impressions. Since the client device in this case supports video serving ad A alone would generate 0.070 serving ads B and C would generate 0.090 serving ads B and D would generate 0.155 and serving ads C and D would generate 0.135. Thus in this scenario if the ads or combinations of ads are scored based on their revenue the serving scenarios would be ordered BD CD BC and A. Therefore ads B and D would be served in the 30 second ad spot under the foregoing example.

As this third example illustrates allowing advertisers to target based on keywords or topics rather than targeting their ads to a particular audio document allows advertisers to have their ads placed on various audio documents without having to specify each such document. Thus ad A would also be relevant to an audio document concerning cars ad D would also be relevant to an audio document concerning the NBA ads A and C would also be relevant to an audio document concerning Oakland etc.

Voicemail is available on telephone systems and is being integrated to e mail services such as GMail from Google for example. Speech recognition may be used to transcribe voicemail to extract and or generate relevancy information. This relevancy information may be used to determine relevant ads at least some of which may be rendered with a voice mail message or rendered with an e mail. Thus for example ads may be rendered with an e mail that includes an audio attachment.

Documents such as Web pages for example may include audio and or video links. Relevancy information may be extracted e.g. from close captioned information and or generated using speech recognition. This relevancy information may be used perhaps in addition to other relevancy information of the Web page to determine relevant ads at least some of which may be rendered with the document. Such rendering might be conditioned upon the audio and or video link being selected by a user.

Webcasts and podcasts may be played on media players such as Mediaplayer from Microsoft and Realplayer from RealNetworks. Rather than simply showing pre selected ads which might not be relevant to the content of the Webcast and or which might not reflect the desire of competing advertisers to have their ad played speech recognition may be used to extract and or determine relevance information from the audio stream. Such relevance information may be used to determine relevant ads at least some of which may be rendered with the Webcast or podcast. Depending on the type of the ads chosen video audio ads can be appended prepended or inserted into the video audio stream text or graphic ads can be rendered on an ancillary display or a browser window etc.

Voice chatting is provided in various messaging software. Speech recognition may be used to extract and or determine relevance information from the audio documents. Such relevance information may be used to determine relevant ads at least some of which may be rendered with the chat e.g. along side every live conversation . For example if two people are chatting about IPod speech recognition can be used to extract the topic or keyword IPod and ads relevant to IPod can be inserted into the chat.

Advertising systems such as AdWords from Google for example may serve ads with a search results page where the ads are relevant to a search query that prompted the search results page. The search engine may use indexed Web page information. Rather than searching Web pages video files can be searched. Ads relevant to the search query may be served in association with the search results. Information extracted from the video linked from the search results page may also be used to determine relevant ads and or to improve search results.

As can be appreciated from the foregoing embodiments consistent with the present invention can be used to deliver relevant advertisements for audio rich media such as for example radio television voicemail Webcast podcast online voice chatting telephone conversations etc. Embodiments consistent with the present invention support arbitrations allowing more advertisers to compete for ad spots on audio documents. This increased competition should increase advertising revenues for audio document publishers.

