---

title: Method for fabricating a microscale anemometer
abstract: Method for fabricating a microscale anemometer on a substrate. A sacrificial layer is formed on the substrate, and a metal thin film is patterned to form a sensing element. At least one support for the sensing element is patterned. The sacrificial layer is removed, and the sensing element is lifted away from the substrate by raising the supports, thus creating a clearance between the sensing element and the substrate to allow fluid flow between the sensing element and the substrate. The supports are raised preferably by use of a magnetic field applied to magnetic material patterned on the supports.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07451537&OS=07451537&RS=07451537
owner: The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
number: 07451537
owner_city: Urbana
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050518
---
This application is a divisional application of U.S. application Ser. No. 10 346 565 filed Jan. 17 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 923 054 which claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 349 431 filed Jan. 18 2002 under 35 U.S.C. 119.

This invention was made with Government assistance under National Science Foundation Grant No. NSF IIS 99 84954 National Aeronautics and Space Administration Grant No. NASA NAG 5 8781 and National Science Foundation Grant No. NSF IIS 0080639. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

A field of the invention is sensing. Other fields of the invention include microelectronics and micro electromechanical systems.

Measuring fluid flow velocity is useful for turbulence flow measurement in fluid mechanics research and any industrial application where flow measurement is required such as but not limited to gas metering and air duct monitoring. Commercial flow sensors are mainly based on one of two principles thermal anemometry and laser Doppler velocimetry. A thermal anemometer is a common type of commercial flow sensor for measuring the velocity of fluid flow. A typical type of thermal anemometer often referred to as a hot wire anemometer utilizes a resistive heater a hot wire that serves as both a Joule heater and a temperature sensor. Monitoring the resistance of the resistive heater as current is passed through determines the temperature of the element.

Under a constant bias power and zero flow rate the temperature of the resistive heater reaches a steady state value. As flow of a fluid media passes the resistive heater heat is transferred from the element to the fluid media via forced convection thus reducing the temperature of the sensor. The flow speed is derived indirectly from the temperature variation from steady state values. Accordingly the temperature of the resistive heater provides a means to gauge the cooling rate of the element and the flow velocity.

A conventional hot wire anemometer includes a thin wire made of platinum or tungsten that is supported by prongs and mounted on a probe having a suitable electrical connection. This thermal sensor provides a fast response in the kilohertz range with low noise. The sensor also can be made relatively small and inexpensively.

However conventional hot wire anemometers suffer from significant shortcomings. One such shortcoming is that the fabrication process is delicate and may not result in uniform performance. Another problem is that it may be prohibitively difficult to form large arrays of the anemometers for measuring flow distribution for example.

Micromachined anemometers have been used by those in the art to realize a thermal sensor with smaller dimensions better uniformity faster frequency response and lower cost of production via the batch processing nature of micromachining for example . They also provide the ability to perform applications such as but not limited to flow field measurement. Conventional micromachined anemometers have been produced using a bulk micromachining technique resulting in free standing cantilevered structures within substrates. For example doped polycrystalline silicon may be used to make prongs and resistive heaters by bulk micromachining. To create a significant distance between the resistive heater and the substrate thus increasing thermal insulation to the substrate and increasing the sensitivity the cantilevered structures are formed by at least partially removing the silicon substrate.

However bulk micromachining incurs significant cost and restricts the type of substrate that can be used. For example the doping of silicon to create the resistive heater for example the etching of the silicon and the packaging of individual silicon dies require significant expertise and effort. Additionally most micromachined hot wire anemometers cannot be realized effectively in a large array format. Furthermore bulk micromachining requires significant etching time and bulk etching using anisotropic wet etchants frequently poses concerns of materials compatibility as all materials on a given substrate are required to sustain wet etching for long periods several hours to etch through typical silicon wafers for example .

Also many other types of devices use doped polysilicon thin film as the material for the resistive heater. However polysilicon deposition and annealing require a high temperature process and generally preclude the use of substrates with a low melting point.

Certain microscale hot wire anemometers use surface micromachining for a simpler fabrication process. However the resistive heater employed is typically located directly on the substrate or very close to it. This leads to a slower frequency response and reduced sensitivity.

The present invention provides among other things a method for fabricating a microscale anemometer on a substrate. A sacrificial layer is formed on the substrate and a metal thin film is patterned to form a sensing element. At least one support for the sensing element is patterned. The sacrificial layer is removed and the sensing element is lifted away from the substrate by raising the supports thus creating a clearance between the sensing element and the substrate to allow fluid flow between the sensing element and the substrate. The supports are raised preferably by use of a magnetic field applied to magnetic material patterned on the supports.

The present invention provides among other things a method for fabricating a microscale thermal sensor on a substrate preferably using surface micromachining. The thermal sensor provided on a substrate includes a resistive heater preferably containing a thin film suspended above the substrate by supports attached at one end to the substrate either directly or indirectly. The thin film is produced from temperature sensitive electrically conductive material. As opposed to conventional microscale anemometers the present thermal sensor allows non silicon materials to be used for the resistive heater and or the substrate. Furthermore it is preferred that the resistive heater including the thin film be made of a non silicon material such as a metal.

The supports are raised at an angle with respect to the substrate to suspend the resistive heater preferably creating a clearance underneath the resistive heater for flow of a fluid media. The clearance may be defined for example by the resistive heater the substrate and the supports. The supports preferably suspend the resistive heater at opposing ends of the element.

The supports preferably include cantilevered prongs formed from a ductile metal beam such as gold so that the support can bend about a bending region or hinge plastically deforming when lifted so that the support remains in a raised position after the lifting process concludes. The supports preferably further include a polymer structural support such as a polyimide support beam to provide structural rigidity to the supports. If the metal beam is conductive the supports can also serve as electrical leads for the resistive heater.

The film for the resistive heater preferably includes metals such as nickel and or platinum. A polyimide structural support layer may also overlap the film and form part of the resistive heater providing structural support for the resistive heater. A chrome layer may also be present to adhere the polyimide layer to the film. The resistive heater may have various shapes including a straight line wave like shapes square wave for example or tooth etc.

Because the resistive heater is preferably raised away from the immediate velocity boundary layer next to the substrate higher flow speed and convection heat transfer rate is experienced by the resistive heater. This improves the sensitivity and response time of the thermal sensor. Additionally the raised thermal sensor provides increased thermal insulation from the substrate.

The types of substrates on which the thermal sensors are produced may vary due at least in part to the surface micromachining fabrication process. Surface micromachining also enables more efficient assembly and allows formation of large arrays of thermal sensors. Furthermore because the resistive heaters are preferably realized using non silicon materials the fabrication process can be realized in a more efficient and less costly manner.

Three dimensional assembly methods are preferably used in conjunction with the surface micromachining to produce the thermal sensors of the present invention. This circumvents the use of bulk micromachining. The preferred three dimensional assembly method pairs magnetic actuation with deformable metal hinges of the supports to fabricate a thermal sensor using surface micromachining of preferably metal and polymer materials. The magnetic actuation preferably includes application of a magnetic field to a ferromagnetic layer formed on the thermal sensor.

Preferably the maximum temperature required throughout the process flow is under 350 C. but this temperature may vary and may be even lower such as but not limited to below 200 C. By limiting the overall process temperature the preferred fabrication process can be run on a broad range of substrates including but not limited to silicon glass and plastics. The chosen substrate s glass transition temperature T should be higher than the maximum processing temperature. Otherwise the substrate choices may vary widely.

It is also preferred that no etching using concentrated hydrofluoric HF acid be necessary. This is beneficial for at least the reason that concentrated HF a commonly used sacrificial layer etching solution in silicon based surface micromachining is prone to attack the interface between a hot wire and its support structure. Heretofore solutions to this problem have added significant process control complexity.

Referring now to the drawings shows a preferred embodiment thermal sensor . The thermal sensor includes a resistive heater that is elevated i.e. suspended above a substrate supported by a plurality as shown two of supports . Preferably the height of the resistive heater above the substrate is predetermined and corresponds though not necessarily equates to the length of the supports . The predetermined support length and therefore the resistive heater height above the substrate is preferably decided according to for example the type of flow laminar vs. turbulent for example velocity of flow roughness of the surface etc. As shown in the supports are raised at an angle to the substrate preferably between 10 and 170 and most preferably about 90 to elevate the resistive heater . Other angles for the supports between 0 and 180 are possible as well by changing the orientation of the magnetic field. By elevating the resistive heater away from the bottom of a velocity boundary layer of the substrate the resistive heater experiences greater fluid flow velocity as shown in flow velocity profile and exhibits greater sensitivity. The raised resistive heater and the substrate and preferably the supports as well collectively define a clearance for fluid flow allowing a fluid media illustrated at to flow through the clearance as well as above the resistive heater.

The supports are preferably in the form of first and second cantilevered prongs attached at one end such as a base to the substrate supporting the resistive heater at first and second opposing ends of the element. The first and second prongs preferably include a metal beam see such as but not limited to gold or aluminum for electrical conduction and mechanical resiliency for raising the thermal sensor from the substrate . Preferably any ductile metal that conducts electricity may be used as long as the resistance of the filament of the resistive heater is significantly a few orders of magnitude for example larger than the metal beam . Each of the first and second prongs may but not necessarily also include a polyimide support beam for mechanical support of the prongs. Preferably the resistive heater is electrically coupled to other components through the prongs so that the prongs provide both a mechanical and electrical connection for the resistive heater. Conductive paths may be created from the prongs to other components during fabrication.

Pads of any suitable material or materials with good adhesion to the substrate such as but not limited to gold and chrome are preferably provided at or near the base of each of the prongs for providing mechanical support for the prongs to the substrate to account for shear stress due to fluid flow. A bending joint is created for each of the supports near the base of the supports where the supports begin to raise from the substrate . The bending joints may be reinforced by electroplating nickel for example to enhance the rigidity of the thermal sensor .

As opposed to the doped polysilicon hot wire elements of conventional anemometers the resistive heater of the present invention may and preferably does include a non silicon material such as but not limited to a thin film metal or filament having a high temperature coefficient of resistance TCR . A polymer piece such as a polyimide support beam may also be present to provide additional structural integrity to the resistive heater . Also at least in part because the thermal sensor is produced using surface micromachining the thermal sensor may be implemented on various substrates . Particularly a non silicon substrate is used including but not limited to flexible and or curved substrates. However the low processing temperature available and preferably used in fabrication of the thermal sensor according to a preferred method allows the thermal sensor to be built on top of an integrated circuit substrate as well without affecting the transistor property of the circuit.

A hot wire anemometer such as the thermal sensor of the present invention operates by sensing temperature change of the resistive heater resulting from forced convection. The temperature variation can be inferred by the change of the resistance of the thin film as a current i passes through the supports and the resistive heater . A suitable current source may be provided to supply the current i to the resistive heater . The heat balance equation for the resistive heater under electrical Joule heating is 

where Q is the rate of heat storage Qis the generated bias power from Joule heating Qis the rate of heat loss due to forced convection and Qrepresents the sum of conductive losses e.g. through the supports . For a hot wire anemometer the term Qinvolves both loss from the ends of the resistive heater through the supports as well as longitudinal thermal conduction along the resistive heater. Under a given set of bias power Q and fluid flow rate it is important to maximize Qwhile minimizing Qin order to obtain greater sensitivity to velocity changes. To minimize the conductive heat loss also means that the thermal sensor can be operated in a more thermally efficient manner. This is especially important if an array of sensors is used. Accordingly the thermal sensor of the present invention reduces the end loss by supporting the resistive heater using supports raised out of plane that have a high aspect ratio and a small cross section creating a relatively large thermal resistance. The range of aspect ratios and cross sections may vary as there is a design trade off between thermal insulation and mechanical rigidity. Furthermore regarding thermal resistance a trade off also exists between electrical and thermal resistance.

One significant design parameter is the length of the resistive heater . It is possible to increase Qby increasing the length of the resistive heater because Qvaries slowly with the element length whereas the value of Qchanges roughly linearly with respect to the length. However the length of the element may be limited by fabrication practicality and yield considerations. The longer the resistive heater the more difficult it may be to realize.

Another design parameter is the diameter of the cross section of the resistive heater . In the case that the resistive heater has a rectangular cross section the equivalent diameter that yields the cross sectional area may be considered. By reducing the value of the cross section the surface to volume ratio of the resistive heater is increased thus encouraging more convection while confining the conductive component. However there exists a practical limit to the minimal diameter of the resistive heater as well due to mechanical rigidity concerns.

In particular embodiments of the thermal sensor devices include resistive heater lengths of 50 m 100 m 150 m and 200 m preferably between about 10 m and on the order of millimeters and heights of the supports of up to on the order of a few millimeters. A preferred embodiment of the resistive heater is a 1200 angstroms thick metal thin film but preferably within a range of hundreds of angstroms so that the film exhibits a sufficient TCR up to several microns thick overlapping with the polyimide piece though other polymers may be used. A preferred cross section of the polyimide piece is 6 m wide by 2.7 m thick. The polyimide piece provides additional mechanical support for the effective thin film metal . If the polyimide piece thickness is much lower than 2.7 m though it is possible the mechanical rigidity will likely be degraded. However if the thickness is too great the polyimide beam may decrease the frequency response of the thermal sensor due to added thermal mass.

According to a preferred embodiment thermal sensor the cross section of the resistive heater is comparable to that of commercially available hot wire sensors. The surface micromachining process of a preferred fabrication method of the present invention allows good control of the dimensions of the resistive heater .

A preferred method for fabricating the thermal sensor of the present invention will now be described with reference to . A material for the metal thin film is chosen that provides a high temperature coefficient of resistance TCR . A preferred primary material for the metal thin film of the resistive heater is nickel as it has an effective TCR as a deposited thin film. Though other materials such as platinum may be used these materials may exhibit a reduced effective TCR due to among other things a higher than expected electrical resistivity attributable to electron scattering at the grain boundary. Though the boundary scattering can be modified by for example annealing to increase grain size the annealing temperature in some cases for Pt above 600 C. may be incompatible with integrated circuits and or the polyimide film used with the metal thin film in the preferred thermal sensor .

The resistive heater includes the temperature sensitive non silicon preferably metal thin film preferably overlapped by the supporting polymer piece . The preferably polyimide polymer piece is used for at least the reason that it provides the resistive heater with structural rigidity without significantly increasing cross sectional area and thermal conductivity. The thermal conductivity of polyimide is almost two orders of magnitude lower than that of a metal such as nickel.

A preferred fabrication process uses a three dimensional assembly method that utilizes a surface micromachined structure such as the thermal sensor anchored to substrates with cantilever beams made of ductile metal materials for example gold and aluminum . The ductile metal cantilever beams are the supports in the present thermal sensor . Pieces of electroplated ferromagnetic material such as Permalloy are attached to the supports . By applying an external magnetic field H the ferromagnetic material is magnetized and interacts with the field producing a torque to bend the supports out of plane with respect to the substrate . Once the supports are sufficiently bent the cantilever bending joints are plastically deformed resulting in permanently bent supports even after the magnetic field His removed. This magnetic assembly process may be realized in parallel on the wafer scale for example.

Referring now to the process begins with a starting wafer for the substrate such as silicon glass polymer etc. Because the preferred process has a relatively low overall temperature the process can be performed on substrates in addition to silicon. For example the thermal sensor may be formed on a flexible polymer substrate or other flexible even curved substrates for conformal coating of fluid dynamic surfaces of interest.

A sacrificial layer is evaporated and patterned on the substrate . Preferably a chrome copper titanium stack is used for the sacrificial layer . More precisely a chrome film about 10 nm thick preferably serves as an adhesion layer between the remainder of the sacrificial layer and the substrate . A titanium about 250 angstroms thick thin film of the sacrificial layer reduces in process oxidation of a copper film which itself is preferably about 2500 angstroms thick. Other materials for the sacrificial layer may be used for example aluminum so long as the material chosen can withstand the process temperature chosen and the etchant of the sacrificial layer does not significantly affect the other materials.

Next as shown in a preferably photo definable polymer such as polyimide is spun on preferably about 2.7 m thick patterned via lithography and cured for example at 350 C. for about two hours. The polymer layer as previously described forms part of the supports including the base and raised prongs defined by for example the portion covering the sacrificial layer and part of the resistive heater .

A Cr Pt Ni Pt film is then evaporated and patterned to complete the thin film of the resistive heater . A preferred thickness of the Cr layer an adhesion layer of the film is about 200 angstroms. For the remainder of the thin film an 800 angstrom thick nickel film forming the resistor is sandwiched between two opposing 200 angstrom thick platinum films which are used to reduce possible oxidation of the nickel resistor while in operation because platinum is relatively inert at high operation temperatures. However other high TCR materials may be used for the thin film.

Next a Cr Au film preferably about 5000 angstroms thick is evaporated and patterned . The Cr Au film as part of the supports serves as a mechanical bending element as well as electrical leads of the resistive heater . Other ductile conductive metals may be used. A ferromagnetic material such as Permalloy is then electroplated preferably about 4 m thick using a photoresist mold on portions of the cantilever support prongs formed by the Cr Au film . The photoresist is removed leaving the bending joint exposed for the three dimensional assembly process.

In one embodiment and referring to a release of the sacrificial layer is then performed by using a solution containing acetic acid and hydrogen peroxide for example to selectively remove the copper adhesive thin film of the sacrificial layer. Next a magnetic field His applied for example by a permanent magnet preferable field strength of 800 Gauss at the bottom of the substrate . The applied magnetic field lifts the resistive heater out of plane by bending the cantilevered supports rotating them about the bending joint and away from the substrate at an angle . Other methods to apply the magnetic field H such as electromagnets may be employed. Finally a chip including the substrate and the thermal sensor is rinsed in deionized water and dried.

The adhesion between the preferably gold metal beam of the supports and the polyimide support layer is significant as the adhesion helps to reduce the likelihood of separation during the three dimensional assembly step . One preferred method of improving adhesion is to use a Cr layer as an adhesion layer as described above and also to treat the polyimide layer by using Oreactive ion etching RIE before the deposition of the metal gold layer . By employing the RIE treatment a hydrophilic structure is created on the polyimide layer surface that enhances adhesion. Cr is preferred for the adhesion layer as other materials such as titanium though having good stability in chemical etchants and higher electrical resistivity may allow the metal layer to peel off from the polyimide during the three dimensional assembly.

Both the resistive heater and the supports preferably have relatively small frontal areas. The momentum thus imparted by fluid on the thermal sensor is minimal. Accordingly a preferred thermal sensor can withstand airflow with a mean stream velocity lower than 5 m s without being damaged. However at such velocity the supports may vibrate. Because the thermal sensor is preferably at least partially immersed in the velocity boundary layer it is possible to develop sensors that can withstand high flow velocity by lowering its height and fully immersing the thermal sensor in the boundary layer.

For certain applications it may be advantageous to strengthen the bending region hinge of each of the supports so that the thermal sensor can operate at i.e. withstand high flow speed of the fluid media . shows a step in the preferred process including an additional post sacrificial layer release electroplating step. In this step a nickel layer is selectively electroplated at the bent hinges to strengthen the hinges. Other electroplated materials may also be used. Referring first to before the removal of the copper sacrificial layer the photoresist is spun on and patterned to prevent the electroplated nickel from growing on the resistive heater . Thus the only metals preferably exposed at this stage are the gold bending regions and the electrical leads of the supports . The sample chip is then put in a copper etchant until the sacrificial layer including copper is completely undercut . Afterwards the sample chip is removed from the etchant solution thoroughly rinsed in deionized water and immediately placed into a nickel plating bath.

The external magnetic field His then applied preferably in a direction normal to the substrate in parallel to lift the supports out plane. Next the nickel layer is locally electroplated onto the hinge . A preferred plating time may be between 5 30 minutes for example at preferably between 1 and 1000 mA cmper device depending on the size of the chip . This provides a nickel layer at the hinge preferably of a few m in thickness though this may be higher on the order of tens of microns for example . After plating is completed the sample chip is removed from the plating bath and the resist is stripped . shows an embodiment of the thermal sensor after release and assembly.

Alternatively the thermal sensor may be formed without fabrication of the polyimide supports so that the supports include only metal cantilever beams and the ferromagnetic material used for assembly unless it has been removed and the non silicon thin film used for the resistive heater is exposed to fluid media on both sides. A scanning electron microscope SEM micrograph of such a thermal sensor is shown in .

In operation of the thermal sensor preferably as part of the chip the supports serving as electrical leads are coupled directly or indirectly to the source . For example the sensor may be hooked up to a constant current or constant temperature driving circuit via a pair of conductive paths . The output of the driving circuit goes through a signal conditioner for amplification and linearization for example and finally to an A D converter and readout for determining fluid flow for example. The output may also be measured by a multimeter.

For example shows a nonlimiting example of a basic constant current driving circuit for analyzing constant current response of the thermal sensor including a constant current source in series with a resistor R and the thermal sensor as resistor R. As one non limiting embodiment an LM334 current source in conjunction with a diode to reduce temperature dependence on the circuit may be used for the source. Due to a positive TCR the voltage across the resistive heater decreases as the flow rate increases. The sensitivity of output voltage with respect to air velocity increases with increasing overheat ratio because of the increase in temperature difference between the resistive heater and the fluid media .

In addition to the chip having an individual thermal sensor a chip according to an alternative embodiment of the present invention can also be realized in a large array format for distributed flow sensing. For example shows a triple point thermal sensor array including first second and third thermal sensors . The three dimensional assembly process described above allows among other benefits assembly of multiple thermal sensors in parallel using a globally applied magnetic field. However the array of thermal sensors need not be parallel co planar or even disposed on the same substrate . For example a plurality of thermal sensors having resistive heaters disposed orthogonally to one another can be used to provide flow rates in three dimensions and thus determine orientation of fluid flow.

Furthermore by integrating a strain gauge into a base of the polymer support structure of the present thermal sensor a tactical sensor can be produced as well. Arrays of such tactical sensors are possible for measuring water flow and airflow.

While various embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that other modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

