---

title: Therapies and compositions for controlling the stress mechanism and for stabilizing hemostasis in an organism
abstract: A method for treating skin malignancies, malignant tumors, metastatic malignancies and abnormal skin growths in an organism by treating the organism to inhibit the stress mechanism via different pathways and synergistically reduce the production of thrombin in the organism by maintaining antinociception anesthesia throughout the treatment process to control psychic and somatic stress and to reduce the activity levels of Factor VIII, administering medications to the organism that reduce the activity of Factor VII, administering anti-thrombin medications to the organism, or administering to the organism medications that reduce the activity levels of Factor X and Factor Xa.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08071545&OS=08071545&RS=08071545
owner: Lewis S. Coleman, MD, Inc.
number: 08071545
owner_city: Bakersfield
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050315
---
This invention relates to methods useful in treating surgical stress syndrome circulatory disorders malignancies and for providing a blood substitute in an organism. The methods and treatments disclosed herein include methods and compositions that stabilize the turbulence of an organism s blood in order to treat stress related disease.

A Unified Theory of Stress Coagulation Inflammation Wound Healing Embryological Development and Tissue Maintenance

Stress n. 1. The reaction of the animal body to forces of a deleterious nature infections and various abnormal states that tend to disturb its normal physiologic equilibrium homeostasis . 2. The resisting force set up in a body as a result of an externally applied force. 1 

Disorder is the basic law of the universe. Living creatures are ordered forms that employ combinations of information systems chemical reactions and mechanical mechanisms to acquire energy from their environment to maintain their structural integrity and function and replicate. To be alive is to be unceasingly stressed by the demands of energy acquisition and structural maintenance.

Occam s Razor a key concept in scientific philosophy suggests that the best approach to a complex problem is to assume that the simplest explanation or set of explanations is correct until proven otherwise.

It has long been understood that humans and animals are equipped with physiological mechanisms that enable them to resist and repair the damaging effects of stressful stimulus including coagulation inflammation scab formation wound repair and tissue maintenance. The observed reactions to stress are numerous confusing and inter related 2 3 and thus far no attempt has been made to describe a single mechanism that can explain these various phenomena. This manuscript will present a theory Stress Theory that endeavors to explain the biological reaction to stressful stimuli in terms of a simple unified physiologic mechanism. The formulation of the theory was inspired by the author s observations of the clinical benefits of opioid based anesthetic strategies and has been greatly facilitated by recently published studies. It is intended to inspire new research that may lead to improved surgical outcome as well as general advance of medical understanding.

The Stress Theory may provide fresh insights to the nature of embryology neonatology 4 physiology immunology pharmacology and pathology. It may offer improved understanding of the mechanisms of drug actions systemic vascular resistance blood flow and distribution blood pressure atherosclerosis thromboembolism capillary homeostasis apoptosis embryological tissue development muscle hypertrophy athletic cardiovascular conditioning blood coagulation tissue inflammation wound healing Virchow s Triad the Fight or Flight stress syndrome of Hans Seyle Surgical stress tissue remodeling and maintenance and numerous manifestations of pathology by describing all these in terms of the effects of a cohesive stress opposing mechanism that operates continuously to maintain homeostasis and tissue integrity in the animal body 5 .

Presently accepted coagulation Cascade theory provides an incomplete description of the coagulation process that defines coagulation Factors VII and VIII and thrombin as enzymatic proteins that react with one another and other blood borne proteins to effect clot formation. Stress Theory is predicated on the alternate hypothesis that coagulation factors VII and VIII are blood borne stress agents that respectively cause local and systemic elevations of thrombin levels and synergize each other s actions to produce hyper elevations of thrombin at the site of stress injury and that thrombin is responsible for the numerous symptoms and effects exerted by the stress mechanism. Stress Theory offers a simpler and more complete explanation of hemostasis and coagulation than presently prevailing Cascade Theory plus a simple explanation of wound healing tissue maintenance and important aspects of embryological development that is presently lacking.

Stress Theory assigns a role to Factor VII that might be compared to the Extrinsic cascade. It circulates in flowing blood and is separated from exposure to the underlying collagen that constitutes the major component of blood vessel structure by the vascular endothelium which is only one cell layer in thickness. Disruption of the vascular endothelium therefore exposes factor VII to collagen causing its activation. Its activity is normally localized and it focuses the effects of the Stress Mechanism at the site of injury stress .

Likewise the role of Factor VIII loosely corresponds to the Intrinsic cascade. It is a hormone that is produced and released directly into the blood by the vascular endothelium a gland under the control of the Sympathetic Nervous System SNS so that its blood level varies in accord with the tone and activity levels of the SNS. Its activity is systemic and its function is to regulate the activity level of the Stress Mechanism.

Both Factors VII and Factor VIII activate thrombin and their combined effects cause localized hyper elevations of thrombin that focus the effects of the stress mechanism at the site of stress and injury. The role of thrombin thus corresponds to the Final Common Pathway as described by Cascade Theory.

Stress Theory hypothesizes that thrombin is the primary enzymatic effecter agent of the stress mechanism. Thrombin is the known cause of numerous effects including platelet activation 6 cell mitosis 7 cell hypertrophy increased cell metabolism inflammation 2 collagen production and the conversion of fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin 8 . It is closely associated with embryological development wound healing coagulation malignancy and tissue maintenance. Stress Theory hypothesizes Is that thrombin produces these multiple effects by means of a common mechanism that has yet to be identified.

Stress Theory postulates two mechanisms of hemostasis both of which are controlled by blood levels of thrombin and insoluble fibrin. These are 1. Capillary Hemostasis which is initiated by closure of a molecular level Capillary Gate Mechanism governed by varying levels of insoluble fibrin and 2. Systemic Hemostasis which is manifested by the familiar blood clot formation process that occurs in larger vessels. This is initiated by declines in blood turbulence and mixing that are initiated by increased blood levels of insoluble fibrin a three dimensional molecule with physical properties absent in its precursor soft fibrin and further enhanced by the formation of fibrin strands that connect various blood components to one another as turbulence and mixing decline.

The theory implies that changes in systemic vascular resistance occur in accord with the operation of the Capillary Gate mechanism and the degree of capillary hemostasis 9 as opposed to muscular contraction or relaxation of larger blood vessels. It asserts that the rapidly reversible physical properties of the three dimensional matrix structure of insoluble fibrin as controlled and facilitated by varying levels of Factor VIII enable it to open and close the hypothesized Capillary Gate Mechanism to produce capillary hemostasis and indirectly regulate capillary perfusion. Simultaneously insoluble fibrin increases systemic blood viscosity which reduces blood turbulence and mixing thereby increasing blood coagulability and thereby inducing clot formation. Hyper elevations of insoluble fibrin in the immediate vicinity of stressful stimulus injury determined by the combined effects of Factors VII and VIII reduce turbulence and mixing below a critical threshold whereupon fibrin strands form inter connections among blood components that further reduce turbulence and mixing and clot formation proceeds to completion .

Chronic systemic elevations in blood viscosity caused by persistent stressful stimulus and other factors cause reductions in blood turbulence and mixing that accelerate atherosclerosis in the arterial tree and increase the risk of thromboembolism in the venous system 10 . Systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure 11 vary directly and cardiac output and tissue perfusion vary inversely 12 with the degree of closure of the Capillary Gate mechanism as determined by the level of stress SNS activation and Factor VIII release.

Although thrombin plays an essential role in coagulation most thrombin generation occurs after clot formation suggesting that it may have additional functions 13 14 . Stress Theory postulates that thrombin initiates coagulation and inflammation as a prelude to wound healing and attracts various wound healing cell types to the site of injury 15 16 . It subsequently induces fibroblast mitosis metabolism proliferation and collagen production 17 as an integral part of the wound healing process. Thrombin levels continue to be elevated at the site of stress to regulate the wound healing process in accord with continued collagen exposure to flowing blood which maintains Factor VII activation. When wound healing is substantially complete and collagen is sealed from exposure to flowing blood thrombin levels fall. The decline in thrombin levels induces fibroblast apoptosis signaling an end to the active phase of wound healing 18 19 .

Maintenance levels of thrombin may stimulate collagen replenishment and tissue maintenance and remodeling as evidenced by skin necrosis and ulceration and disturbances of wound repair 20 that sometimes result from treatment with coumadin which exerts anti thrombin effects 21 23 .

Growing evidence suggests that the embryological development of complex multi celled eukaryotic organisms may be largely governed by genetic programming contained in junk DNA in the form of introns that in the case of humans constitutes 95 percent or more of the genome 24 . The introns may exert their effects on embryological development by controlling the timing of developmental processes such as stem cell maintenance cell proliferation and apoptosis 25 . Thrombin has been shown to be closely associated with cell maintenance 26 metabolism 27 hypertrophy 28 30 proliferation 31 angiogenesis 32 and apoptosis 19 and thrombin appears to play an important role in embryological development as evidenced by fetal developmental defects that are associated with the administration of thrombin inhibitors to pregnant females and studies that demonstrate the role of thrombin in embryological development 31 33 34 . I therefore hypothesize that introns control embryological development by controlling localized thrombin levels at precise time intervals. The stress mechanism which also governs thrombin levels may play a complimentary and synergistic role in embryological development by stimulating newly developed organs and tissues to grow and enlarge in response to the stresses associated with fetal development. Assuming the presence of thrombin sensitive growth and mitosis receptors common to all cells the combined effects of introns and the stress mechanism to regulate thrombin levels may provide a simplified explanation of embryological development in complex organisms.

Nearly all forms of disease cause activation of the stress mechanism typically manifested by a triad of 1. elevated blood levels of Factor VIII 2. increased blood viscosity and 3. increased blood coagulability. These are often accompanied by a wide variety of seemingly unrelated pathological symptoms 35 due to inflammation fibrin generation and fibroblast proliferation. The stress mechanism may account for these symptoms. The Stress Mechanism is powerful and may cause pathological effects including malignancy that are at odds with its healing function. Understanding the cause of these symptoms may offer insight into the nature of several hitherto mysterious stress related diseases such as rheumatoid disease 36 the tissue damage of diabetes ARDS asthma inflammatory bowel disease 37 39 malignancy eclampsia 40 and DIC. It may explain how stress related conditions appear to exaggerate the incidence and severity of one another as in diabetes and pregnancy or in CREST syndrome 41 . It may explain the fact that patients afflicted with one form of cancer are at increased risk of additional forms of cancer how conditions that activate the stress mechanism may increase the risk of atherosclerosis and malignancy 42 and how environmental factors may increase the risk of stress related disease 43 44 . It may explain the associations between hypertension systemic vascular resistance blood viscosity 5 blood coagulability atherosclerosis and heart disease 45 46 . It may suggest new forms of treatment and research. Finally it may offer a logical way to employ anesthesia and surgical techniques to control stress and improve surgical outcome.

The various elements of the Stress Theory will be discussed in detail. Clinical examples including eclampsia essential hypertension diabetes DIC and ARDS will be offered as illustrations of the role that stress may play in disease.

Recent advances in the understanding of the characteristics of Factor VIII may offer fresh insight as to the presence and nature of a fast acting sub microscopic molecular level Capillary Gate Mechanism. A mechanism that regulates blood flow and hemostasis at the capillary level has long been suspected but never identified 58 60 . The Capillary Gate hypothesis is attractive for several reasons. It offers an explanation of observed capillary hemostasis where none presently exists. Capillaries lack musculature and cannot contract so capillary vasoconstriction is impossible. However capillaries and vascular endothelium have been shown to be innervated with both sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve endings 61 that may govern the release of Factor VIII and other vasoactive substances. Theories of capillary endothelial cell swelling that occlude the capillary lumen have been proposed but are not supported by evidence. Theories of pre capillary sphincter contraction that might explain capillary hemostasis are likewise lacking in substance because pre capillary sphincters and vessels invariably relax after short periods of contraction and then exhibit compensatory vasodilation.

The Capillary Gate hypothesis also offers an improved explanation for the regulation of blood flow and distribution and systemic vascular resistance 62 . The surface area of the capillaries is many times greater than that of all larger vessels combined and the hemodynamic pressures and flows are vastly lower so that control of blood flow might be more easily explained at the capillary level than at the level of larger blood vessels. The Capillary Gate hypothesis might also offer an improved explanation of the Blood Brain barrier 63 and cerebral autoregulation 64 66 .

Witte et al 67 have demonstrated microvascular endothelial receptor sites for fibrinogen fibronectin and Factor VIII suggesting that these are structural elements of the Capillary Gate Mechanism. Since insoluble fibrin contains fibronectin I hypothesize that fibronectin receptor sites may actually serve as attachment sites for insoluble fibrin. I hypothesize that the Capillary Gate Mechanism is regulated by the blood level of Factor VIII as determined by the activity level of the Sympathetic Nervous System. Rising levels of Factor VIII cause increased blood levels of thrombin which cause elevated levels of insoluble fibrin whereupon both Factor VIII and insoluble fibrin act in concert with fibrinogen to obstruct capillary flow and close the Capillary Gate.

It has been demonstrated that thrombin inhibits the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin 68 and insoluble fibrin contains plasminogen that is an integral part of its structure. I therefore hypothesize that when levels of Factor VIII decline the resulting decrease in thrombin level allows spontaneous conversion of plasminogen to plasmin which attacks and dismembers the insoluble fibrin molecule into fibrin split products . In addition enzymes such as urokinase and Tissue Plasminogen Activator TPa may attack insoluble fibrin and prevent closure of the capillary gate in certain tissues where uninterrupted capillary perfusion is vital such as brain and heart tissue. This might explain the blood brain barrier and cerebral autoregulation.

This concept is consistent with the observations of Holemans et al 69 that vasoactive drugs are associated with elevated rates of fibrin turnover and that vasodilators are associated with greater levels of fibrin turnover than vasopressors . I hypothesize that vasopressors enhance fibrin formation and the closure of the Capillary Gate while vasodilators enhance the breakdown of fibrin and the opening of the Capillary Gate. These agents may effect changes in systemic vascular resistance and therefore blood pressure by manipulating the operation of the Capillary Gate 98 .

Angiodysplasia an age related bleeding diathesis in which visible damage to capillaries occurs 70 may offer direct evidence of a Capillary Gate Mechanism. Angiodysplasia has been shown in all studied forms to be associated with damaged or absent VWF 71 73 . It occurs in von Willebrand s Disease 74 . It also occurs in uremia 75 aortic stenosis 76 78 and Idiopathic Hypertrophic Subaortic Stenosis 79 80 all of which have been shown to be associated with functional abnormalities of the VWF molecule 81 . In the absence of adequate levels of functioning VWF the half life of the VIIIC component of the Factor VIII complex becomes undetectable so that severe defects in the quality or quantity of VWF results in complete cessation of all aspects of Factor VIII complex activity. In contrast angiodysplasia does not occur in classical hemophilia where only VIIIC is absent and normal levels of VWF are present. This suggests that the VWF portion of the Factor VIII complex plays a dominant role in Capillary Gate function compared to the VIIIC component and defects in the quality or quantity of VWF cause a structural defect in the Capillary Gate Mechanism so severe as to result in visible capillary damage known as angiodysplasia.

Fibrin cuffs and deposits have been noted at the entrance and in the lumen of capillaries in association with venous obstruction 82 83 . Fibrin deposits in blood vessels and tissues and hyper elevations of blood coagulability are consistently observed in association with severe stress states 84 . These observations are consistent with hyper elevations of blood fibrin levels that commonly occur in states of stress. I hypothesize that severe stress may cause overproduction of insoluble fibrin that normally functions to close the Capillary Gate Mechanism and regulate blood coagulability with the result that excess fibrin accumulates at the entrance of the capillary gate and deposits on vessel walls as in DIC.

Sielenkamper et al have demonstrated unexplained increases in bowel capillary flow in association with epidural anesthesia despite lowered systemic blood pressure. Kabon et al have demonstrated increased tissue oxygenation associated with epidural anesthesia 85 again despite lowered systemic blood pressure. Kapral et al have demonstrated higher pH in bowel tissue associated with epidural anesthesia 86 . Epidural anesthesia has been associated with reduced thrombophlebitis reduced blood loss 87 increased stroke volume decreased systemic vascular resistance 88 and overall improvement in morbidity and mortality in high risk patients 89 90 . These studies are consistent with the hypothesis that epidural anesthesia may interfere with the systemic release of Factor VIII 91 by decreasing SNS tone and activity levels thereby reducing blood levels of insoluble fibrin preventing closure of the Capillary Gate and improving capillary bed perfusion.

Sielenkamper et al have also demonstrated unexplained decreases in bowel capillary flow in association with sepsis a powerful cause of stress 92 . Sepsis is known to cause stressful effects and elevations in blood levels of Factor VIII 93 . The observed decreases in capillary flow may be explained by closure of the Capillary Gate caused by sepsis induced elevated levels of Factor VIII 94 95 .

Luostarinen et al demonstrated unexplained injury induced decreases in adjacent uninjured bowel capillary flow that was restored by direct application of lidocaine 96 . The decreases in capillary flow may be explained by the activities of Factors VII and VIII in the vicinity of injury. I hypothesize that the direct application of lidocaine to capillary beds may block the function of exposed SNS nerve endings that terminate in the capillary endothelium and prevent the release of Factor VIII thereby opening the Capillary Gate and restoring of capillary flow.

Weinberg et al 97 have demonstrated that bupivacaine inhibits the accumulation of acidic products of anaerobic glycolysis during ventricular fibrillation VF in dogs whereas tissue oxygen levels are not affected. They could not explain this. Like lidocaine intravenous dosage with bupivacaine may interrupt the function of exposed nerve endings in the vascular endothelium so as to inhibit the release of Factor VIII and prevent the closure of the Capillary Gate Mechanism. This might promote capillary perfusion or diffusion during VF and thereby mitigate the accumulation of acidic metabolic products in cardiac tissue 98 during VF. Oxygen levels would be expected to be depleted rapidly regardless of the effects of bupivacaine as VF would interrupt the transport of oxygen via systemic circulation causing cardiac tissue to rapidly deplete oxygen stores and revert to anaerobic glycosis metabolism which exaggerates the production of acidic metabolic products.

Anaphylactic shock may also provide insights to Capillary Gate structure and function. It differs from other forms of shock 99 in that it is not associated with elevated fibrin levels or decreased cardiac output. It is characterized by severe hypotension hives and angioneurotic edema that may cause swelling of airway tissues so severe as to cause death. It is associated with repeated exposure to antigenic drugs and chemicals notably protamine and bee venom. It can be successfully treated with epinephrine which is known to cause the release of Factor VIII and to enhance the conversion of fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin 100 . I hypothesize that the cause of anaphylaxis symptoms may be a to sudden widespread failure of the Capillary Gate Mechanism that causes a severe translocation of red cells and plasma from large blood vessels to capillaries and extravascular space. Such a phenomenon might occur if the immune system were to attack one of the Capillary Gate components in association with exposure to antigen causing sudden widespread failure of the Capillary Gate mechanism. Existing studies suggest that anaphylaxis may involve sudden a complement mediated attack on the VWF molecule 101 followed by activation of plasminogen causing widespread destruction of the insoluble fibrin molecule 102 as thrombin levels fall in response to the inactivation of VWF. These studies are consistent with the hypothesis that insoluble fibrin and VWF are important structural components of an existing Capillary Gate Mechanism.

Serine protease thrombin is a powerful multifunctional and ubiquitous stress enzyme that plays a central role in coagulation 103 107 DIC 108 injury 109 inflammation 110 111 blood vessel repair 110 and tissue remodeling 21 112 113 . Thrombin mediates embryological cell proliferation and tissue development as evidenced by serious birth defects that occur with fetal exposure to anti thrombin medications. It inhibits apoptosis 18 . Declines in thrombin levels may therefore explain the apoptosis that plays an important role in both embryological development and wound healing 114 . Thrombin is routinely employed in the operating theatre to control bleeding from cut surfaces. It mediates platelet activation and fibrin deposition 115 . It stimulates fibroblast metabolism proliferation hypertrophy 116 and collagen production as an integral part of wound healing 117 . It supports and promotes malignancy 118 . Thrombin may activate leukocytes polymorphonucleocytes monocytes macrophages and endothelial cells as part of the inflammatory process. It stimulates angiogenesis 118 119 . It has been associated with abnormal proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells and pathogenic vascular remodeling 120 . Chronic hypoxia chemical exposure and other forms of stress may induce thrombin mediated pathological forms of tissue proliferation 17 121 . Thrombin may mediate cellular and tissue hypertrophy such as muscular hypertrophy that occurs with mechanical stress to muscles. Its mitogenic effects appear to be inhibited by glucocorticoids and this may explain certain therapeutic effects of these agents 122 .

Thrombin generation appears to depend on the presence of Calcium and Factors VIII and IX 123 124 . During the coagulation process thrombin enzymatically cleaves fibrinogen into fibrin monomers that polymerize into strands soft fibrin . It simultaneously catalyzes the activation of Factor XIII fibrin stabilizing factor which forms fibronectin 125 cross links in the developing fibrin structure so as to produce a three dimensional fibrin matrix structure known as insoluble fibrin 126 . Thrombin directly induces platelet activation and platelet elaboration of thromboxane causing vasoconstriction and reduced blood flow in the immediate vicinity of activated platelets.

I hypothesize that Thrombin stabilizes the plasminogen that is incorporated into the fibrin matrix and prevents it from spontaneously converting to plasmin thereby preventing plasmin from attacking the fibrin matrix and reducing it to fibrin split products 68 . Elevated levels of thrombin may thus preserve the integrity of the insoluble fibrin structure which appears to spontaneously disintegrate when levels of VIIIC and thrombin decline. This may explain the ability of VIIIC to control the Capillary Gate Mechanism by regulating thrombin levels.

I hypothesize that these seemingly disparate effects of thrombin are mediated via a common mechanism that is presently obscure. I hypothesize that thrombin is the primary effecter enzyme of the stress mechanism. It is activated by both Factor VII and the VIIIC component of Factor VIII complex and appears to control both coagulation and wound healing.

Often the effects attributed to thrombin have also been attributed to other enzymes. For example direct platelet activation has been attributed to Factor VIII collagen Factor VII and other platelets as well as thrombin. For the sake of simplicity I assume that in the absence of evidence to the contrary any effects attributed to both thrombin and another factor are directly caused by thrombin unless proven otherwise and that the other factors operate indirectly by activating thrombin.

It is generally accepted that there is a dynamic equilibrium in the blood between the forces of coagulation and anti coagulation but the exact nature of this equilibrium has never been described 127 129 . To explain this I hypothesize that a homeostatic equilibrium exists between fibrinogen and fibrin that is governed by the opposing effects of Factor VIII and plasminogen 130 . Factor VIII acts via thrombin to convert fibrinogen to fibrin and cause elevations in blood levels of insoluble fibrin but plasminogen rapidly converts to plasmin when blood levels of Factor VIII decline and then the plasmin attacks and dismantles the insoluble fibrin matrix. The dismantling process typically causes elevations in Fibrin Split Products or d Dimers which appear to be remnants of insoluble fibrin and are associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease 131 132 . In addition to this basic mechanism of fibrin formation and spontaneous self destruction there appear to be independent mechanisms governing fibrinolysis that involve urokinase tissue plasminogen activator TPA and activated Protein C 133 . These mechanisms may serve to prevent the closure of the Capillary Gate mechanism under various circumstances.

Thrombin causes the conversion of fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin. Insoluble fibrin is a three dimensional structure that appears to incorporate fibronectin a glycoprotein present in the blood. The conversion of fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin requires some five minutes or more in a test tube but I hypothesize that it may occur in vivo in a matter of moments 134 135 . According to Ellison and Jobes 136 Native fibrinogen molecular weight 343 000 daltons is composed of three pairs of non identical peptide chains Aa2 Bb2 Gamma 2 stabilized by disulfide bonds. These are the fibrin monomers. To accomplish the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin thrombin catalyzes the cleavage of fibrinopeptides A and B from the Aa and Bb chains yielding the a and b chains of the fibrin monomer which polymerize into lengthening strands to yield a soluble form of fibrin. Thrombin then catalyzes the activation of the fibrin stabilizing factor Factor XIII which catalyzes the formation of intermolecular crosslinks between the gamma chains forming gamma gamma dimers and between the a chains forming a a multimers . Fibronectin may be incorporated into this three dimensional cross link structure to form a matrix structure. Studies demonstrating coagulopathy related to defects in the quality or quantity of Factor XIII illustrate the importance of the cross linked three dimensional form of insoluble fibrin 137 .

I hypothesize that insoluble fibrin a very large three dimensional molecular structure possesses unique physical properties that enable it to simultaneously induce 1. closure of the Capillary Gate Mechanism and 2. increases in blood viscosity which decreases turbulence and mixing and thereby increases blood coagulability so as to control the coagulation process.

So called soft fibrin which consists of fibrin strands that lack cross links is present in classical hemophilia where the VIIIC component of the Factor VIII complex is absent and insoluble fibrin is not produced in appreciable amounts due to the resulting defect in thrombin production and Factor XIII activation. This suggests that the critical defect in hemophilia is the inability to convert soft fibrin to insoluble fibrin in functional quantities. The resulting inability to regulate blood coagulability and capillary hemostasis may explain the bleeding diathesis that occurs in both hemophilia and von Willebrand s Disease.

Fibronectin is a glycoprotein disulfite bonded dimer of 200 220 Kd subunits that appears to be secreted by the vascular endothelium into blood. It is also found in an insoluble fibrillar form as a component of connective tissue matrix like collagen proteoglycans and forms molecular complexes with collagen fibrinogen fibrin heparin activated factor XIII and bacteria to form domains or subunits and thus mediate adhesion of cells to cells or cells to biomaterials or tissue and cell migration chemotactic activity and tissue stromal organization. It also interacts with hemostatic 138 and fibrinolytic systems and is a part of the fibrinous blood clot. It plays an important role in wound healing and the formation of immune complexes. Depletion of fibronectin due to hyper activation of the stress mechanism in sepsis 139 may worsen outcome 125 and fibronectin replacement may be an effective treatment 140 . In eclampsia increased circulating levels of fibronectin and Factor VIII are associated with glomerular endotheliosis and hypertension 141 .

Calcium and possibly an external source of energy 142 may be essential for the conversion of soluble fibrin to insoluble fibrin matrix. Calcium appears to be elevated in association with thrombin activity and elevated Ca is also associated with the inhibition of plasmin action. Sodium citrate inhibits clot formation by absorbing calcium the addition of Ca to citrated blood restores the clotting process. Calcium has been used to achieve therapeutic hemostasis 143 144 and sodium citrate has been used to control coagulation in hemodialysis 145 .

Plasmins dissolve fibrin yet small quantities of plasminogen the plasmin precursor are adsorbed onto fibrin at lysine binding sites thus becoming an integral part of the insoluble fibrin matrix 138 146 . The fact that both plasminogen and plasminogen activators are incorporated into the fibrin matrix suggests the presence of a mechanism for causing a rapid dissolution or self destruction of the fibrin matrix that must somehow be inhibited otherwise the fibrin structure would be inherently unstable 130 147 . As noted previously this may be explained by the inhibition of plasminogen by thrombin.

Numerous clues suggest a direct relationship between fibrin split products FSP and amyloid protein. Like FSP Amyloidosis is associated with excessive fibrin turnover in the presence of elevated levels of urokinase 148 and amyloidosis is associated with atherosclerosis 149 150 . Amyloid protein appears to interfere with coagulation by competing with fibrin precursors 151 153 particularly Factor X 154 suggesting a structural similarity between FSP and amyloid protein. Like fibrin amyloid protein appears in the form of chains or fibrils. Fibronectin a component of insoluble fibrin and vitronectin a component of amyloid are both glycoproteins and may be closely related 155 . Both fibrin breakdown products and amyloid appear to be associated with hypercoagulability states 156 and both interfere with coagulation 157 160 they may be directly related. Like fibrin amyloid protein tends to appear as deposits in vessels 161 and organ tissues in association with stressful conditions 152 162 163 and this may be a largely unappreciated source of pathology 151 164 . Occult amyloid deposits that damage blood vessels and surrounding tissues may be a factor in Congestive heart failure 164 and ischemic colitis 160 . Amyloid protein appears in rheumatoid nodules 165 and in the synovium 166 and other tissues 167 170 of patients afflicted with rheumatoid arthritis and other rheumatoid diseases 171 . Amyloid may be a cause or a contributing factor in the development of diabetes a stress related condition 172 and Alzheimer s Disease l173 .

On the basis of this evidence I hypothesize that amyloid protein is a form of fibrin split products or d dimer that has undergone a conformational change that renders it distinct 174 . Amyloid protein and fibrin degradation products may represent the exhaust produced by the operation of the Capillary Gate Mechanism and increased blood levels of these proteins may be caused by opening and closing of the Capillary Gate Mechanism by urokinase vasoactive drugs or stress related factors. I further hypothesize that rheumatoid diseases represent clinical manifestations of amyloidosis 175 178 .

The classical hormonal response to trauma is described as activation of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis and the sympathetic nervous system interacting with immunological responses 179 . Neither Factor VIII nor Factor VII has been previously associated with this concept but their proposed roles in Stress Theory may offer an improved explanation of the known effects of stress 180 . I hypothesize that Factor VIII is a stress hormone that is secreted directly into systemic circulation under Sympathetic Nervous System control by the vascular endothelium a gland. It is released into circulation in circumstances similar to those in which other stress hormones such as epinephrine glucagon and cortisol are released. Its function is to regulate the activity level of the Stress Mechanism including systemic blood coagulability and Capillary Gate closure and synergize with the localized effects of Factor VII a companion stress enzyme to induce localized hyper elevations of thrombin that initiate coagulation and regulate wound healing at the site of injury or stress. Factor VIII may be elevated in response to either psychic or somatic pain and stress or both as well as other forms of stressful stimuli that increase SNS activity levels 181 . It may thus be released pre emptively prior to actual injury so as to minimize blood loss as part of the fight or flight stress mechanism described by Hans Selye.

Factor VIII consists of two very large molecules VIIIC and VWF 182 . These circulate together and exert their effects in concert. Unlike other known coagulation proteins that are produced in abundance by the liver and have prolonged stable half lives Factor VIII is produced in the vascular endothelium normally has a brief half life of some 3 5 hours and both its half life and blood levels fluctuate constantly in association with a wide variety of stressful diseases and stimuli 183 186 . For example blood levels of Factor VIII correlate with the severity of DIC 187 eclampsia 188 and Raynoud s syndrome 189 .

Decreases in Factor VIII are associated with lowered blood viscosity and coagulability. Increases in Factor VIII are associated with increases in blood coagulability in blood viscosity in platelet activation and in stress related symptoms 190 . Its effects appear to be largely attributable to regulation of thrombin levels 191 . Both the half life and blood levels of Factor VIII constantly fluctuate in accord with SNS tone and activity levels and hypothalamic stimulation. Blood levels of Factor VIII appear to decline after anesthesia induction and ablation of psychic stress accompanied by decreases in blood coagulability and viscosity but then rise progressively with the onset of surgical tissue disruption. Blood levels of Factor VIII may remain elevated for at least eight days after surgical procedures causing increases in blood coagulability inflammation and increased incidence of stress related symptoms 192 193 .

Manucci et al first demonstrated that Factor VIII is released under nervous control in response to somatic pain 194 . Several studies have associated pure psychic pain and stress such as fainting 195 or experiencing an earthquake without injury with sharp elevations in Factor VIII and fibrin 196 as well as increased incidence of myocardial infarction stroke and angina all of which are stress related 51 197 198 . Blood levels of Factor VIII may exhibit very sudden but short lived increases such as those following hard muscular exercise fainting or the injection of adrenalin they may exhibit sustained changes such as those observed in pregnancy diabetes sepsis inflammatory states hyperthyroidism 199 and other stress related conditions. Starvation depresses both SNS activity and Factor VIII levels 200 201 as does myxedema 202 and moderate alcohol consumption.

Hypothalamic stimulation which is known to control SNS activity levels can cause either increases or decreases in Factor VIII blood levels depending on the part of the hypothalamus being stimulated 203 204 . Hypothalamic stimulation has also been shown to cause endothelial damage and to accelerate atherosclerosis 205 208 .

The VIIIC component of the Factor VIII complex is sex linked as the gene that produces it is located on the X chromosome. It mediates the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin thereby activating the various effects of thrombin. The inherited inability to produce VIIIC is the cause of true hemophilia which afflicted the royal families of Europe.

VWF is produced by a somatic gene. It stabilizes VIIIC and extends its half life. In the complete absence of VWF the half life of VIIIC is so short as to be undetectable resulting in a bleeding diathesis that cannot be distinguished from true hemophilia. VWF is known to facilitate the adhesion of platelets to fibrinogen fibrin fibronectin exposed collagen and to one another so as to facilitate the formation of white thrombi white clots as a prelude to red clot formation 209 . I hypothesize that this is explained its ability to enhance and prolong VIIIC activity thrombin production and Factor XIII activation. Defects in the quality or quantity of VWF may result in bleeding problems known as von Willebrand s Disease that vary widely in severity presumably due to simultaneous impairment of both VWF and VIIIC function. As noted previously VWF may be a major factor in the operation of the Capillary Gate Mechanism.

I hypothesize that the stabilizing role of the VWF component of Factor VIII complex automatically extends the half life of Factor VIII when large quantities of Factor VIII are released. This has important implications for the control of inflammation and the stress syndrome because it implies that once significant amounts of Factor VIII are released Stress Mechanism activity may remain elevated regardless of subsequent stress control measures and restoration of normal SNS activity levels. This may explain the beneficial effects attributed to pre emptive anesthesia 210 and explain much of the confusion that has bedeviled research on the subject of stress.

Turbulence and mixing in the blood have long been suspected of playing a role in both coagulation and atherosclerosis but a clear explanation of how this might occur is lacking. Arterial blood flow appears to operate near a transition zone where small increases or decreases in shear stress the force associated with the forward movement of blood result in large increases in turbulence and mixing 211 . The cardiac cycle induces two peaks of turbulence in arterial blood flow 50 . The first occurs in mid systole at the time of maximum shear stress. The second occurs in mid diastole when blood flow momentarily reverses direction.

Turbulence is enhanced by hyperdynamic cardiac function such as athletic activity and depressed by hypodynamic cardiac function such as occurs in congestive heart failure. This is consistent with the observation that athletic conditioning retards atherosclerosis 212 and hypodynamic heart function or low activity levels such as found in obesity congestive heart failure and myxedema are associated with accelerated atherosclerosis. The effects of turbulence and mixing are also consistent with the observation that thrombophlebitis rarely occurs in arteries but is not uncommon in areas of stasis in the venous system especially in the presence of hypercoagulability and hyperviscosity of blood where levels of turbulence and mixing are reduced.

Bjorn Hof et al recently published studies of fluid flow in pipes that demonstrate sharp increases in turbulence and mixing associated with sudden acceleration of flow rates 213 . These studies which employed laser beams and cameras to track microscopic tracer beads in water demonstrated that a sudden increase in water flow rate in a pipe resulted in turbulent vortices that pushed sluggish water to the center of the pipe creating a slow moving streak down the center and fast moving streaks around it. These studies suggest that pulsatile blood flow induces sharp increases in turbulence and mixing that occur most prominently along the walls of blood vessels in association with sudden increases in shear stress induced by cardiac activity. Such turbulence and mixing might play an important role in preventing the deposition of blood elements on vessel walls and inhibiting coagulation.

Wettstein et al 137 have demonstrated that defects in the quantity or quality of coagulation factor XIII causes bleeding problems. Factor XIII governs the formation of fibronectin cross links to form a three dimensional fibrin structure. I hypothesize that the physical properties of this three dimensional structure induce damping of turbulence and mixing in blood and its absence may disable the coagulation mechanism. Kawasaki et al 214 have demonstrated how fibrin strands visible on electron micrographs form attachments among various blood components as an integral part of the coagulation process. These attachments may also induce damping of turbulence and mixing in blood or synergize with the damping effects of three dimensional fibrin matrix. Alexandrov et al 215 have demonstrated that ultrasound may inhibit blood clot formation and disrupt existing blood clots. Ultrasound may exert these effects by increasing turbulence and mixing in the blood.

The detailed description set forth below in connection with the appended drawings is intended as a description of presently preferred embodiments of the invention and is not intended to represent the only forms in which the present invention may be constructed and or utilized. The description sets forth the functions and the sequence of steps for constructing and operating the invention in connection with the illustrated embodiments. However it is to be understood that the same or equivalent functions and sequences may be accomplished by different embodiments that are also intended to be encompassed within the spirit and scope of the invention.

I hypothesize that blood turbulence and mixing induced by pulsatile blood flow which is associated with sharp increases in mixing inhibits blood coagulability by preventing blood components from adhering to one another to form clots. I likewise hypothesize that turbulence and mixing inhibits atherosclerosis by preventing toxic blood components from escaping suspension in the blood and depositing on arterial surfaces and initiating the inflammatory response that results in atheroma formation.

In fluid dynamics turbulence and mixing vary inversely with viscosity. I hypothesize that chronic increases in blood viscosity which may be caused by various factors causes damping decrease of blood turbulence and mixing that accelerates atherosclerosis by allowing toxic blood components to escape suspension in the blood and form deposits on arterial walls that cause atheroma 216 217 . I hypothesize that acute localized hyper elevations of blood fibrin levels under the combined control of Factors VII and VIII cause localized increases in viscosity resulting in decreases in turbulence and mixing that enable blood clot formation. When the fibrin matrix damps turbulence and mixing below a critical threshold fibrin strands form spontaneously and connect various blood components to one another so as to induce even greater increases in viscosity and decreases in turbulence and mixing. As turbulence levels fall additional fibrin strands form spontaneously and connect blood components into a clot. I hypothesize that extreme systemic hyperviscosity of the blood that causes systemic decreases in turbulence and mixing is the cause of DIC 218 219 . Blood viscosity appears to be determined by a combination of factors primarily including the following 

Elevations of blood viscosity caused by any of these factors or combinations of these factors may pre dispose a patient to problems associated with hypercoagulability such as thrombophlebitis 236 237 accelerated atherosclerosis and impaired capillary perfusion 217 238 . Blood transfusions may cause elevations in blood viscosity 239 and excessive transfusion of packed red blood cells can cause a form of DIC. Extreme stress related elevations in blood viscosity due to abnormal elevations in blood levels of insoluble fibrin such as those associated with sepsis 240 trauma 241 prolonged surgical procedures or the hemolysis elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count syndrome hereinafter HELLP Syndrome of eclampsia are known to precede and pre dispose to the onset of DIC syndrome 242 244 in which spontaneous widespread coagulation occurs 218 245 246 . Over transfusion with washed packed red blood cells produces a similar situation.

Low blood viscosity states such as those found in anemia caused by uremia or by acute blood loss and iatrogenic hemodilution may exaggerate blood turbulence and mixing and thereby inhibit blood coagulability so as to aggravate bleeding tendencies. This may provide a better explanation than the platelet washout syndrome to which bleeding problems associated with massive blood loss hemodilution and uremia 247 are commonly attributed.

Atherosclerosis is widely blamed on elevated blood levels or intake of cholesterol or lipids but the evidence for this is questionable 248 249 . It correlates with advancing age sedentary life style hemodynamic stress 250 increasing blood levels of Factor VIII 251 increases in blood viscosity 222 elevated fibrin 131 and fibrinogen levels 252 and hypercoagulability 253 254 all of which are associated with increased blood viscosity. Anemia lowers blood viscosity and inhibits atherosclerosis whereas elevated hematocrit accelerates it 222 . Stressful diseases such as hyperthyroidism which elevate blood viscosity are associated with accelerated atherosclerosis despite normal or increased cardiac output 255 256 and shear stress. Hypodynamic cardiac function as in congestive heart failure and myxedema 257 is associated with accelerated atherosclerosis 258 . Most chronic diseases are associated with accelerated atherosclerosis 256 .

Atherosclerosis is opposed by athletic conditioning 259 which increases turbulence and mixing. Several studies have demonstrated that moderate alcohol consumption such as a glass of red wine every evening retards atheroma formation and cardiovascular disease 260 . The sedative effects of alcohol may reduce psychic stress and reduce blood viscosity. There is evidence that atherosclerosis may be retarded by hemophilia and von Willebrand s Disease 261 262 though these patients retain the ability to heal wounds and form scabs. This may be explained by the inability of these patients to produce the cross linked form of fibrin.

The observation that atheroma formation begins on the greater curvatures of the bifurcations of arteries where shear stress is decreased 263 has led to the published hypothesis that low shear stress is the cause of atherosclerosis 211 264 265 . The shear stress hypothesis explains most of the facts noted above but is deficient in important respects. For example it fails to explain the acceleration of atherosclerosis that occurs in stressful conditions such as hyperthyroidism or direct hypothalamic stimulation where both cardiac output and shear stress are maintained or increased. It also fails to explain the observation that regular moderate alcohol consumption which is associated with low levels of shear stress retards atherosclerosis.

I hypothesize that atherosclerosis is inhibited by blood turbulence and mixing as opposed to shear stress. Low shear stress and low turbulence and mixing tend to occur under similar conditions however shear stress is minimally affected by viscosity whereas turbulence and mixing may be sharply inhibited by elevations in viscosity and enhanced by reductions in viscosity. This would better explain the accelerated atherosclerosis that occurs in stressful conditions such as hyperthyroidism 266 where the turbulent effects of hyperdynamic heart function may be negated by elevations in is Factor VIII which increases blood viscosity by causing elevated levels of three dimensional fibrin matrix in the blood. It would also better explain how the tranquilizing effects of moderate alcohol consumption retard atherosclerosis by decreasing psychic stress and SNS activity levels and lowering blood levels of Factor VIII insoluble fibrin and blood viscosity 267 .

Somewhat surprisingly Smoking Syndrome does not appear to be associated with elevated levels of Factor VIII and insoluble fibrin 268 though it is associated with other stress related illnesses and may exaggerate their incidence or severity 37 269 270 . However it is consistently associated with elevated levels of blood fibrinogen 220 271 platelet reactivity 272 red cell mass and blood viscosity 273 . I hypothesize that smoking induces increases in blood viscosity by increasing both red cell mass and blood fibrinogen 274 levels and that the increased viscosity causes decreased turbulence and mixing in the blood which is responsible for the acceleration of atherosclerosis and heart disease that is strongly associated with Smoking Syndrome 275 276 .

Nicotine is known to have powerful sedative hypnotic and stress opposing effects 277 . I hypothesize that it reduces psychic stress and thereby reduces blood levels of Factor VIII thereby possibly explaining the normal levels of Factor VIII observed in smokers. The effects of nicotine may oppose and offset the otherwise stressful effects of smoking. This is consistent with the observation that smoking reduces the severity of symptoms in eclampsia where the tranquilizing effects of nicotine may reduce Factor VIII levels and blood viscosity. The effect may be similar to the protective effect of moderate alcohol consumption 260 267 . These sedative effects in and of themselves may mitigate the release of Factor VIII and help prevent acute increases in blood viscosity due to fibrin matrix but the chronic increase in blood viscosity caused by elevated hematocrit and fibrinogen may dominate the beneficial effects of nicotine.

A substance or a mechanism has long been suspected but never verified that localizes and controls the inflammatory response white clot and subsequent red clot formation fibroblast proliferation and wound healing 278 . Factor VII is known to be activated by exposed collagen and to cause conversion of prothrombin to thrombin 279 . It is known to activate the intrinsic pathway 280 . I hypothesize that Factor VII is a locally acting stress agent that synergizes with the systemic effects of Factor VIII to cause hyper elevations of thrombin at the site of tissue disruption and thereby govern localized clot formation and wound healing 281 .

I hypothesize that tissue factor is collagen or a portion of the collagen molecule 16 282 285 . Collagen a ubiquitous protein that is a basic structural component of all larger blood vessels is normally separated from flowing blood by the delicate vascular endothelium which is only one cell layer thick 286 . Traumatic stress that disrupts the vascular endothelium immediately exposes underlying collagen to flowing blood and activates Factor VII.

Factor VII has been successfully employed via intravenous infusion as a substitute for Factor VIII to treat hemophilia 287 288 and trauma 289 but its normal thrombin elevating effects are believed to be primarily local whereas those of Factor VIII appear to be systemic 49 . Like Factor VIII the half life of Factor VII is very short and it must be administered as an infusion to treat hemophilia 290 . Its origin appears to be hepatocytes 291 and its function is vitamin K dependent. Like Fibrinogen its blood level is normally stable and genetically controlled but may be elevated in chronic stress conditions such as diabetes 292 . If administered in excessive quantities it causes hypercoagulability of blood as also occurs with Factor VIII. Deficiencies in the quality or quantity of Factor VII are rare but devastating 293 294 .

Normally thrombin elevation by both Factor VII and Factor VIII is required for effective clot formation. In rare circumstances such as severe sepsis or eclampsia extreme stress related elevations in Factor VIII may cause severe systemic hypercoagulability that pre disposes to DIC however with the exception of venous thrombophlebitis the hypercoagulability induced by Factor VIII is not ordinarily associated with clot formation in the absence of tissue disruption and Factor VII activation. Likewise in the absence of Factor VIII Factor VII does not appear to be produced in adequate quantities to initiate clot formation as evidenced by the absence of clot formation in hemophilia 295 . Normal coagulation appears to involve the combined effects of Factors VII and VIII in response to a combination of SNS activation and collagen exposure to flowing blood that elevates local thrombin levels and initiates white clot formation and then governs the transition of white clot to red clot as collagen is repeatedly re exposed and Factor VII is re activated.

Subsequent re exposure of collagen due to deterioration of the red clot causes persistent re elevations of thrombin levels at the site of injury that initiate and sustain the inflammatory response fibroblast proliferation and collagen production and thereby govern the wound healing process 130 . Factor VII may also control cell migration 296 via thrombin. As wound healing proceeds to completion collagen is ultimately sealed from exposure to flowing blood thrombin levels decline and the acute phase of wound healing ends. I hypothesize that apoptosis is caused by declining thrombin levels that occur during the resolution of the acute phase of the wound healing process 18 19 . That Factor VII plays a major role in regulating the wound healing process is consistent with the fact that wound healing and scab formation appear to remain near normal in the absence of Factor VIII 297 .

It is known that proliferating fibroblasts are exquisitely sensitive to hypoxia and acidosis which may cause inadvertent apoptosis and that the early stages of capillary formation that take place in the wound healing process may be disrupted by a variety of stressful stimuli 278 . This may explain the poor wound healing and increased incidence of wound infection associated with uncontrolled surgical stress. I hypothesize that proliferating fibroblast cells are inherently fragile and susceptible to apoptosis and are critically dependent on adequate but not excessive levels of thrombin to multiply and function correctly.

More than 150 years ago Rudolf Virchow stated his famous Triad of postulates that must be present in order for blood coagulation to occur 1. blood flow stasis 2. hypercoagulability of blood and 3. tissue crushing. The understanding of how coagulation occurs has changed little since Virchow s time and the mechanisms of these postulates have yet to be explained.

Although it seems intuitively logical the Cascade theory of blood coagulation is dauntingly complex and confusing and exhibits numerous shortcomings and inconsistencies. It fails to provide a clear explanation of the postulates of Virchow s Triad. It implies that enzymatic blood proteins engage in a series of confusing and cross related interactions that culminate in the formation of fibrin but offers no explanation of how fibrin might control either hemostasis or localized clot formation. It offers few clues as to how so potent a system might cause disease or be affected by it. It fails to explain the perturbations in blood viscosity coagulability and rheology that are commonly associated with disease processes. These are but a few of its more obvious shortcomings. Worse yet many of the laboratory tests that have been used both to study the cascade theory and perform clinical testing are inadequately standardized indirect in nature or simultaneously test multiple reactions and thus they may produce confusing or contradictory results. For example published studies have variously attributed direct platelet activation to thrombin Factor VIII Factor VII and collagen. Inhibition of the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin has been attributed to both thrombin and Plasmin Activator Inhibitor 1 PAI I 68 . Factor VII activation has been confusingly attributed to both exposed collagen and Tissue Factor when it would appear that both Tissue Factor and collagen are present in the same extravascular location suggesting that they might be one and the same. The effect of this confusion may be to discourage logical and systematic investigation.

Stress Theory in contrast to Cascade Theory may offer a simple explanation of Virchow s Triad as follows 

Prevailing theories of the cause of malignancy usually involve the assumption of genetic damage induced by radiation viruses or other factors that cause cells to undergo a malignant change. I propose an alternative explanation. I hypothesize that the cause of malignancy is prolonged stress related hyper elevation of systemic and local thrombin levels that over stimulate wound healing cell proliferation 298 and cause proliferating wound cells to invade normal tissues and provoke a self sustaining stress response 296 . I hypothesize that the resulting stress response maintains elevated thrombin levels so as to support continued cell proliferation and invasion 282 299 . This hypothesis is consistent with the observation that chronic ingestion of toxic chemicals is associated with increased rates of various types of malignancies in various locations but painting the same chemicals on skin surface causes greater increases in the incidence of cancer at the application site than systemically. It is also consistent with the association between malignancy and stressful conditions such as diabetes and morbid obesity.

Malignancy is known to be associated with sustained and elevated stress such as prolonged osteomyelitis infection and sepsis chronic exposure to toxic chemicals or chronic tobacco abuse. It is increased in the aftermath of major surgery a stressful event. Cancer is typically accompanied by increases in Factor VIII and thrombin accompanied by increases in blood viscosity and coagulability 300 the relation may be one of both cause and effect. Thrombin has been demonstrated to promote both mitosis 112 and malignancy 118 301 . Thrombin has been demonstrated to stimulate proliferation of brain astrocytes and may be directly associated with astrocytoma 113 302 303 . Thrombin has also been shown to play an important role in lung 304 and colon 305 adenocarcinoma. Elevated levels of thrombin may be necessary for cancer cell survival 114 . Elevations of Factor VII also promote malignancy 306 . Anti thrombin medications have been demonstrated to induce apoptosis and enhance the effectiveness of other cancer treatments 114 301 suggesting that a combination of intense anti stress and anti thrombin measures might offer an improved means of inducing apoptosis so as to treat malignancy. I hypothesize that conventional cancer therapies including surgery chemotherapy and radiation therapy are innately counter productive in that they cause stressful stimulus that tends to aggravate the malignant process they are intended to cure.

Stress Theory might offer an improved understanding of the mode of action of vasoactive drugs that are commonly employed as anesthesia adjuncts and might lead to more judicious use of these agents. The terms vasopressor vasodilator and vasoconstrictor imply that such agents owe their effects to muscular constriction or relaxation of the lumens of arteries arterioles veins and venules. These terms may be misnomers. Stress Theory and research evidence suggests that vasodilator drugs such as nitroprusside 307 nigroglycerine 308 309 epsilon aminocaproic acid EACA 310 MgSO4 311 313 and furosemide 314 interfere with the conversion of soft fibrin to insoluble fibrin or induce fibrinolysis 69 so as to prevent the closure of the Capillary Gate Mechanism reduce systemic vascular resistance and lower blood pressure. The therapeutic effects of these drugs may be explained by their ability to improve capillary bed perfusion. Vasoconstrictor drugs such as epinephrine 315 vasopressin 315 and ionized calcium 124 may promote the conversion of soft fibrin to insoluble fibrin and thereby facilitate closure of the Capillary Gate Mechanism increase systemic vascular resistance and thereby increase blood pressure. Thus vasopressors may enhance CFS effects while vasodilators may oppose them. This may better explain the mode of action and many of the side effects associated with excessive use of vasopressor drugs.

Calcium channel blockers such as Nifedipine and Verapamil are known to lower blood levels of Ca and thus may exert their effects by interfering with the formation of insoluble fibrin. They have been used successfully to treat Raynoud s Syndrome 316 . They are known to reduce blood pressure 317 blood viscosity 318 and systemic vascular resistance and preserve cardiac output 317 . They may inhibit atherosclerosis 319 and tissue hypertrophy induced by stress both effects being mediated by thrombin 30 . They have been associated with bleeding problems 320 321 . In contrast calcium preparations have been used to control bone bleeding. Calcium channel blockers have also been shown to reduce myocardial infarct size in rats 322 augment bowel and myocardial perfusion in shock states 323 prevent the no reflow phenomenon that sometimes follows successful angioplasty procedures 324 325 and are associated with beneficial effects on atherosclerosis. I hypothesize that no reflow is a manifestation of CFS in cardiac tissue. Calcium Channel blockers also appear to interfere with platelet activation. They may exert these therapeutic effects by interfering with the elevation in Ca levels associated with thrombin actions 6 .

Local anesthetics have well recognized systemic anesthetic anti inflammatory and anti coagulant effects 326 328 . The anti coagulant effects and anti inflammatory effects are unexplained. Their anti arrhythmic effects are presently attributed to their supposed ability to stabilize nervous conduction pathways in the heart. I propose an alternative explanation. I hypothesize that local anesthetics anesthetize the exposed nerve endings of the SNS in the vascular endothelium and prevent the release of Factor VIII. I hypothesize that local anesthetics achieve their anti arrhythmic actions by reversing CFS and tissue ischemia in nervous pulmonary 329 and cardiac tissue thereby restoring is stable function. I hypothesize that the anti inflammatory and anti coagulant effects of local anesthetics are likewise explained by inhibition of Factor VIII release and lowered levels of thrombin activity. When administered via conduction anesthetic techniques they may block sympathetic nerves directly also preventing the release of Factor VIII plus small amounts may escape into systemic circulation and exert additional effects.

Surgeons frequently employ mixtures of local anesthetics and epinephrine to simultaneously control surgical pain and effect hemostasis 330 331 . In most cases this approach works well 332 but in certain patients the presence of local anesthetics is associated with persistent oozing 333 . There have been reports of serious hematoma formation that has accompanied the use of local anesthetic injections of tissues 334 . I hypothesize that these occasional manifestations of inadequate hemostasis are caused by mild cases of von Willebrand s Disease in which the effects of local anesthetics further inhibit the already marginal function of the Factor VIII molecule and prevent closure of the Capillary Gate thereby causing failure of capillary hemostasis.

Streptokinase and urokinase appear to exert their effects by enhancing the operation of plasmin. Their benefits may derive from their ability to promote the dismemberment of the three dimensional insoluble fibrin matrix by plasmin reduce systemic hypercoagulability of blood and cause opening of the Capillary Gate and reduction of CFS. The sudden hypotension associated with large doses of these drugs may be explained by sudden widespread opening of the Capillary Gate that causes a decrease in systemic vascular resistance. This may also explain the re perfusion arrhythmias that are associated with these drugs which may be caused by a steal phenomenon of blood flow at the expense of compromised tissues. The therapeutic benefits associated with these drugs may derive primarily from their ability to reverse CFS during the early stages of evolving MI as thrombosis appears late in the infarction process 52 335 .

Beta blocker drugs such as propranolol are presently believed to exert their benefits by lowering heart rate and increasing diastolic filling time. However these drugs are also known to interfere with platelet activity 336 lower blood fibrinogen levels 337 and lower blood levels of Factor VIII 315 . Thus the benefits of these drugs may derive primarily from their ability to inhibit the stress mechanism.

Aspirin is presently thought to produce its therapeutic effects by inhibiting platelets. It s inhibition of other elements of the coagulation process are poorly appreciated and its beneficial effects may derive primarily from its ability to inhibit CFS rather from platelet effects 338 .

The Fight or Flight Stress Syndrome described by Hans Selye may be explained in terms of stress related effects hypercoagulability of blood capillary hemostasis increased systemic vascular resistance elevated blood pressure etc. that are activated by psychic stress and stimulus and the release of stress hormones including Factor VIII in advance of physical injury so as to minimize blood loss in the event of subsequent injury and enhance the success of fighting or escaping. The survival benefits of such a mechanism are self evident and abundant evidence exists that SNS activity levels and blood levels of Factor VIII can be elevated by fear and psychological stress sometimes accompanied by pathological manifestations of stress such as myocardial infarction stroke and sudden death.

In contrast the Surgical Stress Syndrome may be explained by the inadvertent elevation of SNS activity levels and release of Factor VIII due to inadequately controlled somatic stress despite ablation of the patient s psychic stress and conscious awareness of pain via the use of sedative hypnotic anesthetic agents. Prevailing techniques for administering general anesthesia Traditional Technique rely heavily on combinations of inhalation agents and muscle relaxants to achieve satisfactory operating conditions but these do not inhibit the effects of somatic stress. SNS tone and activity levels and blood levels of Factor VIII blood coagulability platelet activity 192 and viscosity decline on induction of anesthesia and ablation of psychic stress and awareness but then begin to rise after surgical stimulus and the onset of somatic stress. These do not reach peak levels until several hours after completion of the surgical procedure and do not return to normal levels for at least several days. Psychic stress associated with anesthesia emergence and restoration of the conscious awareness of pain may add to the stressful activation of SNS activity levels caused by tissue disruption. Stress related morbidity and mortality coincides with the rise in Factor VIII blood levels 339 .

Sufficiently activated Factor VIII levels may remain elevated for at least eight days after surgery long after SNS activity levels have returned to normal and these may be resistant to subsequent pain control measures. This prolongation of the half life of Factor VIII and its insensitivity to subsequent stress control measures may be explained by the preserving and stabilizing effects associated with the release of large amounts of VWF and or CNS Wind Up . The elevation in Factor VIII levels is mirrored by clinical manifestations of the Surgical Stress Syndrome including vasomotor instability tachycardia hypertension fever mental disorientation stroke dysrhythmias myocardial infarction bowel ileus poor wound healing wound infection and death.

Both the rise in Factor VIII levels and manifestations of surgical stress may be mitigated by the pre emptive use of conduction anesthesia 340 local anesthetic infiltration generous dosage with opioids 341 and other stress control techniques 342 that inhibit the release of Factor VIII however I hypothesize that any lapse of stress control that allows SNS activation during or for several hours after surgical tissue disruption may risk causing sustained elevations of Factor VIII that may subsequently resist control.

I hypothesize that the pathological effects associated with the Surgical Stress Syndrome are primarily caused by uncontrolled elevations of circulating Factor VIII that cause elevated thrombin activity hyperviscosity and hypercoagulability of blood systemic inflammation and prolonged and widespread closure of the Capillary Gate Mechanism that results in cellular hypoxia and tissue damage in capillary beds Capillary Fibrin Stress CFS . CFS may explain the increased incidence of stress related problems in geriatric patients 343 whose decreased cardiac index increased blood levels of Factor VIII 106 344 345 and senescent capillary beds that have been shown to have perfusion defects 346 may render them more vulnerable to CFS thrombophlebitis and atherosclerosis than younger patients. It is also consistent with the fact that most stress symptoms are closely associated with vital organs that require uninterrupted perfusion such as brain bowel heart and kidneys.

Prolonged low grade activation of the Stress Mechanism after surgical procedures may cause persistent systemic inflammation and explain the increase in malignancy mortality and morbidity in the distant aftermath of surgery noted by Terri Monk et al 347 that strongly correlates with the Traditional technique of general anesthesia that relies primarily on inhalation agents and muscle relaxants and does not effectively inhibit somatic stress.

Stress Theory suggests a new Theory of Anesthesia and alternative anesthetic goals and strategies to optimize surgical outcome. Previous attempts to develop theories of anesthesia that are confined to explaining the reversibility of the conscious awareness of pain may be inadequate. Anesthesia may be analogous to stress control. The optimal role of the anesthesiologist may be to protect his patient from stressful stimulus whenever possible and to employ adequate doses of analgesics local anesthetics and opioids to control the effects of somatic surgical stress in addition to the traditional use of hypnotics to ablate conscious awareness and the effects of psychic surgical stress. Optimal outcome may require pre emptive uninterrupted measures to control the effects of both psychic and somatic surgical stress and prevent hyper activation of the Stress Mechanism. The term anesthesia which means loss of sensation may be inadequate to describe this role. For lack of a better term I call this antinociception anesthesia .

Traditional approaches to anesthesia rely primarily on combinations of inhalation agents and muscle relaxants. This combination provides good surgical conditions and apparent safety and predictability however Stress Theory suggests that the persistent elevations in systemic vascular resistance and blood viscosity and coagulability associated with this technique may be caused by inadequately controlled somatic stress that may increase risk. The associated increases in blood pressure are customarily treated with increased concentrations of inhalation agent or intravenous hypnotic agents in the belief that hypnotic agents reduce sympathetic tone and activity levels. However neither hypnotics nor muscle relaxants prevent the release of hormones in response to somatic stress and large doses of hypnotics are known to cause direct myocardial depression. Hypnotics may thus reduce blood pressure by depressing cardiac output rather than by controlling SNS activity. Low blood pressure is accordingly viewed with alarm by anesthesiologists who regard it primarily as a warning of dangerous cardiac depression caused by anesthetic agents. In consequence opioids and conduction anesthesia techniques are often avoided or used with great caution due to their tendency to cause hypotension when combined with hypnotics. In addition traditional anesthesia techniques typically employ deliberate hypocarbia which may be inherently counterproductive and which may cause dangerous respiratory depression in the presence of generous opioid dosage. This further discourages the use of opioids.

Stress Theory suggests that blood pressure may be an inadequate and misleading standard for anesthesia monitoring and record keeping purposes. Hypotension in the presence of the Traditional technique of general anesthesia where uncontrolled somatic stress routinely causes elevations in systemic vascular resistance is properly regarded as a warning of cardiac depression. In contrast moderate hypotension in the presence of modern stress control techniques that employ opioids and local anesthetics in doses adequate to control somatic stress may signal the opening of the Capillary Gate reduction in systemic vascular resistance improved capillary bed perfusion and the establishment of effective and desirable stress control conditions. This effect has been demonstrated most clearly in the case of combined epidural general anesthesia techniques where increased tissue perfusion 348 and oxygenation 85 together with improved outcome and reductions in the incidence of symptoms of Surgical Stress 349 89 have been demonstrated despite significant reductions in blood pressure. Similar improvements in outcome together with synergistic reductions of SNS tone and blood pressure appear to occur with combinations of inhalation agents and opioids 350 353 . A similar effect may explain successful therapeutic regimens for congestive heart failure that combine fibrinolytic agents such as NTP and NTG that lower systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure with inotropes such as dopamine that increase cardiac output. Reductions in blood pressure may reflect benefit under such circumstances. It may be that alternative means of evaluating perfusion and oxygenation can offer a monitoring standard that is more useful and less confusing than blood pressure.

Modern general anesthetic approaches consist of a two drug process involving combinations of an analgesic opioid or local anesthetic and a hypnotic such as an inhalation agent that synergize each other s effects via their respective abilities to depress SNS and CNS Central Nervous System activity. This can be visualized in the form of a three dimensional bologram . Opioids and local anesthetics produce a marked reduction in the level of hypnotic required and vice versa the relationship is highly non linear and neither type of agent produces satisfactory results when used alone. This synergism of hypnotics and analgesics is consistent with Stress Theory which suggests that psychic and somatic stress cause SNS activation via semi autonomous pathways.

These scientific principles may be exploited to optimize desirable drug effects minimize those not desired and devise an antinociceptive general anesthetic strategy that may optimize outcome in the manner of combined epidural general techniques. Opioids control somatic stress in a dose related manner but cause minimal depression of cardiac output. Inhalation agents produce optimal control of psychic stress in below MAC concentrations that ablate awareness but large concentrations progressively depress cardiac output. Therefore small concentrations of inhalation agents may be combined with generous doses of opioids to achieve simultaneous control of both somatic and psychic stress thereby theoretically optimizing control of SNS activity levels and the Stress Mechanism with minimal direct depression of cardiac output. The interaction may also be exploited to accelerate anesthetic induction and emergence and reduce the need for muscle relaxants which operate via a separate mechanism and do not synergize the effects of either opioids or hypnotics. The respiratory depression that may accompany this technique can be easily managed with common respiratory support techniques that allow mild hypercarbia to offset the respiratory effects of opioid and encourage cardiac output.

In the left and rightmost edges of the surface are the sigmoid concentration response relation for drug A and drug B respectively. The three radial lines on the surface show the sigmoid concentration response relation for three fixed ratios of drug A and drug B. The effect for any combination of drug A and drug B is described by the response surface. The 25 50 and 75 effect isoboles as shown. 354 .

Stress Theory might inspire fresh approaches to anesthesia. Intravenous lidocaine infusion a once popular anesthetic technique in North America was abandoned after the introduction of Halothane. Surviving descriptions of the technique 355 suggest that lidocaine dosage needed to achieve adequate analgesia was associated with a pronounced cutaneous flush and mild hypotension that might be explained by reduction of Factor VIII blood levels and widespread opening of the Capillary Gate. Lidocaine infusions have been shown to control thrombophlebitis 356 and to reduce MAC 357 which may be explained by their ability to inhibit somatic stress and the release of Factor VIII 358 359 . They might offer a relatively safe and effective to achieve antinociceptive anesthesia if combined with hypnotic agents and respiratory support.

This section discusses the interpretations of selected diseases and syndromes in terms of Stress Theory and illustrate how the Theory may provide simplified and improved explanations of observed phenomena.

SIRS Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome 360 has four identified components vasodilation increased microvascular permeability increased leukocyte and platelet activation and adhesion and hypercoagulability 361 . It tends to be associated with conditions of stress such as trauma sepsis 139 pancreatitis and bums 360 . Multi Organ Failure Syndrome MOFS also a Critical Care phenomenon associated with sepsis and trauma and frequently observed in the Intensive Care Unit is associated with the same types of extreme stress and exhibits similar symptoms 95 362 . These may be closely related stress states caused by activation of Factors VII and VIII. SIRS might be explained by relatively greater activation of Factor VII causing inflammatory effects to predominate and MOFS might be explained by relatively greater activation of Factor VIII 363 causing the effects of hyper elevations of blood fibrin levels to predominate. Alternatively SIRS may represent the prelude to MOFS 364 or a lower grade activation of the Stress Mechanism. Extreme activations of the Stress Mechanism and elevations of circulating insoluble fibrin might explain the increased incidence of DIC 246 365 and the fibrin deposits 366 that appear in vital organs in MOFS 366 368 .

ARDS is characterized by elevations in Factor VIII is strongly associated with DIC 369 appears to be part of Multi Organ Failure Syndrome 370 and serves as a prototypical example of fibrin induced organ damage that disrupts the function of kidneys bowel liver and other organs in severe stress states. Massive deposits of fibrin have been documented in pulmonary capillaries in ARDS 371 372 . I hypothesize that stress related fibrin deposits in alveolar capillaries are the cause of the ARDS syndrome. Because of the large capillary reserves that exist in normal lung the onset of ARDS tends to be occult and insidious. Pulmonary vascular resistance is normally very low and the accumulating fibrin may cause few noticeable symptoms until fibrin deposits have accumulated beyond a critical threshold that causes increased pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary perfusion pressures and right heart failure. This would explain the apparent sudden onset of clinical symptoms that commonly inspires ineffective and potentially counter productive efforts to treat the syndrome using ventilation techniques. Surviving patients often suffer residual pulmonary fibrosis and permanent lung damage as the stress mechanism consolidates the fibrin deposits into sclerotic lesions that reduce capillary reserve. I hypothesize that a similar stress phenomenon resulting in acute thrombin mediated deposition of fibrin in lung capillaries combined with thrombin mediated fibroblast activation 373 may largely explain asthma 374 High Altitude Pulmonary Edema HAPE 375 378 cor pulmonale 379 the pulmonary manifestations of acute CHF and other lung pathologies 15 .

I hypothesize that shock states including cardiogenic shock septic shock and hypovolemic shock are caused by combinations of stress related closure of the Capillary Gate that causes increased systemic vascular resistance and CFS 187 and low cardiac output. The SNS may regulate closure of the Capillary Gate so as to direct limited cardiac output preferentially to vital organs such as the heart and brain to preserve life while other tissues may suffer hypoxic damage due to exaggerated CFS under such circumstances. Shock states are associated with elevations of SNS tone systemic vascular resistance Factor VIII blood viscosity and coagulability and blood levels of insoluble fibrin 380 . Second Tier organs such as kidneys and bowel that normally require high perfusion rates may be particularly vulnerable to CFS under such circumstances and the stress related elevations in blood levels of insoluble fibrin may explain the renal casts 381 382 acute tubular necrosis and bowel ileus that occur in such conditions. I hypothesize that the heart and brain are relatively resistant to the effects of CFS but not immune. This might be partly explained by the activity of astrocytes in the brain 64 which may mediate the release of both fibrinolytic and fibrin enhancing substances from the vascular endothelium that preserve brain capillary blood flow in hypotensive states 383 . Astrocytes may be specialized neurons that control the release of stress related hormones from the vascular endothelium 64 that regulate the Capillary Gate in addition to the Stress Mechanism. The activity of astrocytes may thus largely explain cerebral autoregulation .

Normal pregnancy is a stressful condition 384 that is associated with above normal levels of Factor VIII and blood coagulability 141 242 . It is associated with other stress related conditions such as diabetes and may aggravate them 385 . Eclampsia is a stress state that involves levels of blood coagulability and Factor VIII that are elevated above those of normal pregnancy 40 188 and the severity of eclamptic symptoms mirrors the elevations in Factor VIII and blood coagulability 386 387 . A common source of additional stress that may convert a normal pregnancy into an eclamptic state is sepsis resulting from pyelonephritis 388 389 . The risk of eclampsia is increased by the presence of other stress states such as diabetes 390 . In the most severe manifestation of eclampsia known as HELLP Syndrome there is severe risk of DIC 218 391 that may be initiated by amniotic fluid embolus 392 and visible fibrin deposits appear in various organs causing disturbed organ function 243 244 393 . Fibrin deposition on placental villi interferes with fetal growth and development and may cause miscarriage. Fibrin deposits in the liver can disturb liver function and cause the organ to swell and burst with fatal consequences.

I hypothesize that occult fibrin deposits in the renal arterioles disturb juxtaglomerular apparatus function and cause activation of the renin angiotensin aldosterone reflex in a manner analogous to that observed in classical Goldblatt kidney. This might explain the severe water retention cerebral and peripheral edema and electrolyte disturbances observed in eclampsia. I hypothesize that a similar stress mechanism explains so called essential hypertension and may be the major cause of renal failure 394 .

Magnesium sulfate the most effective treatment for eclampsia has powerful anticoagulant properties 312 and reduces blood fibrin levels. It has recently been shown to be surprisingly effective in the treatment of pheochromocytoma symptoms 313 perhaps via similar properties. Magnesium deficiency is associated with arrhythmnias hypertension neural and psychiatric disturbances 395 and sudden ischemic death. I hypothesize that the therapeutic effects of magnesium sulfate are explained by its ability to interfere with the formation of insoluble fibrin open the Capillary Gate and inhibit CFS 311 396 . I hypothesize that it may offer an effective treatment for other acute manifestations of stress such as ARDS and multi organ failure.

Diabetes is a stressful condition in which cellular glucose deprivation causes SNS activation and elevations in blood levels of stress hormones including glucagon and Factor VIII. This may be opposed by parasympathetic activity 306 . The effects of glucagon cause elevations of blood glucose that characterize the disease but evidence that elevated levels of blood glucose cause tissue damage is lacking. The elevation of stress hormones appears to interfere with the transport of glucose into cells causing additional stress and further aggravating the problem in the form of a vicious cycle . The chronic stressful stimulus causes persistent elevations in fibrinogen 274 fibrin viscosity and coagulability that disturb blood rheology 236 292 and microcirculation 397 . Chronic CFS may explain the inexorable tissue and organ damage that occurs over time 398 . Careful management of cellular hypoglycemia using insulin and measures to alleviate stress and direct treatments that reduce blood viscosity have been shown to improve capillary blood flow 399 and diabetic symptoms 400 .

Amyloidosis may play an important role in diabetes 401 403 as a cause and or an effect. Amyloidosis is associated with increased fibrin turnover which is characteristic of stress states and there is a strong correlation between diabetes and Alzheimer s Disease which is caused by amyloid deposits. There is evidence that amyloid protein may be involved with the destruction of insulin producing cells in the pancreas 402 404 .

The known increases in morbidity and mortality associated with the treatment of diabetes using sulfonamide compounds may be explained by the fact that these drugs cause a lowering of blood glucose levels thereby aggravating stressful cellular glucose starvation SNS activation and glucagons release. The observed increase in morbidity and to mortality associated with these drugs may be due to their tendency to activate the Stress Mechanism.

Stress Theory suggests numerous avenues of research and treatment. Additional research is needed to challenge Stress Theory and clarify its mechanisms. Animal research is needed to determine the most effective anesthetic approach to maintain capillary perfusion and tissue oxygenation. The possible role of other enzymatic proteins known to be associated with the coagulation process must be evaluated with respect to the Theory. For example Factor V Leiden 405 406 which appears to oppose the effects of thrombin and Factor VIII might function to maintain the Capillary Gate in an open state except in conditions of acidosis and low calcium 407 . The role of Factors IX Christmas Factor and X 408 may be clarified 409 .

Studies are needed to evaluate the possibility that combinations of anti thrombin agents Factor VII inhibitors and stress control techniques such as lidocaine infusions may offer more effective treatment of malignancy rheumatoid diseases eclampsia diabetes and other pathologic manifestations of stress mechanism hyperactivity. Rheopheresis therapies may relieve CFS in a wide variety of pathologies 410 . Research may reveal better approaches to controlling surgical stress and CFS safely and conveniently via modification of the stress mechanism at several levels. Medications and treatments might be variously directed at the hypothalamus Sympathetic Nervous System Vascular Endothelium thrombin 411 insoluble fibrin plasminogen or Factors VII VIII and XIII.

New anesthesia monitoring devices might be developed that could offer ways to detect activation of the stress mechanism and rapidly evaluate the success of stress control measures and treatments 412 415 . Perhaps pulse oximeter technology could be modified to detect elevations in the blood levels of insoluble fibrin. EKG machines could be merged with ANSAR technology and non invasive computerized cardiac output technologies to provide continuous appraisal of stress related effects. Non invasive is techniques to monitor tissue oxygen saturation as a reflection of capillary perfusion might be possible. Adapting oscillometric blood pressure technology to monitor variations in blood turbulence as a reflection of blood levels of insoluble thrombin may offer yet another possibility. Better clinical strategies for controlling the stress mechanism during and after surgery may be sought.

Improved understanding of blood viscosity and rheology might offer better guides to red cell and platelet transfusion. New intravenous fluid preparations might be devised that would better maintain physiologic blood viscosity coagulability 416 and rheology and produce improved vasomotor stability compared to presently available colloids 417 and crystalloids. Cardiac bypass pump technology might be modified so as to impart physiologic levels of turbulence and mixing into the infuscate this might mitigate pump head syndrome and coagulability problems associated with bypass surgery. Similar considerations might apply to the design of artificial heart and ventricular assist devices.

The problems associated with blood transfusion 239 and over utilization of crystalloids and colloids might be reduced by the availability of such an intravenous fluid. Unexpected benefits might accrue from improved maintenance of normal levels of blood viscosity and rheology such as reduction in the incidence of PONV the cause of which remains poorly understood.

Stress Theory might inspire new techniques and medications to minimize spinal cord damage in the presence of acute injury speed wound healing reduce infection and enable tissue repairs that are presently unimaginable. It may lead to better techniques for athletic conditioning and performance. It might also suggest practical ways to extend longevity via better prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis and amyloidosis.

For example Antinociception Anesthesia method of general anesthesia improves surgical outcome by controlling and reducing psychic and somatic surgical stress simultaneously and is preferably employed continuously before during and after invasive surgical procedures to prevent surgical stress syndrome. Antinociception Anesthesia may additionally be employed in the treatment of malignancies and in treating atherosclerosis. Antinociception Anesthesia is based upon preventing pathological elevations in Factor VIII blood levels that increase blood viscosity and decrease capillary bed perfusion a.k.a. capillary fibrin stress that cause surgical stress syndrome. Antinociception Anesthesia preferably comprises at least one step and may comprise multiple steps from the group consisting of controlling psychic stress controlling somatic stress avoiding hypocarbia avoiding hypoxemia avoiding hypovolemia avoiding hypervolemia and other forms of non surgical stressful stimuli inducing mild hypercarbia. and maintaining normal body temperatures at all times.

For example psychic stress may be controlled by using Sevoflurance or equivalent anesthetic inhalation agents or intravenous hypnotic drugs. Where Sevoflurance is used it is preferably used in about 0.5 MAC concentrations.

Somatic stress may be controlled by using Fentanyl which is preferably administered intravenously and may be administered in a loading dose of from about 2 to about 10 micrograms kg before surgical incision. Alternately an equivalent dosage with other opioid medications such as sufentanil may be used. Treatment of somatic stress is may be supplemented by employing additional doses of opioid to prevent sympathetic nervous system activation and or the respiratory rate may be maintained between about 8 to about 12 breaths minute before emergence. Somatic stress may also be controlled using intravenous infusions of lidocaine as an alternative to or as a supplement to treatment with opioids. For example an intravenous infusion of lidocaine at about 0.05 to about 1 mg kg hour may be used to prevent somatic stress.

Mild hypercarbia may be induced by endotracheal intubation and the use of controlled ventilation preferably with continuous monitoring. Mild hypercarbia is preferably at about 50 torr to support respiratory drive in the presence of opioid dosage and to encourage cardiac output and tissue perfusion. Also mask induction is preferably employed for increased safety and to eliminate the need for intravenous hypnotic agents that may prolong emergence. The above referenced techniques to reduce activation of the Stress Syndrome may also be employed to treat malignant tumors metastatic malignancies and systemic inflammatory states.

Malignant tumors metastatic malignancies and systemic inflammatory conditions may be treated by techniques and medications that inhibit the Stress Mechanism via different pathways so as to synergistically reduce the production and or function of thrombin. The reduction in thrombin may occur systemically and or locally. Methods to reduce thrombin in the treatment of tumors metastatic malignancies and systemic inflammatory conditions may include induction and maintenance of Antinociception Anesthesia as described herein throughout the treatment process to control psychic and somatic stress and Factor VIII levels. Additionally medications that reduce the activity levels of Factor VII may be employed as a supplement or as an alternative.

By way of example only Factor VII inhibitors such as LMWH low molecular weight heparin or tinzaparin UFH unfractionated heparin TFPI tissue factor pathway inhibitor synthesized by the vascular endothelium anti Factor Vlla and other blockers of Factor Vlla Xa TFPI complex Reviparin rNAPc2 nematode hookworm anticoagulant protein recombinant tissue factor pathway inhibitor AP 1 monoclonal anti TF antibody PHA 798 enoxaparin dalteparin compound 34 pyrazinone TF VIIa inhibitor available from Pfizer and low doses of warfarin may be used alone or in combination with other coagulation inhibitors to decrease the above noted effects of the stress syndrome.

To decrease the effects of the stress syndrome and to aid in treating conditions such as for example atherosclerosis malignant tumors metastatic malignancies and systemic inflammatory states a suitable dosage of tinzaparin may be from about 75 U kg qd to about 175 U kg qd for enoxaparin a suitable dosage may be about 1 mg kg bid and for dalterparin a suitable dosage may be about 120 U Kg bid and a suitable dosage of Raviparin may be about 10 mg kg or about 30 to about 50 IU kg Q about 12 hours. A suitable dosage of UFH for the treatments described herein may be determined on the basis of APTT activated partial thromboplastin time 2 times normal or whole blood clotting time 3 times control value. A suitable dosage of rNAPc2 may be about 3 micrograms kg. A suitable dosage of PHA 798 may be from about 100 to about 200 mcg kg minute.

Coagulation inhibitors may also be used in combination with apoptosis to treat malignancy. For example coagulation inhibitors in combination with chemotherapy agents such as camptothecin and fas ligand may be used.

Techniques and medications that inhibit the Stress Mechanism and or reduce the production and or function of thrombin including for the treatment of tumors metastatic malignancies atherosclerosis and systemic inflammatory conditions may additionally include the administration of medications that reduce the activity levels of thrombin Factor X and Factor Xa and techniques that avoid hypothermia hypocarbia hypoxia hyperoxia and other stressful stimuli that may activate the stress syndrome. For example rTAP recombinant tick anti coagulant protein tinzaparin Fondaparinux and rNAPc2 Indraparinux and Parnaparin may be used to reduce the levels of Factor X and Factor Xa. A suitable dosage of rTAP may be about 1 mg kg bolus followed by 3 mg kg per hour. A suitable dosage of tinzaparin may be about 175 U kg. A suitable dosage of Fondaparinux may be from about 2.2 to about 10 Qacute over D . A suitable dosage of rNAPc2 may be from about 0.3 to about 5 microgram kg and a suitable dosage of Parnaparin may be about 100 IU kg.

Suitable thrombin inhibitors may include for example warfarin coumadin annexin V Ximelagatran Melagatran hirudin bivalirudin and argatroban. A suitable dosage of Ximelagatran may be from about 24 to about 36 mg bid orally. Melagatran may be administered intravenously or subcutaneously. A suitable dosage of warfarin may be from about INR 2.0 to about INR 3.0. As suitable dosage of Hirudin may be from about 0.006 to about 0.24 mg kg hour IV infusion. A suitable dosage of bivalirudin may be about 0.75 mg kg bolus and about 1.75 mg kg hour infusion. A suitable dosage of argatroban may be from about 0.5 to about 2 micrograms kg minute.

Suitable inhibitors of Factor VIII may include for example local anesthetic infusions opioids and sedative hypnotic agents and inhalation agents and combinations thereof.

The above referenced compounds and medications that inhibit the Stress Mechanism and Factor VIII Factor VII Factor X Factor Xa and thrombin may be delivered by employing a skin patch or skin peel. For example the above referenced medications may be delivered via a skin patch or skin peel to induce localized apoptosis to treat skin malignancies and other abnormal skin lesions. Suitable skin patch and skin peel technologies may include materials marketed by Zars Inc. of Salt Lake City Utah.

Avoiding hypothermia hypocarbia hypoxia hyperoxia and other stressful stimuli that may cause activation of the stress mechanism may also be used alone or in combination with the methods and compositions disclosed herein to reduce the stress mechanism and to treat atherosclerosis improve surgical outcome treat tumors metastatic malignancies and systemic inflammatory conditions. For example use of tube feeding techniques to the distal ileum may be employed to prevent activation of the stress syndrome due to starvation during the treatment process. Careful padding may be used to protect the patient s body form trauma that might hemorrhage in the presence of suppression of blood coagulation. Use of special beds to regularly change the patient s body position and thereby minimize the risk of pressure injury may be used. The patient may be emerged from anesthesia after completion of treatment and restoration of safe levels of blood coagulability.

Atherosclerosis may be treated and reversed by decreasing the stress mechanism by way of medications and techniques and or by increasing blood turbulence and mixing. For example ultrasound may be used to increase blood turbulence and mixing. Ultrasound may be induced in the blood via external ultrasound devices and or induced by pulsed laser radiation. The pulsed laser radiation may be delivered via an intra arterial fiberoptic catheter. Ultrasound may also be generated externally and delivered to the intra arterial treatment location via an intra arterial catheter or generated at the tip of an intra arterial catheter by a miniaturized ultrasound generator device.

Blood viscosity may also be decreased by reducing blood levels of red cell mass by reducing blood levels of fibrin and fibrinogen by plasmapheresis or medications or combinations thereof.

An intravenous blood substitute solution preferably comprises fibrinogen albumen and electrolytes. The electrolytes may include sodium potassium magnesium and trace elements found in normal blood. The fibrinogen may comprise human fibrinogen animal fibrinogen and combinations thereof. The blood substitute may be used for rapidly restoring normal blood viscosity rheology osmolarity turbulence and mixing and hemodynamic stability.

While the present invention has been described with regards to particular embodiments it is recognized that additional variations of the present invention may be devised without departing from the inventive concept.

