---

title: Data storage and retrieval system with intensional category representations to provide dynamic categorization of information items
abstract: A system and method for applying intensional category representations to provide dynamic categorization of information items in a data storage and retrieval system is disclosed. The disclosed system may apply pattern recognition techniques during information storage and retrieval to provide dynamic categorization of information items. Information items are categorized as they are observed. Information items may each be associated with one or more categories. An information item may become a member of a category either initially, when it is created, or subsequently by dynamic acquisition of certain properties. Category membership may be further be acquired or lost when property values are changed, and/or as a result of changes to properties or property values of referenced or referring information items. The disclosed information storage and retrieval system operates to categorize objects as they evolve over time. Properties may be added to information items, thus changing the structure of the information item, with the result that new functionality is dynamically associated with the information items.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07412452&OS=07412452&RS=07412452
owner: PI Corporation
number: 07412452
owner_city: Kirkland
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050120
---
The present invention relates generally to the field of information storage and retrieval and more specifically to an information storage and retrieval system having intensional category representations to provide dynamic categorization of information items.

Many types of software systems have been developed for storing and retrieving data. Relational databases are one type of solution that performs well in the specialized use areas they are designed for. However relational databases are not applicable to all problems. It is generally understood that the performance of relational databases suffers when they are used to provide run time flexibility in the information categories i.e. tables being stored.

In the area of non relational systems some systems are referred to as semi structured in that they involve the storage and retrieval of semi structured information such as XML extensible Markup Language documents. For example non relational systems may be more suitable than relational systems for the storage management retrieval and exchange of personal information and or information relating to information workers.

Moreover areas that have traditionally been approached using non relational systems may not actually be cleanly reducible to a set of documents. Accordingly existing semi structured approaches may be inadequate for a category of data storage and retrieval applications. This category includes the storage and retrieval of personal information and is characterized by high variability of the structure of the stored information. For example a user of a personal information database may wish to store information regarding multiple personal contacts. However when various communication modes are considered the contact information stored for each contact is highly variable from contact to contact and potentially also over time. Moreover the functional context for each contact is also highly variable since each piece of stored contact information for a given contact may or may not be relevant to a specific communication application. While existing systems using an XML based approach have fared better than relational databases with regard to this problem the information being represented is really not hierarchical and imposing a hierarchy is the defining feature of the XML approach.

Additionally if it is desirable to share parts of documents in a document based system there arises the problem of maintaining different document versions and the resulting dependencies become too complex for a system in which the documents are totally independent. File systems also suffer from the same problem since they are based on an independent container model.

For the above reasons and others it would be desirable to have a new system for information storage and retrieval that is applicable to problems not amenable to solution using relational databases or using existing non relational systems such as existing semi structured document based systems and necessarily having highly variable information structure. The new system should be applicable to storage management retrieval and exchange of various specific kinds of information including personal information and or information relating to information workers.

To address the above described and other shortcomings of previous systems a system and method for applying intensional category representations to provide dynamic categorization of information items in a data storage and retrieval system is disclosed. The dynamic categorization of information items provided by the disclosed system is performed automatically independently with respect to information item creation or modification and responsive to dynamic category creation or modification. Information items may be categorized as they are observed by the disclosed system either in response to receipt of a query or independent of query receipt. The disclosed system may apply pattern recognition or other appropriate techniques to information items during information storage and retrieval to provide dynamic categorization of the information items.

Each information item in the disclosed system may be categorized such that it is associated with one or more categories. An information item may become a member of one or more categories as a result of its initial properties at its creation though the categorization itself may be delayed to a point in time subsequent to creation of the information item. The categorization of an information item may further reflect properties acquired subsequent to its creation. The disclosed information storage and retrieval system classifies information items as they evolve over time as categories are also dynamically added and or modified over time. As a result of the disclosed categorization that detects the addition or removal of properties in the information items over time functionality associated with those properties can be dynamically applied to the information items. Moreover since the categories may also be added and or modified over time the disclosed system can dynamically vary the functionality associated with certain properties and applied to the information items.

The disclosed system advantageously provides a model for data storage and retrieval which is at least as flexible as previous XML document based semi structured information representation approaches and provides sufficiently high performance in terms of data and knowledge retrieval time to meet various specific application requirements.

As shown in components in an illustrative embodiment of the disclosed system in a data storage and retrieval kernel include an information item and category creation and modification interface an information retrieval interface a number of Information Items and a number of Categories . The Information Items and Categories are stored separately in that they are logically independent and the Categories maintain no references e.g. pointers to or identifications e.g. names of the items they include. Advantageously the structures of the information items within the Information Items may be highly variable. First different ones of the Information Items may include different numbers of properties having associated values. Thus the Information Items may each have different numbers of properties. Additionally the number of properties for a given one of the Information Items may change over time. For purposes of illustration the Information Item is shown including Properties each having a corresponding one of the Values . Values of the properties for the Information Items may also change dynamically.

The Information Items may include any specific types of information. In one embodiment the Information Items include personal information maintained by individuals themselves during and or for their general daily and or professional activities and the properties of each of the Information Items may accordingly include corresponding personal information properties. Such personal information properties may for example include various types of contact information such as postal addresses electronic mail addresses telephone numbers persons names and any other type of contact information. Personal information properties may further include information regarding personal activities to do lists schedule information including appointment dates and times and any other type of personal information. The preceding examples of personal information properties are given only for purposes of explanation and the disclosed system is not so limited. Accordingly the disclosed system may be implemented in embodiments using any other specific type of personal information or any other non personal information.

Each of the categories includes or is associated with a predicate which may be embodied as a software routine or software routine with a Boolean result. The predicate for a category provides a test for an information item to which the predicate is applied. If an information item passes the test defined by the predicate of a category then the information item is considered to be contained within the category and an association may be formed between the information item and the category. The disclosed system uses intensional category assignment in that each category includes a predicate which applied to an information item logically returns true or false with respect to whether the information item belongs in that category. This approach is distinct from previous extensional approaches which rely on information item identities and categories that include the information item lists. In traditional relational databases only extensional categorization has been supported represented by the table membership of the records in the database. Such existing systems have not supported testing of the contents of a record to determine which table it belongs to.

General definitions for intensional definition may be found in various sources. In the area of logic an intensional definition gives the meaning of a term by giving all the properties required for something to fall under that definition the necessary and sufficient conditions for belonging to a set being defined. One example of an intensional definition of bachelor is unmarried man. This is because being an unmarried man is an essential property of something referred to as a bachelor. Being an unmarried man is a necessary condition of being a bachelor one cannot be a bachelor without being an unmarried man. Being an unmarried man is also a sufficient condition of being a bachelor any unmarried man is a bachelor. The intensional definition approach is opposite to the extensional definition approach which defines by listing everything falling under a definition. Accordingly an extensional definition of bachelor would be a listing of all the unmarried men in the world. In this regard intensional definitions are best used when something has a clearly defined set of properties and work well for sets that are too large to list in an extensional definition. Moreover it is impossible to give an extensional definition for an infinite set but an intensional one can often be stated concisely. For example while the infinite number of even numbers makes them impossible to list they can be defined intensionally by saying that even numbers are integer multiples of two.

The predicates used in the assignment process provided by the disclosed system advantageously provide intensional definitions for corresponding ones of the categories . Accordingly each predicate of the disclosed system tests the properties of an information item to determine if that information item belongs to the category defined by the predicate. The intensional definition of categories in the disclosed system enables categorization of information items at run time and accordingly allows information items to dynamically change their categorical membership. The disclosed system enables checking information items at any time to determine whether they have changed category membership. Each category must accordingly at least include a category name and a predicate which can be applied to an information item to determine if the information item belongs to the category.

In the embodiment of each of the categories has a corresponding predicate. Thus category corresponds to Predicate A category corresponds to Predicate B category corresponds to Predicate C and category corresponds to Predicate D . While for purposes of concise illustration only four example categories are shown in the categories of the disclosed system is not so limited and may be embodied using any specific number of categories.

The predicates for the categories may each be satisfied by a different set of the information items . If one of the information items satisfies any one of the predicates for the categories it may be considered as belonging to the corresponding category for any processing or handling that might be associated with that corresponding category at any point during the processing of that information item. Additionally if one of the information items satisfies a predicate for one of the categories then that information item can be included when all the members of the category are enumerated or otherwise processed at any point.

The information item and category creation and modification interface permits information items to be created and or modified dynamically and independently permits categories to be created dynamically. The interface may be embodied to allow information item creation and or modification operations to be performed directly or indirectly by a user for example in an embodiment where the disclosed system stores personal information for that user. Such user controlled actions may for example be provided by through graphical user interface GUI or the like associated with or provided by the interface . The interface may also or alternatively allow information item creation and or modification by software programs and or processes external to the data storage and retrieval kernel . Such actions may for example be provided through an application programming interface API or the like associated with or provided by the interface .

In a preferred embodiment item modifications are provided in two different ways depending on how categories are configured. Synchronous categories require that item modification operations are reflected immediately in the results of any subsequent information retrieval operations. In this way a category can be configured such that when an item modification affecting the membership of that category returns a completion status all subsequent queries will return results that completely reflect that modification. Asynchronous categories do not require immediate consistency with the modifications in subsequent information retrieval operations.

The information retrieval interface permits retrieval of information items dynamically and independently from the categorization of the information items based on the categories . The interface may be embodied to allow information item retrieval to be performed directly or indirectly by a user for example in an embodiment where the disclosed system stores personal information for that user. Such user controlled actions may for example be provided by through graphical user interface GUI or the like associated with or provided by the interface . Information item retrieval through the interface is accomplished in a preferred embodiment based on input information retrieval queries including one or more category names associated with corresponding ones of the categories . The information items returned in response to such queries reflect the categorization of information items based on the ones of categories indicated by the category names contained in such queries. The interface may be embodied such that any specific query language including by not limited to SQL Structured Query Language or the like may be used to indicate the information items to be retrieved. The interface may also or alternatively allow information item retrieval by software programs and or processes external to the data storage and retrieval kernel . Such actions may for example be provided through an application programming interface API or the like associated with or provided by the interface .

Automatically pre computed category membership data structures may be used to support the information item retrieval interface in order to provide better response times for queries including those queries that may use category definitions as part of the query. The data structures may be created or modified automatically synchronously or asynchronously in response to the items or categories being created or modified via the information and category creation and modification interface .

Any application may operate using or based on the dynamic categorizations provided by the disclosed system. For example in one embodiment a search application or tool may operate to perform searches and apply rankings of the search results based on categorizations of information items provided by the disclosed system. In such an embodiment the search tool might respond to a search query by searching only for information items belonging to some combination of categories .

Any specific intensional definition can be used in the predicates for the categories of the disclosed system. For example a predicate may test an information item for the existence in an information item of all properties in a set of one or more properties. Or a predicate may test an information item for the presence of at least one property within a set of properties. Another type of predicate may test the cardinality of certain properties. Such a predicate may test whether an information has a specific property and whether the information item has some predetermined number of values for that property. If the information item does not have the predetermined number of values for the property then such a predicate is not satisfied.

The disclosed system may further include value based predicates which test for certain property values. Value based predicates may test any specific property for any specific value. For example these predicates may test whether a Boolean property has a true or a false value whether a zip code property has a certain zip code value whether a price property has a value between a minimum and a maximum price whether a date property is between a starting date and an ending date etc.

Another type of predicate that may be used in an embodiment of the disclosed system tests one or more referential properties of an information item. These predicates test whether a value of a property is a reference e.g. pointer to another information item belonging to a specified category or set of categories.

The above described predicate examples are given for purposes of explanation only and those skilled in the art will recognize that the disclosed system is not limited to those specific types of predicates and that other types of predicates may readily be used in the alternative or additionally.

The intensional category definitions of the disclosed system may associate various combinations of information items into categories. For example with reference to Category has Predicate A which may be satisfied by Information Item and Information Item . Category has Predicate B which may be satisfied by Information Item Information Item and Information Item . Category is shown having Predicate which may be satisfied by none of the Information Items and Category has Predicate which may be satisfied by all of the Information Items . Over time the specific ones of Information Items that satisfy specific ones of the predicates for the Categories may change as the properties of the Information Items change.

The previous examples are given for purposes of explanation only in order to illustrate the categorization process of the disclosed system. Accordingly predicates within an embodiment of the disclosed system may operate to categorize information items across specific categories in various specific combinations.

As shown in information items may pass through a series of steps or actions and or . At step the information items are either created or subsequently modified. Information items may for example be created by being manually inserted by a user through a user interface or by being automatically inserted as a result of information received over network. At step categories are either created or subsequently modified. Categories may for example be created or modified as a result of installation of an application program activities performed during execution of an application program user activities and or other events. By providing for on going introduction of new and modification of existing categories the disclosed system allows for dynamic participation of newly created modified or previously existing information items in one or more new or modified categories. A categorization step then applies the predicate or predicates associated with one or more categories to the information items in order to assign each information item to one or more categories. Step may for example be performed at the same time as creation modification or at any subsequent point in time. The categorization of an information item may reflect the run time addition of or modification to one or more properties of the information item in step for example and or the run time addition of or modification to one or more categories in step for example independent of the categorization step . Advantageously the categorization step may be performed automatically independent and asynchronous with respect to the creation and or modification of the information items and or with respect to the creation and or modification of categories allowing significant performance optimizations.

The assignment of items to one or more categories may be embodied in various ways. For example a number of automatically pre computed category membership data structures may be created or modified at step . These data structures may be used subsequently for efficiently identifying items to be retrieved that satisfy queries expressed at least in part using the category definitions.

At step the automatically computed data structures from step may be used to support user operations or information rendering such as category specific processing of user queries or requests and or category specific presentation of information items to the user based on category. For example a user can request a retrieval and display of all information items relating to one or more categories that was applied at step . Additionally the categorization at step may enable a user to conveniently request and obtain a display of all information items related to a category for a specific work project one or more application programs or any other relevant category.

The categories associated with the information items at step may also or alternatively be used to facilitate application of certain functionality to the information items at step independent from and transparent to the user. In one example where a category is used to identify those information items associated with an electronic mail email application the presence of an indication of a destination email address property within the information item may satisfy the associated predicate. Satisfaction of such a predicate may be based on a pattern matching function that tests the information item for the existence of any specific property denoting a destination email address. If such a property exists on the information item the category forms an association between the information item and the email application or provides an indication that the information item is associated with the email application. Accordingly based on the categorization provided at step possibly in response to detection of a destination email address property or the like as a property in an information item functionality provided at step may responsively present a SEND button display object to the user within a graphical user interface while the user is viewing that information item. Or in the case where the SEND button display object had previously been grayed out the disclosed system may operate to un gray the button in response to the categorization at step when the user is viewing such an information item. Thus an information item initially created as a text processing document which has subsequently had attached to it a destination email address property or the like may be automatically categorized as an email document and based on that categorization can be subsequently treated by other applications as an email message. Those skilled in the art will recognize that various other specific function may be provided at step in response to the specific categorization performed at step for an information item.

Properties or values of the information items such as the above described destination email address property may be added to modified or removed from information items during information modification at step and or in response to various user actions performed at step . Thus the disclosed system provides an application independent information item categorization step at step . The item categorization at step operates using intensional category predicates independent from any subsequent use of the categories associated with the information items and also independent from the step of modifying the information items. As an information item is recognized as a member of a new category the overall system gains any resulting advantages that come with being able to treat the item as a member of the new category. Such benefits of newly determined category membership may make the information item more useful or more easily accessible for certain purposes. Certain categories might be more significant for certain applications and may result in a reduction in the amount of work in terms of how the information item is retrieved.

The disclosed system provides significant advantages over traditional systems in which categories are established at information item creation time and maintained throughout the information item s lifetime. It allows improved flexibility in the structure in which items are represented during their lifetimes as they acquire new properties or change existing ones without needing to be recreated.

Those skilled in the art should readily appreciate that programs defining the functions of the present invention can be delivered to a computer in many forms including but not limited to a information permanently stored on non writable storage media e.g. read only memory devices within a computer such as ROM or CD ROM disks readable by a computer I O attachment b information alterably stored on writable storage media e.g. floppy disks and hard drives or c information conveyed to a computer through communication media for example using wireless baseband signaling or broadband signaling techniques including carrier wave signaling techniques such as over computer or telephone networks via a modem.

While the invention is described through the above exemplary embodiments it will be understood by those of ordinary skill in the art that modification to and variation of the illustrated embodiments may be made without departing from the inventive concepts herein disclosed. Moreover while the preferred embodiments are described in connection with various illustrative program command structures one skilled in the art will recognize that they may be embodied using a variety of specific command structures. Accordingly the invention should not be viewed as limited except by the scope and spirit of the appended claims.

