---

title: Oxidation resistant coatings for ultra high temperature transition metals and transition metal alloys
abstract: The invention provides oxidation resistant coatings for transition metal substrates and transition metal alloy substrates and method for producing the same. The coatings may be multilayered, multiphase coatings or gradient multiphase coatings. In some embodiments the transition metal alloys may be boron-containing molybdenum silicate-based binary and ternary alloys. The coatings are integrated into the substrates to provide durable coatings that stand up under extreme temperature conditions.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07560138&OS=07560138&RS=07560138
owner: Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation
number: 07560138
owner_city: Madison
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051212
---
This application is a divisional of and claims priority to U.S. Ser. No. 10 428 336 filed May 2 2003 pending which claims priority to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 467 076 filed May 1 2003 the entire disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties and for all purposes as if fully set forth herein.

This invention was made with United States government support awarded by the Navy ONR under grant number N00014 02 1 004 and Air Force AFOSR under grant number F33615 98 C 7801.

The invention relates to oxidation resistant coatings for transition metal substrates and transition metal alloy substrates and method for making the same.

For structural materials that are intended for high temperature application it is essential that the material offer some level of inherent oxidation resistance in order to avoid catastrophic failure during use. Nickel based alloys or superalloys represent one class of material that is commonly used for high temperature applications such as turbine components. These nickel based alloys have been found to exhibit good chemical and physical properties under high temperature stress and pressure conditions such as those encountered during turbine operation. However as larger planes with faster take off speeds have developed a need has arisen for turbine materials that can withstand greater temperatures.

Multiphase intermetallic materials composed of molybdenum silicides are one alternative to the nickel based superalloys. These multiphase alloys may include either boron or chromium in addition to molybdenum and silicon and have the potential to withstand much higher operating temperatures than the nickel based superalloys. Although the chemical and physical properties of these molybdenum silicide alloys are promising oxidation of these materials at high temperatures remains a significant problem in their development for use in high temperature applications. At high temperatures above about 800 C. these materials naturally form protective oxide coatings that hinder continued oxidation of the underlying material. However this coating is insufficient to completely halt the oxidation process and over time the reaction of oxygen with molybdenum consumes the alloy.

The present invention provides oxidation resistant coatings for transition metal substrates and transition metal alloy substrates. The coatings may be multilayer multiphase coatings or contiguous multiphase coatings having a compositional gradient extending from the substrate outward.

The coatings form a protective layer that prevents the substrate from oxidizing which results in a weakening of the substrate through dissolution or disintegration particularly at high temperatures. The use of the coatings allows the substrates to be used in very high temperature applications where high strength is required. Because the coatings provided by the present invention are actually integrated into the underlying substrate they are resistant to cracking and peeling under the hot cold cycles that are typically experienced by transition metals and transition metal alloys under actual operating conditions.

The coatings contain multiple phases including phases of molybdenum borosilicates molybdenum borosilicides and molybdenum silicides. Specific phases may include Mo known as the BCC phase MoSiB known as the Tphase MoSiwith a small amount of boron less than 5 atomic denoted MoSi B and known as the Tphase MoSi known as the A15 phase and MoSi known as the C11 phase .

A broad variety of substrates may benefit from the coatings of the present invention. The coating may be grown on any substrate having phase constituents of molybdenum e.g. BCC molybdenum silicides e.g. Tor A15 or C11 or combinations thereof and molybdenum borosilicides e.g. T at the surface of the substrate. In some instances the substrate may itself be an alloy comprising molybdenum silicon and boron denoted a Mo Si B alloy . In other cases the substrate will have a surface that has been enriched with molybdenum silicon and or boron to produce a substrate surface having a Mo Si B alloy character. In either case the surface of the substrate is desirably rich in molybdenum.

In addition to molybdenum silicides borosilicates and borosilicides the coatings may include other compounds wherein the chemical composition of at least one of the phase constituents within the coating is all or partly replaced by other transition metals other metalloids simple metals or combinations thereof. For example the coating may be a Mo Ti Cr Si B coating wherein a portion of the molybdenum in the coating has been chemically substituted with Ti and or Cr in the BCC and Tphases. Alternatively the coating may be a Mo Si B Al coating wherein Al is substituted for a portion of the Si in the MoSi A15 phase.

Two and three phase Mo Si B alloys are specific examples of molybdenum silicide alloys that benefit from the coatings of the present invention.

A first aspect of the present invention provides a multilayered multiphase oxidation resistant coating comprising molybdenum silicon and boron for substrates comprising various transition metals metalloids and simple metals. The multilayered coating includes a diffusion barrier layer which is integrated into at least one surface of the substrate an oxidation resistant layer disposed above the diffusion barrier layer and an oxidation barrier layer disposed above the oxidation resistant layer. The coatings may optionally also include a thermal barrier layer disposed on the oxidation barrier layer. The diffusion barrier layer comprises mainly borosilicides. Typically the borosilicides will contain primarily MoSiB Tphase although other phases may be present. Typically the oxidation barrier layer comprises primarily borosilicates of SiOand BO although other phases may be present. Typically the oxidation resistant layer comprising mainly molybdenum silicides primarily of MoSi C11 phase MoSi B Tphase or combinations thereof. The multilayered structures are formed in situ on the substrates such that they are integrated into the substrates. The diffusion barrier layer and the oxidation barrier layer are grown by annealing an oxidation resistant layer which is itself integrated into the substrate. Therefore depending on the annealing conditions in some embodiments of the invention the oxidation resistant layer is desirably converted completely into two layers an oxidation resistant layer and a diffusion barrier layer and is thus eliminated. In such embodiments the diffusion barrier layer the oxidation resistant layer and the oxidation barrier layer are disposed against each other and integrated across their interfacial regions.

Each layer in the multilayered coating plays a role in protecting and maintaining the strength of the underlying substrate. The diffusion barrier layer helps to prevent the diffusion of reactive atoms such as silicon from the oxidation resistant layer into the substrate where they react with and eventually dissolve the substrate and deplete the oxidation resistant layer. The oxidation resistant layer comprises a material that is capable of forming an oxidation resistant surface oxide layer upon exposure to oxygen. The oxide layer grown from the oxidation resistant layer provides the oxidation barrier layer in the multilayered coating. Thus the oxidation resistant layer facilitates the formation of an oxidation barrier layer in situ. The oxidation barrier comprises a stable oxide capable of resisting oxidation at high temperatures. The optional thermal barrier layer thermally insulates the underlying coating layers and the substrate material.

The invention further provides a method for the in situ production of a multilayered oxidation resistant coating on a Mo Si B alloy substrate or a substrate having a Mo Si B alloy surface character. The method includes the step of exposing the substrate to silicon vapor at a temperature and for a time sufficient to allow the silicon to diffuse into the surface of the substrate to form a molybdenum disilicide layer. The substrate and the molybdenum disilicide layer the oxidation resistant layer are then annealed in the presence of oxygen at a temperature and for a time sufficient to produce an oxidation barrier layer on the surface of the molybdenum disilicide layer. During the annealing process the molybdenum dislicide layer undergoes several conversions. First the molybdenum disilicide layer is at least partially converted into other molybdenum silicide phases such as T. For the purposes of this disclosure these new molybdenum silicide phases along with any remaining molybdenum disilicides are still considered to be part of the oxidation resistant layer of the coating. Second a portion of the molybdenum disilicides are converted into borosilicides which make up a diffusion barrier layer. Finally the portion of the molybdenum disilicides at the surface of the coating oxidize to form borosilicates which make up an oxidation barrier layer. By adjusting the annealing temperatures and times the silicon to boron ratio in each of the layers can be carefully controlled. This process results in a multilayered structure where each layer is distinct from but integrated with its neighboring layers. A thermal barrier layer may be applied to the outer surface of the oxidation barrier layer using convention means such as thermal spray and spray deposition techniques.

A second aspect of the invention provides substrates coated with an oxidation resistant coating having a smooth compositional gradient which is integrated into the substrate. These coatings have a inner region comprising primarily borosilicides that serves as a diffusion barrier region an intermediate region comprising primarily molybdenum silicides that serve as an oxidation resistant region and an outer layer comprising of borosilcates that serves as an oxidation barrier region. These regions are analogous to the diffusion barrier layer the oxidation resistant layer and the oxidation barrier layer of the multilayered structures however because these coatings form a continuous compositional gradient the diffusion barrier region and the oxidation resistant region blend smoothly into each other. Like the multilayered coatings the gradient coating is integrated into the substrate. Also like the multilayered coatings the gradient coatings may have a thermal barrier layer disposed on their outer surface.

Another aspect of the invention provides an oxidation resistant borosilicate coating having a reduced boron concentration for a Mo Si B alloy substrate or a substrate having a Mo Si B alloy surface character. The borosilicate coating is produced by applying a thin film of silicon dioxide to the substrate and annealing the thin film coated substrate at a temperature and for a time sufficient to convert the SiOfilm into a borosilicate coating layer. The SiOis desirably amorphous SiO however crystalline SiOmay also be used. The boron concentration in the borosilicate layer so produced is lower than the boron concentration in a borosilicate layer that is formed by the high temperature oxidation of the substrate in the absence of the SiOcoating. As a result oxygen transport through the borosilicate coatings of this invention is substantially reduced in comparison to the oxygen transport of naturally occurring borosilicate coatings formed through in situ high temperature oxidation of the substrate. In addition in certain embodiments the borosilicate layer having a reduced boron concentration may be produced without the formation of an intermediate MoOlayer between the borosilicate and the substrate which supports the formation of the coating as a barrier to oxygen transport through the surface layer.

Further objects features and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the following detailed description when taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

The present invention provides coatings for various transition metal containing substrates and methods for producing the coatings. The coatings may be multilayered multiphase coatings comprising oxidation resistant layers and diffusion barrier layers wherein the various layers are substantially distinct from each other. Alternatively the coatings may be contiguous multiphase coatings having a compositional gradient and including regions that act as oxidation resistant regions and regions that act as diffusion barriers. The coatings are integrated into the substrates.

A broad variety of substrates may benefit from the coatings of the present invention. The coatings may be grown on any substrate having phase types of molybdenum BCC molybdenum silicides A15 or T1 or C11 or combinations thereof and molybdenum borosilicides T at the surface of the substrate. In some instances the substrate may itself be an alloy comprising molybdenum silicon and boron denoted a Mo Si B alloy . In other cases the substrate will have a surface that has been enriched with molybdenum silicon and or boron to produce a substrate surface having a Mo Si B alloy character. For the purposes of this disclosure a surface has a Mo Si B alloy character if the surface includes enough Mo Si and B to permit the in situ growth of molybdenum silicide phases in the surface region of the substrate upon exposure to Si atoms at elevated temperatures . In either case the surface of the substrate is desirably rich in molybdenum. Substrates suitable for surface enrichment are those in which a solid solution chemical mixture may be formed between at least one of the coating elements Mo Si B and at least one of the elements in a substrate in at least one of the phases of the coating system e.g. Mo BCC T MoSi Tor MoSi . This criterion is met for many substrates composed of transition metals metalloids simple metals or combinations thereof. The substrate may be an alloy or a substantially pure metal. The ability of transition metals metalloids and simple metals to form solid solutions with these coating elements is discussed in Handbook of Ternary Alloy Phase Diagrams ed. P. Villars A. Prince and H. Okamoto 5 Materials Park Ohio ASM International 1995 which is incorporated herein by reference.

Suitable transition metals for use as or in the substrates include V Nb Ta Ti Zr Hf Fe Mn Co and the like. Suitable metalloid or simple metals include Al Ga In C Ge Sn P and the like. Refractory metals and refractory metal alloys are a group of transition metals that are desirably used as substrate materials.

The enrichment of the substrate surface may be accomplished by exposing the substrate to Mo Si and or B under conditions that promote the mixing of the Mo Si and or B with the underlying substrate. Enrichment of the chemical composition of the surface regions of the substrate can take place using individual elements of Mo Si or B or combined elements of Mo Si Mo B Si B or Mo Si B. Methods for enriching a substrate with Mo Si and B are well known and include but are not limited to pack cementation and chemical vapor deposition. The deposited elements may be mixed with the substrate using conventional solid state annealing techniques. Typically the solid state annealing will take place at temperature of at least 800 C. for at least 24 hours. Higher temperatures and longer times favor faster reaction kinetics. The choice of enrichment elements or compositions will depend on the nature of the underlying substrate. For example a substrate of a titanium silicon aluminum alloy would require enrichment with molybdenum and boron. A substantially pure titanium substrate on the other hand would require enrichment with molybdenum silicon and boron.

Methods for introducing molybdenum silicon and boron into substrate surfaces are described in Stolarski T. A. Tobe S. Wear December 2001 249 12 1096 102 Shiraishi M. Ishiyama W. Oshino T. Murakami K. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics Part 1 Regular Papers Short Notes Review Papers December 2000 39 12B 6810 1 Iordanova I. Forcey K. S. Gergov B. Bojinov V. Surface and Coatings Technology May 1995 72 1 2 23 9 Tjong S. C. Ku J. S. Wu C. S. Scripta Metallurgica et Materialia 1 Oct. 1994 31 7 835 9 Stachowiak G. W. Stachowiak G. B. Batchelor A. W. Wear November 1994 178 1 2 69 77 Chemical Vapor Deposition of Mo Isobe Y. Yazawa Y. Son P. Miyake M. Journal of the Less Common Metals 1 Jul. 1989 152 2 239 50 Stolz M. Hieber K. Wieczorek C. Thin Solid Films 18 Feb. 1983 100 3 209 18 Stolz M. Hieber K. Wieczorek C. Thin Solid Films 18 Feb. 1983 100 3 209 18 Slama G. Vignes A. Journal of the Less Common Metals 1971 23 4 375 93 Cockeram B. V. Surface and Coatings Technology November 1995 76 1 3 20 7 Ning He Ge Wang Rapp R. A. High Temperature and Materials Science August December 1995 34 1 3 117 25 the disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference.

Mo Si B alloys provide non limited examples of substrates that benefit from the coatings of the present invention. Such alloys are well known in the art. These alloys include both two and three phase alloys however due their superior oxidation resistance three phase alloys will likely be the focus for many applications of the coatings provided by this invention. For example the Mo Si B alloy may include Mo MoSi and MoSiBphases. Alternatively the alloy may include MoSi MoSiB and MoSi phases. Yet another suitable alloy substrate is made from MoSi MoSi and MoB phases. More detailed descriptions of molybdenum silicide based substrates for use in the coating systems of the present invention may be found in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 595 616 5 693 156 and 5 865 909. The entire disclosure of each of these patent is incorporated herein by reference. Because the Mo Si B alloys already have a Mo Si B alloy surface character no surface enrichment is required prior to the growth of the oxidation resistant coating.

One aspect of the present invention provides a multilayered oxidation resistant coating for a transition metal or transition metal alloy substrate which prevents the substrate from oxidizing at high temperatures thereby allowing the substrate to be used in high temperature applications. As shown in the coating is constructed from a diffusion barrier layer disposed on and integrated into the alloy substrate an oxidation resistant layer above the diffusion barrier layer an oxidation barrier layer on the oxidation resistant layer and optionally a thermal barrier layer . The substrate the diffusion barrier layer the oxidation resistant layer and the oxidation barrier layer form a multilayered structure where each layer is integrated with its neighboring layers. This construction is advantageous because it prevents cracking peeling and delaminating under extreme operating temperatures and pressures.

The oxidation barrier layer the oxidation resistant layer and the diffusion barrier layer are grown from the substrate in situ. This is advantageous because in situ growth eliminates abrupt interfaces between the layers in the coating which tend to separate at elevated temperatures weakening the structure.

A oxidation resistant layer comprising molybdenum disilicide MoSi may be grown on a substrate surface having a Mo Si B character by exposing the substrate to Si vapor under conditions which allow the Si to diffuse into at least one surface of the substrate where it reacts with Mo to form MoSi. This may be accomplished by conventional means such as by pack cementation or chemical vapor deposition. In pack cementation the MoSilayer is formed by depositing silicon onto the surface of the substrate and heating the components in a furnace. During the heat treatment the silicon atoms migrate into the substrate. To facilitate the reaction between the Mo and the Si the substrate will typically be heated to a temperature of at least about 800 C. and the reaction should be allowed to proceed for at least about 24 hours. This includes deposition methods where the substrate is heated to about 900 C. for at least 48 hours. For thicker coatings annealing can be done at either higher temperatures longer times or both.

An oxidation barrier layer is produced in a second annealing step wherein the MoSiis annealed in the presence of oxygen at high temperatures to form borosilicates at the surface of the MoSilayer. At the same time at least a portion of the MoSilayer is converted into other molybdenum silicates such as Tphases which are incorporated into the oxidation resistant layer along with the remaining MoSi. Simultaneously at the elevated annealing temperature a portion of the MoSiabove the alloy substrate is converted to the Tphase. This Tphase layer between the alloy substrate and the oxidation resistant layer serves as the diffusion barrier layer .

The oxidation barrier layer forms as follows during the annealing process a portion of the MoSiproduces MoO a volatile compound that evaporates from the structure leaving a surface rich in silicon and boron which diffuses up from the underlying substrate which react to form a protective borosilicate scale. The resulting borosilicate scale is predominantly made from SiOwith a smaller concentration of BO. The presence of BOin the scale is advantageous because it decreases the viscosity of the borosilicate layer providing enough flow to heal small cracks or defects that appear in the layer. This is desirable because it allows the structure to self heal from damage caused by the impact of foreign objects. However too much boron in the borosilicate layer will reduce the oxidation resistance of the barrier. Therefore the coatings should have a boron silicon ratio that is low enough to provide a barrier to oxidation. In some embodiments the boron concentration in the oxidation barrier layer is no more than about 25 atomic percent. This includes embodiments wherein the boron concentration in the oxidation barrier layer is no more than about 10 atomic percent further includes embodiments wherein the boron concentration in the oxidation barrier layer is no more than about 6 atomic percent and still further includes embodiments wherein the boron concentration in the oxidation barrier layer is no more than about 3 atomic percent.

The diffusion barrier layer is produced during the annealing process serves to prevent or hinder the diffusion of silicon atoms from the oxidation barrier layer and the oxidation resistant layer which have relatively high Si concentrations to the underlying substrate which has a lower Si concentration. This is desirable because the continued exposure of the alloy substrate to Si atoms would eventually lead to the dissolution of the substrate and depletion of the oxidation resistant layer . The Tphase layer provides a low mobility of silicon transport that prevents or hinders the diffusion of silicon from the upper coating layers to the underlying alloy substrate . The thickness of the diffusion barrier layer may have a range of values.

The annealing temperature for the formation of the oxidation barrier layer and diffusion barrier layer may be higher than the temperature at which the oxidation resistant layer is initially formed. In various embodiments the annealing temperature may be at least 800 C. or even at least 1000 C. The annealing time may be at least 24 hours.

In some embodiments the total thickness of the diffusion barrier layer the oxidation barrier layer and any oxidation resistant layer will be at least 20 microns but in other embodiments the total thickness may be greater.

The multilayered oxidation resistant coatings of the present invention may optionally include an overlying thermal barrier layer which thermally insulates the underlying coating layers and the alloy substrate by producing a temperature drop across the thermal barrier layer. As a result the operating temperature capabilities of the material so insulated are extended. The thermal barrier layer typically comprises a heat resistant ceramic and is generally characterized by a low thermal conductivity and preferably low oxygen diffusivity. In addition the material comprising the thermal barrier layer and the oxide comprising the underlying oxidation barrier layer should have similar coefficients of thermal expansion. This reduces the thermal stress at the interface at elevated temperatures and prevents cracking of the thermal barrier layer or separation of the thermal barrier layer from the oxidation barrier layer . Ceramics suitable for use as thermal barriers include but are not limited to zirconia stabilized zirconia AlO mullite CaSrZrPO and combinations thereof. In addition the inventors have discovered that TiOis particularly well suited for use with multilayered coatings grown on molybdenum silicide based alloys because TiOhas a coefficient of thermal expansion close to that of the SiOin the borosilicate oxidation barrier layer and is able to exist in equilibrium with the SiO.

The thermal barrier layer may be deposited by conventional techniques including thermal spray techniques such as plasma spray and vapor deposition techniques such as electron beam physical vapor deposition. The desired thickness of the thermal barrier layer will depend on the intended application for the metal alloy substrate.

A second aspect of the invention provides substrates coated with an oxidation resistant coating having a smooth compositional gradient which is integrated into the substrate. The first step in producing these gradient coatings is to alloy a Mo Si B alloy substrate or a substrate having a Mo Si B alloy surface character with a phase modifier element. If the substrate is a Mo Si B alloy suitable substrates may be formed by alloying a the phase modifier element with the molybdenum silicon and boron during the production of the substrate. Alternatively the phase modifier may be alloyed with the substrate during the process of enriching the surface of the substrate with molybdenum silicon and or boron. For example when the substrate does not initially contain molybdenum silicon and or boron the surface of the substrate can be enriched with one or more of these elements using solid state annealing techniques such as pack cementation to produce a substrate having a Mo Si B alloy surface character as described above. The phase modifier element may be added along with the surface enriching elements during this process to produce the alloyed substrate. The resulting alloyed substrate is then contacted with silicon under conditions sufficient to induce the diffusion of silicon into the substrate and the reaction of the silicon with molybdenum in the substrate. Silicon pack cementation is one process that may be used for this purpose. Because the silicon has a different mobility in the various phases of the substrate it reacts with the different phases at different rates to produce a compositional gradient extending from the substrate outward.

The gradient coating comprises primarily borosilicides such as T alloyed with the phase modifier in the region near the underlying substrate and primarily MoSialloyed with the phase modifier in the region near the exterior surface. When exposed to oxygen at elevated temperatures the alloyed MoSiphase oxidizes to form an oxidation barrier layer of borosilicates. The concentration of oxidation resistant phases or a character of an oxidation resistant layer in the outer region of the gradient coating is higher than the concentration of the oxidation resistant phases in the inner region of the gradient. Similarly the concentration of silicon diffusion resistant phases or a character of a silicon diffusion resistant layer in the inner region is higher than the concentration of silicon diffusion resistant phased in the outer region. Therefore the gradient coatings provide resistance toward both oxidation and silicon diffusion.

The phase modifier element may be any transition metal metalloid or simple metal that accentuates the difference in mobility of silicon between two or more of the various molybdenum molybdenum borosilicate molybdenum borosilicide and molybdenum silicide phases of the substrate. Tungsten is one non limiting example of a transition metal phase modifier. Other suitable phase modifiers include but are not limited to hafnium niobium and titanium.

Another aspect of the invention provides a protective borosilicate coating having a reduced boron concentration for a transition metal substrate or a transition metal alloy substrate having an Mo Si B alloy surface character. One example of a suitable transition metal alloy substrate is a Mo Si B alloy substrate. These protective coatings use a thin SiOfilm to improve upon the oxidation resistant coatings that naturally form on the surface of substrates having a Mo Si B alloy surface character upon oxidation at high temperatures by reducing the boron concentration in the resulting borosilicates.

Mo Si B alloys will naturally form an oxidation resistant borosilicate layer when allowed to oxidize at high temperatures. This process has been described for the three phase Mo MoSiB MoSi system by Park et al. in Scripta Materialia 46 765 770 2002 which is incorporated herein by reference. Briefly oxidation of the Mo Si B alloys initially leads to MoOformation but the MoOlayer offers no protection to continued oxidation. In fact MoOis a highly volatile species that vaporizes from the surface at temperatures above about 750 C. leaving a surface enriched in Si and B that develops a protective SiOlayer containing some BO i.e. the borosilicate layer at high temperatures e.g. temperatures of about 1000 1200 C. . The borosilicate surface layer does restrict oxygen transport and provides a reduced oxygen activity so that a stable MoOphase forms at the substrate alloy surface. This borosilicate scale so produced is protective but it does not completely block oxygen transport so that with continued oxidation exposure the thickness of the exterior scale increases along with a recession in the alloy substrate.

The present invention provides an improved borosilicate coating which was made possible at least in part by the inventors discovery that by enriching the SiOcontent of the outer borosilicate layer the oxygen activity and the oxygen transport through the coating can be reduced. This may be accomplished by shifting the equilibrium of the coating from a borosilicate MoOsystem as described above towards a SiO Mo system.

A borosilicate coating that is enriched in SiO i.e. having a reduced boron concentration may be produced in accordance with the present invention by applying a thin film of SiOto at least one surface of a Mo Si B alloy substrate and annealing the SiOcoated substrate at a temperature and for a time sufficient to form a borosilicate scale on the substrate. In some embodiments the formation of the borosilicate scale is accompanied by the formation of a Mo phase having internal oxide precipitates between the substrate and the borosilicate. The resulting scale will have a boron concentration that is lower that the boron concentration of a borosilicate scale formed through the high temperature oxidation of the substrate in the absence of the SiOthin film. In some embodiments the boron concentration in the borosilicate coating is less than 6 atomic percent. This includes embodiments where the borosilicate coating contains less than about 5 atomic percent further includes embodiments where the borosilicate coating contains less than 4 atomic percent and still further includes embodiments where the borosilicate coating contains less that about 3 atomic percent. In some embodiments the borosilicate coating is formed without the formation of a MoOlayer between the substrate and the borosilicate coating.

The SiOmay be applied to the surface of the alloy substrate by conventional deposition techniques. These techniques include but are not limited to powder spraying thermal spray deposition and chemical vapor deposition. The applied SiOfilm may be quite thin. Once the film is applied or during the application of the film the substrate and the SiOare annealed at a temperature and for a time sufficient to produce the borosilicate coating. The annealing temperature and time will vary depending on a variety of factors including the SiOfilm thickness the method of SiOdeposition and substrate used. Exemplary annealing temperatures and times include but are not limited to annealing temperature of at least 800 C. for annealing times of at least 24 hours.

The Mo Si B alloy substrates that may benefit from the borosilicate coatings having reduced boron concentrations include the two and three phase Mo Si B alloys listed above with respect to the multilayered oxidation resistant coatings.

Si pack cementation process was employed to produce a MoSioxidation resistant layer. A powder mixture of 70 wt AlO 25 wt Si and 5 wt NaF were loaded in an alumina crucible together with clean alloy pieces Mo 14.2Si 9.6B followed by sealing with an AlOslurry bond. The sample crucible was annealed at 900 C. for 48 hours in an Ar atmosphere. The detailed procedure is described in S. R. Levine and R. A. Caves 121 1051 1974 and A. Mueller G. Wang R. A. Rapp E. L. Courtright and T. A. Kircher A155 199 1992 . Briefly the process involves the deposition of Si vapor carried by volatile halide species on the substrate embedded in a mixed powder pack at the elevated temperature which consists of a halide salt activator and an inert filler.

A BSE image of an as Si packed sample is shown in . The nominal thickness of the MoSilayer was observed as about 10 m. During the Si pack cementation process the inward Si diffusion to the substrate results in the formation of mainly the MoSiphase. The reactively formed MoSilayer was also confirmed by XRD . The reactive MoSilayer formation in a diffusion couple between pure Mo and Si has been reported previously see for example P. C. Totorici and M. A. Dayananda 38 1863 1998 and P. C. Totorici and M. A. Dayananda 38 545 1999 where the intermediate silicides follow parabolic growth upon diffusion annealing and the growth of the MoSi phase is sluggish. Also silicon instead of molybdenum mainly contributes to the formation of MoSiand other silicides which is consistent with the pack cementation observation i.e. inward diffusion of Si .

Silicon is the main diffusing element into the substrate during the pack cementation process resulting in the formation of the MoSiouter layer. However the MoSiphase is in equilibrium with the MoB and Tphases in the ternary Mo Si B system see which is different than the phase combination of the as cast alloy composed of Mo MoSi and T. This suggests that other phases exist between the MoSicoating and the substrate when a local equilibrium holds during the interface reactions. Furthermore the relatively slow mobility of Mo and B at this temperature particularly in the Tphase appears to suggest that a boride phase must accompany the formation of the MoSilayer structure. A further examination of the cross section of the as packed sample in a high resolution Field Ion SEM following etching with a Murakami solution reveals the presence of sub micron size particles marked as in that are highly etched and dispersed quite uniformly within the MoSilayer. Furthermore there is a reaction front beneath the outer MoSilayer that appears to exhibit eutectoid like structures. EDS Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy examination on the dispersoid showed an absence of silicon. However since boron can not be detected in EDS and the particle is too small a structural examination via TEM was used in order to verify the types of borides formed. The TEM examination was conducted on samples that were annealed at 1200 C. for 24 hours following the coating treatment. The TEM evaluation clearly reveals the presence of MoB particles within the MoSi . The large presence of twin boundaries is clearly evident in the high resolution TEM image . The large density of twins may be developed from the polymorphic phase transition between alpha and beta MoB. Thus it appears that the reactive Si diffusion into the substrate may stabilize the beta MoB phase initially which then transformed into the alpha MoB phase through a polymorphic phase transition. The growth front beneath the MoSi MoB particle layer appears to involve at least the MoB phase marked in . In addition the MoSi B or Tphase is more likely to be the second phase present in the growth front since the Tphase is the only phase that is in equilibrium with the MoSi MoB and two phases from the substrate MoSi and Tphase . The silicon reactive diffusion can immediately blanket the Mo ss phase and transform it into the MoSi phase resulting the growth front to proceed quite uniformly into the substrate.

Upon oxidation of MoSicoatings on transition metals at high temperature the MoSicoating layer is transformed into MoSi on the substrate side and SiO on the free surface of MoSicoating layer as well indicating that silicon depletion is a significant factor for determining the molybdenum disilicide coating lifetime. Also it should be noted that the growth of the SiOlayer is about 2 3 orders of magnitude slower than that of the MoSiinterlayer suggesting that silicon depletion mainly contributes to impeding the growth of the MoSiphase. In order to retard the growth of the MoSi T phase consuming the molybdenum disilicide coatings the effect of other elements such as Ta or Ge has been documented. For example the rate constant of MoSiphase is about 2 times faster than Mo Ta Siphase at 1400 C. and the rate constant differences expand with increasing annealing temperature.

While the retardation of MoSi T growth can be achieved by selected alloying additions the main limitation still resides in the fact that the Tphase exhibits a poor oxidation resistance. Recently it has been reported that B addition to Tphase increases the oxidation resistance significantly. The Boron doped MoSi T thin layer exhibits a superb high temperature oxidation resistance see R. W. Bartlett and P. R. Gage 230 1528 1964 . The implication of these results appears to be that the MoSilayer coating is suitable for the Mo Si B alloys. Although the growth of the Tphase may still be high upon high temperature exposure it can be as an excellent protective coating provided that the Tphase is saturated with B during the high temperature oxidation exposure.

Upon oxidation test of the silicide coated samples a thin oxide layer formed at the outer layer. On this layer several elements of Al Na Si and O were identified by EDS in which Na is a byproduct from NaF during pack cementation. While AlOmay also be present from residual pack cementation powder the oxide scale formed was mainly composed of SiO. The observed typical thickness of the scale after the oxidation test at 1200 C. for 100 hours was less than 5 m. Upon oxidation at 1200 C. the synthesized MoSiphase had completely transformed into MoSi T when the exposure time reached 50 hr. While the MoSi phase did start to form within the Tphase on this sample upon further annealing the depletion of Si on the surface which results in the MoSi phase formation was quite slow since the oxide layer is very thin. This implies that the Tphase coating indeed serves as an effective protective layer due to the boron content. With further oxidation exposure up to 100 hours at 1200 C. the Tphase coating appears to remain stable and retain an excellent oxidation resistance. From this perspective the use of a MoSiand MoSi T phase coating appears to be effective in inhibiting the oxygen penetration to the substrate and furthermore remains intact with the substrate. In contrast the substrate without a silicide phase coating that was subjected to a similar 1200 C. test for 100 hrs of oxidation produces a thick borosilicate scale on the surface with MoOand an internal oxidation zone beneath it. The outer borosilicate layers of the silicide coated and the non coated sample without internal oxidation zone are directly compared in . It is clear that while the thickness of the borosilicate layer of the non coated sample increases upon oxidation time the change in layer thickness on the coated sample is negligible during this time frame. For example oxidation at 1200 C. for 100 hr yields a borosilicate layer thickness of about 85 m for the non coated sample while the thickness is about 5 m for the coated sample which clearly shows an excellent oxidation resistance compared to the non coated sample.

The transformation of MoSiinto the MoSiphase has been reported previously for the diffusion annealing of Mo with a MoSicoating see T. A. Kir and E. L. Courtright E L A155 67 1992 . The annealing treatment was not conducted in air in this case since without B addition to the MoSiphase the coating has a poor oxidation resistance. The extrapolated value of the MoSiparabolic growth parameter k x k square root over t in the MoSicoated Mo sample is about 4.0 10 cm square root over sec at 1200 C. which is significantly larger than the estimated k value of about 9 10 cm square root over sec in the current work at 1200 C. In fact the growth kinetics of the MoSiphase is closely related to the Si transport towards substrate instead of towards the free surface. It is considered that the slow kinetics in the current work is related to the layer developed between Tand substrate with the associated boron content.

It is also worth noticing that the thickness of the MoSiphase for these experiments does not show a considerable thickness change even after a complete elimination of the MoSiphase. This suggests that while the rapid growth of the Tphase in replacing the MoSiphase is similar to the case of binary Mo Si system the change in the Tphase layer thickness is essentially stalled afterwards. This implies that there must be an effective diffusion barrier formed underneath the Tphase coating inhibiting Si diffusion inward into the substrate and hence consuming the Tphase coating.

The synthesized MoSiphase is not in equilibrium with the three phase Mo ss T MoSi mixture in the substrate and therefore upon exposure to high temperature or oxidation other silicide phase and borosilicide phases are expected to form. After oxidation in air at 1300 C. for 25 hr the Tphase was synthesized from the MoSiouter layer with a thin outer layer of borosilicate as shown in . This attributed to the excellent oxidation resistance of the Tphase coating even at 1300 C.

Since the outer borosilicate layer growth upon high temperature exposure for the coated sample is not significant the main reservoir for the Si content in the shrinking MoSilayer should be the substrate. The Tlayer beneath Tlayer together with MoSi exists and both phases protrude into the substrate . As expected upon Si inward diffusion mainly the Mo phase is transformed into the MoSi and the Tphases . In fact as mentioned previously the synthesized MoSilayer contains MoB dispersoids and there is a MoSi MoB mixture at the interface between MoSilayer and the substrate. However upon oxidation annealing the MoSilayer becomes a Tlayer as shown in . From the observations of the oxidized pack cementation sample and recalling that the substrate is composed of two eutectics Mo Tand MoSi T the resultant reaction for the formation of Tand Tmay be written Mo s.s. T MoSiB MoSi T MoSiB T MoSi T MoSiB MoSi T T MoSi T MoSiB Also it is useful to consider the diffusion pathway to understand the phase evolution upon oxidation processing . Initially after coating the MoSilayer with MoB dispersoids is synthesized and the Tand MoB eutectoid is produced between outer MoSi MoB layer and substrate. It is clear that MoSiphase should exist in order to meet the local equilibrium and it should also be noted that MoSiphase is not in equilibrium with pure Mo. While the exact kinetics of the phase formation next to the MoSiphase needs further refinement Tand or MoSi should exist next to MoSiphase. In this perspective while the diffusion pathway proceeds towards the original substrate composition the Mo near the reaction interface disappears and transforms into MoSi and T to maintain equilibrium in the MoSi T Tthree phase area. It is also important to point out that the Tlayer is in contact with the Tlayer which may explain the origin of the B content in the Tphase coating layer.

The design strategy underlying both silica as well as in situ silicide coatings as high temperature oxidation resistant can also be employed as the basis for the thermal barrier coating such as titania TiO . shows the cross section of the titania coated Mo Si B substrate that been subjected to oxidation at 1200 C. for 100 hours. The titania was deposited using thermal spray processing. The natural borosilicate develops underneath the titania coating and there is no interphase reaction that can be discerned between the titania and the borosilicate. This confirms the high temperature compatibility of boro silica with a potential thermal barrier oxide such as titania. The coating system can be further modified for example with pack cementation treatment which produces silicide phases that naturally form silica when exposed to high temperatures.

It has been shown recently that a small amount of a transition metal phase modifier such as tungsten alloyed with the coatings made from molybdenum silicon and boron can alter the phase equilibrium of a Mo Si B system so that a three phase field of BCC T Tcan be stabilized see R. Sakidja S. Kim J. S. Park and J. H. Perepezko in E. P. George H. Inui M. J. Mills and G. Eggeler Editors p. BB2.3.1 MRS Warrendale Pa. 2003 . By coupling the alloying addition with the Si pack cementation a new coating structure has been synthesized as exemplified in . The coating consists of the Mo W Siphase as the outermost layer with a multiple phase reaction composed of mostly of the Mo W Siphase dark phase . The capability of W substitution to accentuate the different mobility of silicon in the three phases is clearly demonstrated in this case. Unlike the Tphase which has transformed into the disilicide phase the Tand BCC phases have not fully transformed. In this case the diffusion front is described by the different reaction paths that are followed by each phase W alloyed T Si Mo W Si 1 W alloyed BCC Si T Si Mo W Si 2 W alloyed T Si Mo W Boride Phase s 3 The W alloyed Tphase from the substrate appears to have the easiest or most direct path enabling a complete transformation into the disilicide Mo W Siphase. On the other hand the multiple phase reaction path and the slower Si mobility apparently due to W substitution for Mo result in a coating structure with the BCC phase dispersed within the disilicide matrix. Similarly there is a relatively slow decomposition of the Tphase into the disilicide and boride phase s . The resulting coating structure design offers the excellent oxidation resistance of the disilicide phase with enhanced structural integrity due to the dispersed BCC phase and kinetic resistance to modification due to sluggish diffusion rates.

The following example presents a comparison of the oxidation resistance of a borosilicate coating having a reduced boron concentration in accordance with the present invention and a naturally occurring borosilicate coating.

Ternary alloy ingots with a composition of Mo 14.2Si 9.6B atomic were prepared by arc melting in a Ti gettered Ar atmosphere and sliced to 3 mm thick discs. Each sliced piece was polished with SiC paper and ultrasonically cleaned. For the coating studies a SiOpowder layer of about 100 m thickness was deposited at room temperature as a SiO ethanol slurry by an air spray gun on the polished sample discs.

For oxidation testing an alumina boat containing the sample discs was inserted into a furnace initially set at 1000 or 1200 C. in air. After the samples reached the designated exposure time they were pulled out of the furnace promptly air cooling . Following the oxidation testing the samples were cut perpendicular to the interface with a diamond saw. Finally the cross sections were examined by SEM Scanning Electron Microscopy JEOL6100 with BSE Back Scattered Electron imaging. An HR TEM High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope Phillips CM 200 and XRD X ray Diffraction STOE X ray Diffraction System were used for crystal structure and phase identifications. The phase compositions were determined by EPMA Electron Probe Micro Analysis CAMECA SX51 .

As shown in the alloy substrate had a three phase microstructure based upon Mo solid solution Tand MoSi phases. The main constituents of the alloy microstructure are retained in the long term annealed alloy. An SEM BSE image together with x ray maps of the alloy annealed at 1000 C. for 100 hr in air is shown in and From the x ray maps the existence of Mo Si and O is clearly indicated due to X ray interference between Mo Mz and B K line additional contrast can be seen on the boron x ray map . Three separate layer structures can be discerned in the cross section images 1 the exterior borosilicate layer 2 the MoOphase and 3 Mo solid solution phase with oxide precipitates adjacent to the substrate. The exterior borosilicate layer surface was smooth and continuous. The three layers are reflected in the X ray scan which indicates the presence of an amorphous phase broad peak in the 2 range of 15 30 a predominant MoOphase and the Mo ss phase. Further HR TEM examination on the amorphous phase reveals that MoOprecipitates are also present within the borosilicate layer and . In addition Si rich oxide precipitates were also found in the substrate primary Mo ss phase adjacent to the MoOlayer. After oxidation at 800 C. the outermost scale is composed mainly of amorphous borosilicate with a MoOlayer forming beneath it.

The composition of the oxide phases was quantified by EPMA. The amorphous SiOlayer was determined to contain about 10 atomic B or 17 mole of BO which is close to the liquidus at 1000 C. and that in the MoOlayer the solubility of boron and silicon is negligible.

From the layered product structure the kinetic sequence involved in oxidation can be depicted in terms of the diffusion pathway in The phase sequence illustrated in indicates that the identified composition of the borosilicate layer is connected to MoObehind the initial pole between oxygen and the substrate composition.

In order to minimize the alloy recession a spray deposition coating was applied to modify the borosilicate scale to enrich the SiOcontent in order to reduce oxygen transport. The microstructure cross sections for the SiOpowder spray coated samples after oxidation at 1200 C. for 100 hr are shown in and Following the oxidation exposure this treatment reduced the underlying in situ borosilicate and MoOlayer thickness by about 50 compared to the uncoated samples . Moreover with an amorphous SiOpowder coating the MoOlayer did not form and the applied coating has combined with the in situ borosilicate layer during oxidation annealing .

