---

title: Electro-osmotic pulse (EOP) system for de-watering around manmade structures and method of use therefor
abstract: An Electro-Osmotic Pulse (EOP) system is used to dewater structure, both natural and manmade. Preferably, the system employs durable, dimensionally stable anodes affixed to structure in a configuration designed to maximize electrical contact with the structure and minimize electrode gas generation. The anodes and cathodes are attached to a DC power supply that provides a voltage potential between them. DC power is cycled until the structure has been sufficiently treated. Select embodiments employ perforated metal pipes as cathodes for the purpose of transport and drainage of fluids. In select embodiments of the present invention, the cathodes are connected to variable resistors designed to reduce opportunity for corrosion of buried metal objects in the vicinity of the EOP system. Select embodiments employ a pre-specified pulse train of DC voltage pulses to migrate water from under a crawl space while moving available cations in the soil. Select embodiments also protect large structures such as concrete dams.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07763155&OS=07763155&RS=07763155
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07763155
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050601
---
Under 35 U.S.C 121 this application is a continuation in part of and claims the benefit of prior application Ser. No. 10 140 875 filed May 9 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 919 005 B2 Configuration and Electro Osmotic Pulse EOP Treatment for Degrading Porous Material by McInerney et al. Jul. 19 2005 and is incorporated herein by reference.

Under paragraph 1 a of Executive Order 10096 the conditions under which this invention was made entitle the Government of the United States as represented by the Secretary of the Army to the entire right title and interest therein of any patent granted thereon by the United States. This patent and related ones are available for licensing. Contact Bea Shahin at 217 373 7234 or Phillip Stewart at 601 634 4113.

Groundwater under or adjacent a structure s foundation can cause serious damage. In addition to increased concrete deterioration and accelerated rebar corrosion of structure such as walls and pilings internal dampness and resultant high humidity accelerates corrosion of expensive electrical and mechanical equipment such as what may be placed within a dam or in a crawl space beneath a building and can increase maintenance requirements through frequent repainting or cleaning to combat mold and mildew growth. Furthermore the intruding water raises the relative humidity thereby accelerating the corrosion rate of mechanical equipment in the area and creating unacceptable air quality for example in any air drawn from above a crawl space into a building. This air pollution carries concomitant health problems due to the rapid growth of bacteria and mold.

In selective problem areas the usual approach to the treatment of water intrusion problems is to trench and drain. In other words to excavate and expose a piling area or the base of a foundation and to install a drain tile system around the manmade structure or affected area. Other areas such as floors are untreatable using conventional methods.

Electro osmosis has origins in 1809 when F. F. Reuss originally described an experiment demonstrating that water could be forced to flow through a clay water system when an external electric field was applied to it. Research since then has shown that water surrounding cations moves with them the flow initiated by the predominant movement of cations present in the pore fluid of porous media such as a clay concrete concrete block brick cementitious construction materials or the like. The basic physics and chemistry of electro osmosis can be found in several textbooks and treatises. Glasstone S. 2d ed. D. Van Nostrand Company Inc. Princeton N.J. 1946. Tikhomolova K. P. Ellis Horwood Limited Chichester West Sussex England 1993.

Electro osmosis is typically used to solve the problem of groundwater intrusion which can cause serious damage to a structure s foundation and interior. Electro Osmotic Pulse EOP technology typically offers an alternative that addresses moisture problems from the interior of affected areas without the cost of excavation. Examples of such systems are described below.

In one system humidity is removed from a damp structure by positioning electrodes within the structure and applying a DC voltage across them. U.S. Pat. No. 3 856 646 Methods and Electrodes for the Drying of Damp Buildings to Morarau Dec. 24 1974.

In another system chloride ions are removed from concrete by embedding an anode in an electrolyte and establishing an electric current between the anode and the concrete structure in order to avoid corrosion of the concrete s reinforcing means typically steel rebar. U.S. Pat. No. 5 296 120 Apparatus for the Removal of Chloride from Reinforced Concrete Structures to Bennett et al. Mar. 22 1994.

Another system discloses a process for changing the bond strength between concrete and its steel reinforcement by passing DC current through the concrete. U.S. Pat. No. 5 312 526 Method for Increasing or Decreasing Bond Strength Between Concrete and Embedded Steel and for Sealing the Concrete to Steel Interface to Miller May 17 1994.

Still another method used to eliminate humidity from concrete uses electro osmosis to pass current pulses in a predetermined pattern through the concrete. U.S. Pat. No. 5 368 709 Method and Apparatus for Controlling the Relative Humidity in Concrete and Masonry Structures to Utklev Nov. 29 1994.

A method that claims improvement over existing methods by choice of a narrow range of relationships among the three pulse durations of the pulse train provides longer anode life while optimizing the process of dehydration. U.S. Pat. No. 5 755 945 Method for Dehydrating Capillary Materials to Kristiansen May 26 1998.

An improvement over previous methods claims to increase anode life while optimizing dehydration and the time to effect it. It uses a specific pulse train in which the positive pulse width is much greater than the negative pulse width that is in turn greater than the off period. U.S. Pat. No. 6 117 295 Method for Dehydrating a Porous Material to Bjerke Sep. 12 2000.

A method that claims to be an improvement over the 709 patent provides a control unit to control the pulse width of individual pulses by monitoring characteristics of the energizing source. U.S. Pat. No. 6 126 802 Method and Device for Regulating and Optimizing Transport of Humidity by Means of Electroosmosis to Utklev Oct. 3 2000.

A more recent patent proposes a solution to overcome the disadvantage of the 709 patent when used to dehumidify steel reinforced structures. It specifically prevents the deterioration of the reinforcing steel by providing a second voltage to the reinforcement steel in addition to the typical electro osmosis configuration of the 709 patent and its predecessors. U.S. Pat. No. 6 370 643 B1 Method for Effecting Fluid Flow in Porous Materials to Finnebraaten Aug. 7 2001.

In a conventional method an Electro Osmotic Pulse EOP system is configured by installing anodes positive electrodes in the interior wall floor or ceiling of the structure and cathodes negative electrodes in the soil exterior to the structure. Due to the extreme electrochemical environment surrounding the anode special material and geometry requirements may be placed on an anode intended to be used for other than trickle current loads or for extended periods or both.

Durable dimensionally stable anodes are a recent development in anode technology. U.S. Pat. No. 5 055 169 to Hock et al. Method of Making Mixed Metal Oxide Coated Substrates Oct. 8 1991 describes a reactive ion plating process using RF specifically identifying the rate of evaporation of a noble metal such as ruthenium or iridium the rate of evaporation of a valve metal such as titanium and the partial oxygen pressure needed to produce an electrically conductive mixed metal oxide ceramic coating on a valve metal substrate. The coated substrate can sustain a current density of 150 A per mof exposed coating surface in fresh water electrolyte preferably for at least 20 hours and more preferably for at least 75 hours without an excessive increase in the voltage level required to maintain that current density. As noted in the 169 patent abstract these anodes have excellent characteristics to include low resistivity very low dissolution rates long life excellent durability and excellent corrosion resistance. Durable dimensionally stable anodes are also referred to as semiconductive anodes. Durable anodes that are classified as dimensionally stable generally consist of a valve metal substrate such as niobium tantalum titanium or alloys thereof with a catalytic coating consisting of precious metal s most often from the platinum metal group and often in oxide form in combination with valve metal oxides as a mixed metal oxide.

A system and method is provided for de watering uniquely defined volumes desirable to be kept relatively dry. In select embodiments of the present invention the system comprises durable dimensionally stable anodes one or more cathodes embedded in natural structure external to the volume to be protected and circuitry connecting the anodes cathodes and other objects to be protected such that the circuitry facilitates establishing a voltage differential between the anodes and cathodes. In select embodiments of the present invention the circuitry also includes means for improving corrosion resistance of metallic objects. Select embodiments employ a pre specified pulse train of DC voltage pulses that may be variable in voltage to migrate water from protected volumes while moving available dissolved cations. Note that as water is removed and the medium becomes drier the resistance of the medium increases resulting in reduced current flow and concomitant reduction in power requirements.

In select embodiments of the present invention a system is provided for de watering soil under a crawlspace defined by the perimeter of a foundation while protecting buried metal objects proximate the system. In select embodiments of the present invention the system comprises an array of durable dimensionally stable anodes embedded in soil one or more cathodes embedded in soil external to the crawlspace and circuitry connecting the anodes cathodes and metallic objects such that the circuitry facilitates establishing a voltage differential between the anodes and cathodes and the circuitry includes means for protecting the metallic objects. Select embodiments employ a pre specified pulse train of DC voltage pulses to migrate water from under the crawl space while moving available cations in the soil.

In select embodiments of the present invention the array of anodes is embedded in soil within the crawlspace. In select embodiments of the present invention the anodes are embedded in soil external to the crawlspace and between the foundation and the cathodes. In select embodiments of the present invention the anodes are ceramic coated wires. In select embodiments of the present invention the anodes are canister anodes.

In select embodiments of the present invention the anodes are buried in a trench that is backfilled with carbon and bentonite clay. In select embodiments of the present invention the carbon is selected from the group consisting essentially of powdered graphite coke breeze carbon black and combinations thereof.

In select embodiments of the present invention the cathodes are metal rods. In select embodiments of the present invention the cathodes are perforated metal pipes. In select embodiments of the present invention the perforated pipes are wrapped with one or more water permeable geotextiles.

In select embodiments of the present invention the circuitry comprises one or more variable resistors connected to one or more metallic objects and sufficient wiring and connectors to connect the resistors metallic objects anodes and cathodes in the circuitry. In select embodiments of the present invention a DC power supply is connected to the circuitry.

In select embodiments of the present invention a method is provided for de watering soil under a crawlspace defined by the perimeter of a foundation while reducing opportunity for corroding buried metal objects proximate the EOP system used with the method. The method comprises performing a resistivity test on the soil providing an array of durable dimensionally stable anodes embedded in soil providing at least one cathode embedded in soil external to the crawlspace providing circuitry to the anodes cathodes and metallic objects and energizing the circuitry to establish a voltage differential between the anodes and cathodes and to reduce opportunity for corrosion of the metallic objects.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method embeds the anodes in soil within the crawlspace. In select embodiments of the present invention the method embeds the anodes in soil external to the crawlspace between the foundation and the cathodes. In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides the anodes as ceramic coated wires. In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides the anodes as canister anodes.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides for burying the anodes in a trench the trench filled with backfill comprising carbon and bentonite clay.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides the cathodes as metal rods. In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides the cathodes as perforated metal pipes. In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides the perforated pipes wrapped with one or more water permeable geotextiles.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides one or more variable resistors connected to one or more metallic objects and sufficient wiring and connectors to connect the resistors metallic objects anodes and cathodes in the circuitry. In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides a DC power supply connected to the circuitry.

In select embodiments of the present invention a system using electrodes connected to a pulsed DC power supply dewaters soil beneath a structure. The anode electrode is connected to the soil maximizing electrical contact with the soil while minimizing effects of electrode gas generation. The cathode electrode is connected to the soil outside the structure. In select embodiments the cathode electrode is supplemented with additional circuitry to reduce the opportunity for corrosion of nearby buried metallic objects. In select embodiments of the present invention a DC power supply delivers a pulsed signal to effect water migration away from the crawlspace while moving available cations in the soil .

Refer to . In select embodiments of the present invention electro osmosis is facilitated by inserting durable dimensionally stable anode electrodes wires such as the durable dimensionally stable anode wires that may be produced via the process detailed in the 169 patent into the soil that is under a structure defining a crawl space within the perimeter of its foundation . The configuration emplaces cathode electrodes rods in the soil directly outside the foundation of that structure. The durable dimensionally stable anode electrode is embedded in the soil under the structure and the cathode electrode typically a copper clad steel ground rod is embedded into the soil outside the foundation . As depicted the cathode electrode may be placed a short distance e.g. 2 meters from the foundation . Hard wires are used to form the circuit containing the durable dimensionally stable anode electrode the cathode electrode and a DC power supply . The number of durable dimensionally stable anode electrodes and cathode electrodes and placement thereof may be determined from an initial resistivity test of the soil . The objective is to achieve a pre specified current density to create an electric field strength in the soil sufficient to overcome the force exerted by the hydraulic gradient on the water molecules not shown separately enclosed therein. When the system is energized cations e.g. Ca not shown separately and water molecules in the soil flow in the direction of the arrows towards the cathode electrodes thus de watering the soil under the crawl space .

In select embodiments of the present invention a DC power supply operates at a constant voltage in the approximate range of 1 to 40 V. Either pulsed or constant direct current is employed to facilitate movement of fluids. In select embodiments of the present invention that employ alternating polarity pulsed current the preferable mode employs a signal that is positive with respect to the cathode electrode more than approximately 70 of the cycle. In select embodiments of the present invention the upper bound on current is maintained in accordance with the current density on the anode electrode . For example the current density is limited to less than approximately 16 mA per linear foot of anode wire of approximately 1.6 mm 1 16 in. diameter. This design criterion maximizes system life and reduces gas generation at the electrodes.

Refer to profile A and plan B views of an embodiment of the present invention that dewaters a crawlspace. The installation employs an anode grid in the crawlspace composed in a preferred embodiment of conductive anode electrodes preferably ceramic coated and cathode electrodes inserted in the soil outside the building foundation .

In select embodiments of the present invention the S X S grid is installed with anode electrodes on approximately one to two meter three to six foot centers and with x approximately 7.6 cm 3 in. depending on soil composition. In select embodiments of the present invention the cathode electrodes are un insulated unwrapped metal rods preferably copper. In alternate embodiments of the present invention the cathode electrodes are wrapped with insulation having only their tips exposed as shown in . The anode electrode is electrically connected to the soil by burying it in a shallow trench shown in cross section only at with backfill the backfill preferably consisting of a mix of powdered graphite coke breeze and bentonite clay as depicted in the expanded portion of . This backfill insures uniformity of current output while increasing the effective surface area of the anode electrode thereby decreasing current density of the anode s output surface. Bentonite clay absorbs water and helps ensure good electrical conductivity. Carbon is a strong conductor that conforms to geometric variations in both the anode electrode and in the soil surrounding the backfill in the trench. In select embodiments of the present invention the installed trench is approximately 15 30 cm six inches to one foot deep to prevent the anode electrodes and backfill from floating to the surface.

In select embodiments of the present invention the grid layout may be constructed of long canister anodes not shown separately buried horizontally.

Refer to depicting a profile A and plan B view of an alternate embodiment of the present invention. In select embodiments of the present invention this installation is used to dewater a crawlspace using an array of vertically installed canister anodes . In select embodiments of the present invention these canister anodes may be of the variety commonly installed in deep well cathodic protection systems. Preferably the canister anodes are buried at the nodes of a grid in which grid spacing is approximately one meter 3ft. and d equals approximately 7.6 cm 3 in. as depicted in the expanded portion of . In select embodiments of the present invention using either of the above described embodiments of the concentration of anode electrodes is densest preferably at the perimeter of the foundation .

Refer to illustrating an alternate embodiment of the present invention in which both the anode electrode and cathode electrode are embedded in the soil outside the building foundation and crawl space . Directional drilling may be used to install both the anode electrodes and the cathode electrodes . The cathode electrode is depicted in communication with the negative side of a DC power supply and the anode electrode in communication with the positive side of the same DC power supply .

Refer to illustrating another embodiment of the present invention a perforated metal preferably copper pipe is employed simultaneously as a cathode and a drain. The pipe may be connected to a conventional gravity drainage network or a pumping system or both not shown separately to handle collected fluids. The pipe may also be covered as indicated by the covered pipe with a water permeable geotextile mat to prevent clogging of the pores.

Refer to illustrating an embodiment of the present invention that incorporates circuitry that reduces the opportunity for corrosion of metallic objects buried nearby. This configuration is arranged to direct the flow of current starting from the anode electrode and flowing through the soil to both the cathode electrode and the buried structure . Both coated and uncoated metallic objects are connected in this manner. These buried objects may include water pipes gas lines shoring and piling structures buried storage tanks and the like. Each of these buried metallic objects as illustrated by the piping is connected in parallel to a DC power supply in series with individual adjustable resistors rheostats . This arrangement is employed to balance the cathodic current delivered to each of the connected buried metallic objects. This reduces the potential for buried metallic objects to corrode shielding them from stray current effects.

In select embodiments of the present invention a system is provided for de watering manmade structure adjacent the perimeter of natural structure at least part of which comprises bedrock. This system comprises one or more channels in the natural structure one or more conducting screens comprising durable dimensionally stable anodes embedded in the manmade structure one or more conducting screens comprising a cathode installed adjacent the natural structure such that at least part of the conducting screen comprising a cathode is installed adjacent the channels and circuitry communicating with the anode screens and cathode screens such that the circuitry facilitates establishing a voltage differential between the anode screens and the cathode screens. Select embodiments employ a pre specified pulse train of DC voltage pulses to migrate water from the manmade structure while moving available cations in the manmade structure.

Select embodiments of the present invention incorporate one or more pipes that drain fluid from the channels.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more of the anode screens comprise ceramic coated wires. In select embodiments of the present invention one or more anode screens are embedded in cementitious material within the manmade structure. In select embodiments of the present invention the cementitious material is a dry mix concrete blown in place by compressed air with water added at the point of disbursal such as Gunite.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more DC power supplies communicate with the circuitry connected to the screens.

In select embodiments of the present invention a method is provided for de watering manmade structure adjacent the perimeter of natural structure at least part of which comprises bedrock. The method comprises performing a resistivity test on the natural structure providing one or more channels in the natural structure attaching one or more conducting screens comprising durable dimensionally stable anodes to the manmade structure installing one or more conducting screens comprising cathodes adjacent the natural structure such that at least part of the conducting screen comprising cathodes is installed adjacent the channels and providing circuitry communicating with the anode screens and cathode screens such that the circuitry facilitates establishing a voltage differential between the anode screens and cathode screens and energizing the circuitry to establish a voltage differential between the anode screens and cathode screens.

In select embodiments of the present invention the immediately above method provides for installing one or more pipes to facilitate draining fluid from the channels.

In select embodiments of the present invention the immediately above method provides anode screens comprised of ceramic coated wires.

In select embodiments of the present invention the immediately above method embeds anode screens in cementitious material within the manmade structure. In select embodiments of the present invention the cementitious material is provided as a dry mix concrete blown in place by compressed air with water added at the point of disbursal such as Gunite.

In select embodiments of the present invention the immediately above method provides one or more DC power supplies communicating with the circuitry.

Refer to depicting initial stages of work for installing an alternate embodiment of the present invention in bedrock . Shallow grooves of several centimeters a few inches in diameter d typically approximately 2.5 5.0 cm one to two in. are drilled in the bedrock at intervals D of about 45 60 cm 18 30 in. on center using directional drilling techniques known in the art. A metal pipe typically copper of appropriate diameter nominally about 15 cm six in. diameter is emplaced for the additional purpose of catching drainage from the grooves .

Refer to depicting plan A and elevation B views of an installation of an embodiment of the present invention in bed rock . In the plan view A after the grooves are formed in the bedrock a wire mesh screen preferably of copper or similar good corrosion resistant conductor is emplaced as a cathode and suitably connected to the negative side of a DC power source not shown separately in typically operating at less than about 50 volts DC and preferably about 24 V DC. Over the cathode screen a first layer of cementitious material A such as a dry mix concrete blown in place by compressed air with water added at the point of disbursal e.g. Gunite or the like is emplaced. On top of this first layer A is emplaced another screen the anode typically comprising a durable dimensionally stable material as described above. The anode screen is suitably connected to the positive side of the DC power source. A second layer B of cementitious material is emplaced over the anode screen . On top of the second layer B is emplaced a vapor barrier such as a metal foil. A final layer C of cementitious material completes the installation. This installation is particularly well suited to protect dams and other large concrete structures built over or on bedrock . The concept of operation is similar to that described above for de watering crawl spaces replacing wires with screens and holding the screens in place between layers A B of cementitious materials. A top vapor barrier precludes entry of water into the installation.

Although specific types of electro osmotic configurations are discussed other similar configurations or methods including those that may have only some of the constituents or steps used in the above examples may be suitable for dehydrating soil while reducing the opportunity for corrosion of nearby buried metallic objects and thus fall within the ambit of a preferred embodiment of the present invention as provided in the claims herein.

Accordingly all such modifications are intended to be included within the scope of this invention as defined in the following claims. In the claims means plus function clauses are intended to cover the structures described herein as performing the recited function and not only structural equivalents but also equivalent structures. Thus although a nail and a screw may not be structural equivalents in that a nail employs a cylindrical surface to secure wooden parts together whereas a screw employs a helical surface in the environment of fastening wooden parts a nail and a screw may be equivalent structures.

The abstract of the disclosure is provided to comply with the rules requiring an abstract that will allow a searcher to quickly ascertain the subject matter of the technical disclosure of any patent issued from this disclosure. 37 CFR 1.72 b . Any advantages and benefits described may not apply to all embodiments of the invention.

