---

title: System and method for hitch with backup anti-jack knife and anti-dive
abstract: For use in landmine clearing, a hitch system providing backup with anti-jack knife and anti-dive, the system includes a hitch assembly and a roller assembly. The hitch assembly has a hinge axis housing containing a hinge shaft and a connector shaft housing containing a stop block having a first side that engages a flat region on the hinge shaft and a second side that engages a biasing spring that is held in the connector shaft housing using an end cap. The roller assembly includes a roller frame that is rigidly mechanically coupled to the hinge shaft. The biasing spring is selected to provide a compressive bias to the stop block such that the roller assembly selective rotates about the hinge axis housing when the roller assembly is subjected to a landmine detonation, and such that rotation of the hinge shaft is prevented during normal forward, reverse, and turning maneuvers.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07100489&OS=07100489&RS=07100489
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07100489
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050711
---
The invention described here may be made used and licensed by and for the U.S. Government for governmental purposes without paying royalty to me.

The present invention generally relates to a hitch system and method for backup with anti jack knife and anti dive.

Military vehicles that are used for clearing landmines are typically equipped with landmine clearing apparatuses e.g. massive cog wheel rollers that explode buried landmines on the fore and aft ends of the vehicle. Referring to a diagram illustrating a top view of a conventional aft end landmine clearing apparatus is shown. The apparatus can be towed behind a vehicle not shown to clear i.e. detonate landmines that are buried in terrain.

The apparatus typically includes a drawbar assembly having chains and with first ends connected at left and right ends respectively of a shaft and a tow eyelet . The second ends of the chains and the eyelet are generally mechanically coupled to the tow vehicle. The chains generally permit the apparatus to swivel during forward motion turns while providing support for the rear of the assembly such that the assembly is elevated above the terrain.

A roller frame is typically mechanically coupled to the shaft such that the frame rotates about the shaft particularly during a landmine explosion event. The frame generally includes a roller sub assembly having massive cog wheel rollers e.g. rollers that rotate on a roller shaft and explode landmines to clear an area.

The apparatus is typically towed behind the military vehicle during normal operation. However upon some occasions an operator of the vehicle may wish to reverse directions of i.e. back up the vehicle. Under many operating terrain conditions the apparatus will jack knife or dive i.e. the frame will dig into the terrain during back up operations. Thus the apparatus will impede or prevent the desired rearward vehicle motion. Such impeded or prevented vehicle operation can inconvenience or endanger the vehicle operators and occupants and can damage the apparatus .

Another situation that can cause damage to the apparatus is when the vehicle is moving forward or backing up and a landmine is exploded causing the rollers to first become elevated and rotate about the shaft and then drop. When the rollers drop the drawbar and the frame can be jammed into the terrain and damaged.

Thus there exists a need and an opportunity for an improved a hitch system and method for backup with anti jack knife and anti dive. Such an improved system and method may overcome one or more of the deficiencies of the conventional approaches.

Accordingly the present invention may provide an improved hitch system and method for backup with anti jack knife and anti dive reduction or prevention. Such a system and apparatus may overcome one or more of the deficiencies of conventional approaches.

According to the present invention for use in landmine clearing a hitch system providing backup with anti jack knife and anti dive is provided. The system comprises a hitch assembly and a roller assembly. The hitch assembly has a hinge axis housing containing a hinge shaft and a connector shaft housing containing a stop block having a first side that engages a flat region on the hinge shaft and a second side that engages a biasing spring that is held in the connector shaft housing using an end cap. The roller assembly comprises a roller frame that is rigidly mechanically coupled to the hinge shaft. The biasing spring is selected to provide a compressive bias to the stop block such that the roller assembly selective rotates about the hinge axis housing when the roller assembly is subjected to a landmine detonation and such that rotation of the hinge shaft is prevented during normal forward reverse and turning maneuvers.

Also according to the present invention a method of providing tow vehicle backup with anti jack knife and anti dive for clearing landmines is provided. The method comprises rigidly mechanically coupling a hinge axis housing containing a hinge shaft and a connector shaft housing containing a stop block having a first side that engages a flat region on the hinge shaft and a second side that engages a biasing spring that is held in the connector shaft housing using an end cap to form a hitch assembly and rigidly mechanically coupling a roller assembly that comprises a roller frame to the hinge shaft. The biasing spring is selected to provide a compressive bias to the stop block such that the roller assembly selective rotates about the hinge axis housing when the roller assembly is subjected to a landmine detonation and such that rotation of the hinge shaft is prevented during normal forward reverse and turning maneuvers.

Further according to the present invention a drawbar hitch system providing backup with anti jack knife and anti dive is provided. The system comprises a hinge axis housing containing a hinge shaft and a connector shaft housing containing a stop block having a first side that engages a flat region on the hinge shaft and a second side that engages a biasing spring that is held in the connector shaft housing using an end cap and a connector shaft that is slidable inside of the connector shaft housing the connector shaft housing further houses a transverse portion of the hinge shaft at the intersection of the connector shaft housing with the hinge axis housing and the connector shaft has a first end that includes a tang that is configured to engage at least one matching slot in the hinge shaft and thereby prevent rotation of the hinge shaft during normal reverse maneuvers and when the roller assembly is subjected to a landmine detonation.

The above features and other features and advantages of the present invention are readily apparent from the following detailed descriptions thereof when taken in connection with the accompanying drawings.

With reference to the Figures the preferred embodiments of the present invention will now be described in detail. Generally the present invention provides an improved hitch system and method for backup with anti jack knife and anti dive. Such a system and method may be advantageously implemented in connection with a mine clearing apparatus. However the improved hitch system and method of the present invention may be implemented in connection with any appropriate towing system to meet the design criteria of a particular application.

Referring to a diagram illustrating a simplified top view of an aft end landmine clearing apparatus e.g. system assembly arrangement etc. implementation of the present invention is shown. Various aspects of the system are simplified for clarity of explanation in and are described in more detail in connection with . The apparatus is typically towed i.e. pulled drawn dragged etc. behind a military vehicle not shown to detonate landmines that are buried in terrain ground on which the vehicle and the system operate during a normal landmine clearing operation. However upon some occasions an operator of the vehicle may wish to reverse directions of i.e. back up the vehicle. The present invention generally provides a reduction or prevention of jack knife and dive by the aft end landmine clearing apparatus during backing up operations.

Longitudinal and lateral directions relative to the system are generally as illustrated. As such vertical i.e. up down upward downward etc. directions see for example are generally perpendicular to the longitudinal lateral plane.

The system generally comprises a hitch e.g. drawbar tow bar connector coupler etc. assembly e.g. sub system apparatus unit etc. and a roller assembly . The assembly may include left and right connector assembly arms and respectively left and right turning control arms and respectively a hinge axis housing containing a hinge shaft a connector housing a cross brace latch housing left and right lateral beams and respectively left and right pivot assemblies and respectively left and right control eyelets and respectively and a tow connector eyelet .

The connector assembly arms the hinge axis housing the connector housing the cross brace latch housing the lateral beams and the pivot assemblies are generally combined e.g. mechanically coupled by welding bolting etc. to form a substantially rigid framework.

The eyelets and the eyelet are generally mechanically coupled i.e. connected hooked fastened latched etc. to the tow vehicle such that the system may towed behind the tow vehicle when the tow vehicle moves in a forward direction.

The roller assembly generally comprises a roller frame that may be mechanically coupled e.g. welded bolted etc. to the shaft such that the sub system rotates about the shaft housing and the shaft selectively rotates within the shaft housing when the system is subjected to an explosive event e.g. when the roller assembly detonates a landmine . However as discussed in more detail below the assemblies and generally latch at an operating position during normal forward reverse and turning modes of operation of the apparatus .

The frame generally includes a roller sub assembly having a plurality of massive cog wheel rollers e.g. rollers that rotate on a roller shaft and explode e.g. trigger the detonation of landmines to clear an area when drawn by the vehicle. The sub system is generally implemented having sufficient weight mass to detonate landmines that are encountered in the environment e.g. buried underground where the present invention is implemented.

The turning control arms are generally slidable e.g. in out slide and pivotable e.g. side to side swing in the respective pivot housings during forward motion of the system . However the turning control arms generally latch at an operating position during reverse and lateral motion of the apparatus . The eyelet is generally mechanically coupled to a first end of a tow connector e.g. shaft shown for example in . The tow connector shaft is generally slidable in out slide to a limited extent in the connector housing . As such the sub assembly may rotate e.g. flex bend articulate twist etc. relative to the tow vehicle to accommodate changes in terrain beyond the amount i.e. level degree etc. of movement provided by a conventional apparatus such as the mine detonation device .

Referring to a diagram illustrating a sectional view taken at lines of is shown. As illustrated in the apparatus is generally operating in a forward towed mode on substantially level terrain. generally illustrates an example of an apparatus for latching the sub system to the sub system to selectively limit rotation at the hinge axis formed by the shaft .

The housing generally houses i.e. holds contains etc. the shaft a transverse portion of the shaft at the intersection i.e. the inverted T with the hinge housing a stop block and a spring . An end cap may be attached e.g. threadably fastened and the like at the end of the housing that is opposite the end of the housing where the eyelet is implemented.

The shaft generally includes a flat region that normally engages a face of the stop block . The flat may be sized to receive the respective face of the stop block . The spring is generally disposed i.e. placed positioned installed etc. between the stop block and the end cap . The spring is generally selected to provide a compressive bias to the stop block i.e. the spring urges the stop block against the flat region such that rotation of the shaft is prevented during normal forward reverse and turning maneuvers of the hitch system .

On the side of the shaft that is opposite the flat the shaft generally includes a plurality of recesses e.g. grooves slots holes etc. e.g. slots . At the end opposite the eyelet the connector shaft generally includes at least one tang i.e. pawl lug protrusion etc. . The tang is generally sized to engage e.g. mate into respective ones of the slots . The tang will generally engage or not engage respective ones of the slots depending on the mode of operation of the apparatus as discussed in more detail below to further restrict rotation of the shaft and lateral motion of the hinge shaft and thus the sub assembly including the rollers . As illustrated in during a normal forward motion of the tow vehicle the pawl is generally not engaged in any of the slots .

Referring to a diagram illustrating a top view of the center portion e.g. the portion that resides at the intersection of the housings and of the shaft is shown. As illustrated in the shaft is rotated such that the slots are more clearly illustrated. However the hinge shaft is generally oriented substantially as shown in i.e. the flat is generally abutted by the respective face surface of the stop block and the lug is disengaged from all of the recesses during a forward towed mode of operation on substantially level terrain.

Referring to a section top view illustrating additional details of the apparatus is shown. The control arms each generally further comprise respective latch holes e.g. latch holes . . . in the control arm and latch holes . . . in the control arm at the end that engages respective pivot assemblies . Internal to the latch housing the system generally comprises respective left and right latch apparatuses e.g. mechanisms devices sub systems etc. e.g. left latch apparatus and right latch apparatus . The respective left and right intersections of the connector assembly arms the latch housing and the lateral beams generally comprise substantially vertical substantially cylindrical turning arm pivot housings e.g. a left turning arm pivot housing and a right turning arm pivot housing .

The latch apparatus generally comprises a locking device e.g. left and right locking devices and respectively an interconnect cable e.g. left and right interconnect cables and respectively and a pull link e.g. left and right pull links and respectively . The cable generally flexibly and rotatably mechanically couples the respective locking device and the pull link at opposing ends. As described in more detail below in connection with the locking device generally engages a hole to lock i.e. stop prevent etc. in out sliding of the respective control arm particularly during a backing up operation.

The pull link generally has a first end that is rotatably coupled to the cable and a second end that is rotatably coupled to the connector shaft . As illustrated in in one example the second end of the link may be coupled e.g. using a bolt rivet pin and the like to an outer edge of the connector shaft . The latch apparatuses are shown in a locked mode in as may occur during a backing up operation.

The side to side swing i.e. pivot of the control arms is described in more detail below in connection with . The latch apparatuses are described in more detail below in connection with .

Referring to a diagram illustrating a side view of a section of the apparatus including the pivot apparatus . The pivot apparatus generally comprises the turning arm pivot housing and a pivot . That is respective pivots that are pivotably e.g. rotatably mounted in the turning arm pivot housings . Referring to diagrams illustrating respective top end and side views of the pivot are shown.

The pivot generally comprises an end cap that generally holds the pivot in the turning arm pivot housing a control arm housing that is shaped to slidably receive the respective control arm i.e. the in out sliding of the control arm occurs within the control arm housing and a substantially cylindrical pivot stub . The pivot stub is generally sized to receive the end cap at an end that extends generally vertically through the turning arm pivot housing . The side to side pivot of the control arm is generally achieved via rotation of the pivot stub section of the pivot in the turning arm pivot housing .

Referring to in another example the links may be coupled to the shaft using a single pin link at about the lateral center of the connector shaft . Referring also to when the apparatus is towed from a stationary position to a forward moving position the bar is generally urged slidably forward. The links may encounter e.g. interfere with the inner surface of the intersection of the housings and and rotate about the link pin or alternatively respective link pins such that tension is applied to the cables and and the sliding movement of the connector shaft is limited.

Referring to in connection with the locking device e.g. locking device as illustrated in generally comprises a latch key e.g. latch key a latch rotation pin e.g. latch rotation pin a latch spring e.g. latch spring and a stabilizer pin e.g. stabilizer pin . The latch spring is generally implemented as a coil spring.

The latch key may have a first leg that may engage a hole in the control arm e.g. a hole in the control arm shown in phantom in and a second leg that may be mechanically coupled to the cable at a first end and rotatably mechanically coupled to the housing shown in phantom via the respective latch rotation pin . The latch spring may be positioned under compression to provide a biasing force between an inner surface of the latch housing and the first leg of the latch key .

The biasing force between the inner surface of the housing and the first leg of the latch key generally biases the latch key towards engagement in a hole . The biasing force between the inner surface of the latch housing and the first leg of the latch key is generally overcome by the tension generated on the cable when the system is towed in a forward direction which may cause the control arms to be free to move slidably in the respective pivot assemblies e.g. the latch mechanisms may be unlatched .

The stabilizer pin is generally disposed internal e.g. inside the coils of the spring to the spring and is generally sized having a length such that both ends of the pin extend outside of the latch spring . The ends of the pin generally engage respective notches recesses in the cross brace latch housing and the latch key .

The present invention generally provides for the landmine clearing assembly to move substantially freely during mine clearing maneuvers i.e. operations procedures processes methods steps etc. including turns. However the drawbar system i.e. the combination of the sub system and the sub system may be substantially rigid during backing up i.e. tow vehicle reverse motions to reduce or prevent lateral jack knife and downward diving effects that can impede or prevent the desired reverse motion and damage the apparatus .

During backing procedures the tow connector moves generally rearward inside the connector housing and mates up with i.e. mechanically couples to the hinge axis shaft e.g. the pawl engages a slot to prevent the hinge shaft from overcoming the stop block and the force exerted by the biasing spring . The biasing spring is generally selected i.e. chosen determined calculated picked etc. such that the force exerted is generally sufficient to prevent decoupling of the pawl at the shaft slots .

In contrast the tow connector shaft also engages and releases the locking mechanism cables that are used to lock the turning control arms in place. Such locking of the turning control arms may reduce or prevent the system from jack knifing. The cables are generally slack during backing which generally provides for the springs to push the pin legs of the latch keys into one of several holes in the turning control arms .

When the locking mechanism is not engaged the rollers are generally free to move laterally i.e. transversely swing side to side etc. on the shaft in the housing . The lateral movement of the rollers generally provides accommodation to variations in the terrain upon which the system generally is used. The turning control arms slide in and out of the turning arm pivot which pivots in the pivot housing .

The stop block generally restricts movement of the hinge axis shaft except during landmine blast occurrences and during backing up operations. The connector shaft spring is generally selected such that a force from the connector shaft biasing spring on the flat region of the stop block that is sufficient to maintain horizontal orientation of the drawbar assembly vis a vis the roller assembly off the terrain during normal operation of the apparatus such that chains such as the chains of the conventional apparatus may be deleted in the present invention.

However the upward force of a landmine blast may be much greater than the connecting spring force. As such the unit will generally absorb energy and reduce or prevent structural damage. The stop block will generally self reset into the flat region of the hinge axis shaft during forward motion of the apparatus in response to the force exerted by the spring .

As is apparent then from the above detailed description the present invention may provide an improved hitch system and method for backup with anti jack knife and anti dive. The system and method of the present invention may be advantageously implemented in connection with tow vehicles such as military vehicles used for clearing landmines.

Various alterations and modifications will become apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the scope and spirit of this invention and it is understood this invention is limited only by the following claims.

