---

title: Systems and methods for computer aided inventing
abstract: Methods and systems are provided for a systematic approach to computer aided inventing. In a modeling environment, a model representing any item, composition or process can be defined and configured using the lexicon and specification of an innovation database. In the model, objects can be identified, defined, and configured to provide the model with constituent products, components, features and materials. An innovation engine automatically applies one or more morphs from the innovation database to the objects of the model to generate morphed versions of the model that may provide innovations of or invention to the item, composition or process represented by the model.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08229871&OS=08229871&RS=08229871
owner: 
number: 08229871
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051228
---
The present invention generally relates to methods and systems for a systematic approach to computer aided inventing. The present invention claims priority to a United States provisional application entitled Systems and Methods for Computer Aided Inventing filed Dec. 29 2004 Ser. No. 60 639 991 and to a United States provisional application entitled Systems and Methods for Computer Aided Inventing filed Mar. 4 2005 Ser. No. 60 594 025 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention generally relates to methods and systems for a systematic approach to computer aided inventing.

Creative thinking and brainstorming in order to innovate new products technologies and solutions can be challenging time consuming and limited to the knowledge background education experience imagination and other personality and thinking traits of people involved in the innovation process.

Innovation can be a source of sustainable competitive advantage and lasting success in the fast changing business world. Innovative thinking can lead to inventions for new products technologies and solutions to increase productivity and efficiency and improve the quality of products and services. Creativity may manifest itself in design art and music each of which may also contribute to competitive advantage and success. Inventing is usually done by creative individuals through their own internal thinking patterns or from brainstorming sessions which provide collaborative stimuli to assist in the creative thinking process. These brainstorming sessions may be loosely structured by an agenda around an area of interest and will be limited by the creative and imaginative thinking patterns of the session participants. Although the individuals may be creative they may not be able to think of all the innovative choices for an area of interest in the brainstorming session. For example the individuals participating in the brainstorming session may only represent a small subset of all the possible technology disciplines. As such they may not know of or think of alternatives improvements and other creative elements that may be applicable to or used in the area of interest. Furthermore the individuals may not think of a creative element mainly because their particular thinking patterns prevent associating or applying the creative element to the area of interest. For example one may not think of combining a microprocessor with a toothbrush in a brainstorming session. Because humans tend not to be highly detailed most people find it difficult or tedious to enumerate all the species details or embodiments of an invention that is conceived as a broad concept. For example if one tried to list every type of metal it would be quite difficult without reference to a published list.

As the pace of change in new product development accelerates the pace of innovation in product development also needs to accelerate to sustain competitive advantage to provide or continue commercial success or just to continue to develop new products. Methods and systems are desired to increase the speed and efficiency of inventive processes and to accelerate innovation to provide new commercially viable ideas such as products designs music and services for the marketplace.

Additionally filing patent applications may be necessary to protect the investment in research and development of the invention and to sustain the competitive advantage and commercial success desired by the invention. The filing date of a patent application can be critical for establishing a priority right against others and for protecting the invention. Any delays between conception of an invention and drafting a patent application may result in a delay in a filing date and thus possibly hindering the protection of the invention. Especially with the accelerated pace of change in new product development the pace of developing an invention from a concept to a filed patent application also needs to accelerate. As such methods and systems are desired to increase the speed and efficiency of drafting and filing patent applications to protect inventions.

Computation tools are excellent at generating diversity but are often imable to recognize the quality of the outputted variants. Humans on the other hand can typically discern the quality of an innovation be it an idea technology or design. A computation based or other systematic method based modeling environment which generates diversity with an output that allows a person to interactively select and guide the generation of diversity would be very useful.

The present invention provides systems and methods for applying computer aided inventing assistance to the process of inventing new items compositions or processes in a systematic fashion. In a modeling environment a baseline entity can be graphically modeled and designated as the entity to start the inventing process. The starting baseline entity can then be further described in terms of its fundamental products components and elements referred to as objects as well as the materials that make up those objects and the context of the entity s current use. The present invention includes an innovation database that provides a lexicon and specification framework. The innovation database comprises objects materials and configuration data to describe the baseline entity and objects of the baseline entity in a flexible and dynamic manner. The present invention further provides for the selection of one or more objects to be modified from its original form by applying a morph from the innovation database. A morph is a modification to an object of the baseline entity such as a replacement of addition to or alternative configuration of an object. The term alternative configuration includes a modification in the structure of an object as well as a modification in the relationship between an object and one or more other objects of the baseline entity such as a change in distance angle or type of connection between objects. The morphed version of the starting baseline entity provides a new baseline entity that may represent an invention. This morphed baseline entity may be rendered in the modeling environment and can be selected as a starting baseline entity for further modification.

Furthermore the system can automatically apply a multitude of morphs to one or more of the objects or all of the objects of the starting baseline entity to form a large set of different morphed baseline entities each representing a possible invention. The morphed versions can be further selected based on a number of factors including but not limited to the usefulness of the invention the cost of the objects and materials that make up the entity the consumer appeal of the invention the advantages over the baseline entity and the uniqueness over any prior art. These factors may be applied by manually selecting morphed baseline entities and or eliminating erroneous or unwanted entities from a generated set of morphed baseline entities. Alternatively these factors may be applied through the use of automated quantitative and or qualitative filters to select desired entities from the generated set of morphed baseline entities. Each selected morphed entity may be stored in a specific embodiment database to provide a comprehensive and useful source of information for supplying a description of an invention in the detailed description section of a patent application.

Additionally portions of a patent application including but not limited to Figures tables examples and claims can be automatically generated for any set of one or more selected morphed entities.

In summary the present invention provides a structured and systematic method for facilitating the inventing process while reducing the need for creativity input and the time for determining a desired invention. Additionally the present invention can provide a more comprehensive approach to inventing with a multitude of alternative embodiments provided from a database.

The terms invention or inventing as used herein refer to any creative process that produces something new. It is not limited to creations or ideas that are patentable. Rather it is intended to encompass such diverse creations such as flow charts circuit designs software designs database designs graphics arts customization or configuration of vehicles chemical formulations motion pictures including animation advertising such as the creation of television commercials graphic ads audio ads internet advertising architecture negotiation strategies website design writings such as screenplays plays novels business writings and legal writings music composition sculpture business plans or strategies food recipes restaurant menu creation such as custom sandwiches manufacturing plant design plastic surgery planning landscape design video game design as well as use within a gaming environment for example the design or creation of a character for use in a game travel planning military campaign planning teaching plans desktop settings within a software operating system investment strategies portfolio composition homeland security scenario building for example modeling what terrorists might attempt workout or exercise routine design research and experimental design sports strategy design design of gambling machines or other gambling games such as scratch tickets and packaging design.

In one broad aspect the present invention provides a method for systematically aiding invention. The method includes the step of designating a baseline entity that may be a composition an item text music a design or a process. The method further includes the step of selecting one or more objects constituting a portion of the baseline entity. The one or more objects may represent a product a component and an element of the baseline entity. The method associates at least one of the one or more objects with a model class to define the object. The method also includes selecting at least one of the one or more objects for modification. The method further includes applying selected or generated by program a morph to the selected object from a plurality of morphs to produce a morphed baseline entity. The morph may require selection from one or more other databases if it involves the addition to replacement of or a property change in the selected object. In a preferred embodiment the present invention is carried out through the use of a computer and the designation of the baseline entity is done in a model in a modeling environment.

In one aspect the method of the present invention provides a representation of the morphed baseline entity. The representation may include a two dimensional or three dimensional graphical rendering a textual description or a three dimensional model such as an output from a 3 D lithography printer of the morphed baseline entity. In one embodiment the model class is a selection from an object class a configuration class or a materials class. The object class may also include a selection from an element class a composition class or a product class. In another aspect of the present invention the plurality of morphs includes a configuration morph an object morph or a material morph or any combination thereof. Applying a morph to a selected object may include a replacement of an addition to or an alternate configuration of the selected object.

In one aspect of the present invention the step of designating the baseline entity includes graphically representing the baseline entity and or providing a text description of the baseline entity. The step of indicating an object of the baseline entity may include graphically specifying the object and or providing a description of the object. The method of the present invention may also include associating the baseline entity with a class for a composition an item or a process. In another aspect the present invention associates the baseline entity with a context. The context may indicate an environment for which to apply the method of the present invention to the baseline entity. In a further aspect the method of the present invention may include selecting the morph the object and the model class from a hierarchical representation of an invention lexicon database.

In a further aspect the present invention may include automatically applying the plurality of morphs to one or more objects of the baseline entity or to all of the objects of the baseline entity. The present invention may also automatically provide representations of the baseline entity with each of the plurality of morphs applied to the objects.

In yet another aspect of the present invention the method may include providing quality information associated with applying the morph to the object. The quality information may indicate the usefulness and or the uniqueness of the morph. The method may further include selecting an indicator representing a level of usefulness and or uniqueness of the morphed object.

In an additional aspect the present invention may further generate a portion of a patent application descriptive of the morphed item composition or process. The generated portion of the patent application may include a claim a specification and a figure.

In one aspect the method of the present invention may be applied repetitively by designating one of the following as the baseline entity 1 one or more objects of the baseline entity 2 the morphed object and 3 the baseline entity with the morphed object.

In another aspect the present invention relates to a device readable medium having device readable instructions to execute the steps of the method as described above related to systematically providing computer aided inventing.

In one aspect the present invention is directed towards a system for providing computer aided inventing. The system includes a modeling environment and an innovation engine. The modeling environment has a configuration mechanism and a selection mechanism. The modeling environment provides a model of a baseline entity representing a composition an item or a process. The configuration mechanism may be used to define one or more objects constituting a portion of the baseline entity and to associate at least one of the one or more objects with a model class. The model class may include an object class a configuration class or a materials class. The object class may further include an element class a composition class and a product class. The one or more objects may represent a product a component or an element of the baseline entity. The selection mechanism may be used to select at least one of the objects for modification. The innovation engine communicates with the modeling environment and applies a morph to the selected object from a plurality of morphs.

The system of the present invention may further include a rendering mechanism to provide a graphical representation of the baseline entity with the morphed object. The plurality of morphs applied by the innovation engine may include a configuration morph an object morph or a material morph or any combination thereof such as a configuration and material morph a configuration and object morph and a material and configuration morph.

In one aspect the configuration mechanism of the present invention is configured to provide either a graphical representation and or a description of the baseline entity. The configuration mechanism may also be configured to provide a graphical representation and or a description of the one or more objects of the baseline entity. Also the configuration mechanism may be used to provide an association of the baseline entity with a class of a composition an item or a process.

In one aspect of the present invention the modeling environment includes selecting the morph the object or the model class from a hierarchical representation of an invention lexicon database. The morph may include a replacement of an addition to or an alternate configuration of the selected object. A morph may modify the structure of the selection objects and or the relationship between the selected object and one or more other objects of the baseline entity such as a change in distance angle or type of connection between objects. For example in some embodiments a morph may include applying one or more of the following to the selected object and or its relationship with one or more other objects stretch twist bend compress rotate about interface axis slide interface bend at interface increase decrease interface distance separate mirror image rotate inside out permutate repeat delete interlace overlap grow shrink append an additional element change material change color change ratio of components harden irradiate mix crystallize desiccate dope oxidize reduce change opacity and modify pressure.

In another aspect of the present invention the choices for carrying out a morph can be filtered via the configuration mechanism. The morphs may be filtered to limit the choices of morphs to one or more of the following the objects available to replace or add to the selected object the materials available to be applied to a selected object the alternative configurations available to morph the selected object or the morphs available to apply to the selected object. Additionally the filtering of morphs may be based upon one or more qualitative or quantitative characteristics that may be associated with an object material or configuration of a selected object or associated with a morph. These characteristics include but are not limited to cost practicality consumer appeal function size field of use or user defined characteristics.

In an additional aspect the innovation engine of the modeling environment provides quality information associated with applying the morph to the object. The quality information may indicate the usefulness and or uniqueness of applying the morph. Furthermore the modeling environment may also provide for selecting an indicator representing a level of usefulness and or uniqueness of the baseline morphed object.

In one aspect of the present invention the innovation engine automatically applies the plurality of morphs to one or more objects of the baseline entity or to each of the objects of the baseline entity to create a number of morphed objects. The modeling environment via the rendering mechanism may automatically provide textual and or graphical representations of the resulting morphed objects.

In a further aspect the system of the present invention also includes a patent application generator. The patent application generator is in communication with the modeling environment to generate at least a portion of a patent application descriptive of the morphed object process or composition in the modeling environment. The generated portion of the patent application may include a claim a specification and a figure.

In another aspect the system of the present invention further includes a prior art searching module in communication with the modeling environment. Textual output of the morphed objects from the modeling environment is converted to appropriate syntax compatible with searching prior art databases such as the United States Patent and Trademark databases available at www.uspto.gov.

In yet a further aspect the configuration mechanism of the present invention is configured to provide a selection of one of the following as the baseline entity 1 one of the one or more objects of the baseline entity 2 the morphed object or 3 the baseline entity with the morphed object.

The details of various embodiments of the invention are set forth in the accompanying drawings and the description below.

Certain embodiments of the present invention are described below. It is however expressly noted that the present invention is not limited to these embodiments but rather the intention is that additions and modifications to what is expressly described herein also are included within the scope of the invention. Moreover it is to be understood that the features of the various embodiments described herein are not mutually exclusive and can exist in various combinations and permutations even if such combinations or permutations are not expressly made herein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

It should be understood that the system and method of this invention may be carried out without the aid of a computer such as by manually reviewing flash or index cards that represent the various morphs objects materials and configurations utilized by the invention. While not a preferred embodiment such a system and method are within the scope of the present invention.

The illustrative embodiment of the present invention provides systems and methods for computer aided inventing to assist in the process of inventing new items compositions or processes in a systematic and structured manner. In a modeling environment a baseline entity can be graphically modeled and designated as the starting entity. The baseline entity may represent an item composition or process from which one desires to invent. For example one may be looking to invent a new type of toothbrush. A model of a toothbrush may be provided in the modeling environment and selected as the starting baseline entity.

The baseline entity may be a pre existing entity or an inventive entity itself that was created using traditional inventive means. In the latter scenario the system and method of this invention may be used to elaborate additional species of the invention and to create additional new inventions using the initial invention as the starting point.

In one embodiment the user designates the starting baseline entity. This may be achieved by selecting from a list of pre existing entities stored within the system by graphically rendering an entity using tools present in the system e.g. drawing tools CAD tools etc. or through the use of an external program and then importing the rendering into the system by obtaining an image of an existing product e.g scanning and importing said image into the system. In an alternate embodiment the system generates the baseline entity based upon a series of queries from the system and responses from the user. Such an embodiment is particularly useful when the user wants to solve a problem for which no product presently exists. This query response system can be in the form of a wizard of the type frequently present in commercial software such as Microsoft Office . In yet another embodiment the system can simply pick a baseline entity at random or based upon parameters such as cost novelty consumer appeal etc. The system selected baseline entity will be chosen from an database in the system. Most preferably all three embodiments are incorporated into the system and the user is given the choice via a configuration mechanism as to how to generate the baseline entity.

In some cases the baseline entities are dynamic or part of a time dependent process. For example a six pack of soda is dynamic in that the individual filled cans are removed from the packaging they become empty cans after the content is consumed and the packaging becomes separated from the cans when the cans are all removed. When such a situation arises the system can generate a series of models representing the different states of the entity and the context . At the users choice any or all of the states may be morphed. This allows the user to consider potential improvements at various states. The system can be configured to enable the user to move back or forward in time to observe the morph throughout the various states of the dynamic process.

The starting baseline entity can then be further described in terms of its fundamental and constituent elements or parts referred to as objects. The objects may represent a product component or element of the baseline entity. For example for a toothbrush baseline entity one object may represent the toothbrush itself as a product. In another example an object may represent the handle which is a component of the toothbrush and in another example an object may represent the rounded end of the handle which is an element of the handle. A second object may be defined to represent the brush portion of the toothbrush made of bristles and connected to a brush base. The objects can also be defined to be composed of a material. For example the toothbrush handle may be described as being made of plastic. Additionally the objects can be defined to have a configuration. For example the toothbrush may be defined to have a linear arranged handle with the brush on the end of the handle. As such the baseline entity of the toothbrush would be defined by the objects as a round ended handle made of plastic connected to a brush base holding a brush including bristles and the brush connected to the end of the linear arranged handle.

The terms baseline entity objects product component element part material and configuration are to be interpreted as defined herein. To the extent that such definitions vary from a dictionary definition or definition in the art the definitions used herein shall govern the interpretation. These concepts are often given different names in the CAD art. For example see www.solidworks.com wherein the terms shape operation feature part component and assembly are used to define various aspects of a product.

The baseline entity can be described in terms of objects in any form or granularity desired. For example in one case the bristles of the toothbrush may be considered as a whole and be described with an object representing the bristle head as a part of the toothbrush. In another case each bristle may be modeled as an object and further considered and described separately as elements of the toothbrush such as thin plastic flexible smooth rods. A database referred to as the innovation database is used to provide a specification framework for defining objects and forming the baseline entity in a flexible and dynamic manner.

For certain applications it may be desirable that a subset of objects within a baseline entity are constrained in order to preserve functionality. The constraint may be achieved through a grouping function that allows the user to designate multiple objects in the baseline entity that are part of a group and perform a specific function. Alternatively the constraint may be achieved by designating multiple objects in the baseline entity and applying standard constraint tools that are well known in the computer aided design art. These include but are not limited to snap to grid snap to drawing aids snap to shape interfaces snap to alignment box snap to shape geometry glue to shape geometry glue to shape handles glue to shape vertices glue to connection points and snap to dynamic grid as well as known connection tools.

The ability to constrain certain objects within a baseline entity is preferably present in the system and method of this invention. Morphs applied to constrained objects will them be restricted to those which do not destroy the functionality. Software for determining whether functionality is maintained is known in the art see for example the CAD software program Electric available from wwvw.staticfreesoft.com .

Certain features of a baseline entity are conceptual and would not be considered objects in a traditional sense. One of these is a surface plane such as the plane formed by the distal ends of the bristles of a toothbrush. Surface planes may be altered and varied such as having the distal ends of the bristles define a zigzag plane and extending the bristles to meet this planar surface. Morphs that change planes are present in the morph database utilized by the system of this invention.

Another non traditional feature is the spaces within objects or defined by being surrounded by multiple objects such as the space within a sealed tube. Typically such spaces are filled with air but a morph that changes material could be applied to such a space to replace air with a gas such as argon for reducing rusting.

In a preferred embodiment the user would choose whether or not to include planes and spaces as objects that may be subjected to selection and morphs.

The present invention further provides for the selection of one or more objects to be modified from its original form by applying a morph from the innovation database. A morph is a replacement of addition to or alternative configuration of a defined object of the baseline entity. A morph may modify the structure of the selection objects and or the relationship between the selected object and one or more other objects of the baseline entity such as a change in distance angle or type of connection between objects. The application of a morph to the starting baseline entity provides a modified baseline entity that may represent an invention. A morph may change a material a feature a component or configuration of the object or any one or more combinations thereof. For example a material morph on the handle of a toothbrush may change it from plastic to stainless steel. In another case a feature morph may change the toothbrush handle to a bent rod.

Other examples of morphs that may be applied to objects by the method and system of this invention are 

Change Object This morph has different options. In its most simple form it substitutes an object with another object in the same hierarchical class and lower hierarchical classes. For example a glue connection between bristle of toothbrush and the handle can be changed to a rotating joint or a vibrating connection etc. Another option changes the original object to an object of a different hierarchical class.

Modify Edges. This morph is based on existing CAD tools. The edges of a selected object are modified. For example a box with square edges is changed to a box with rounded edges. The method and system of this invention are able to implement this morph with a variety and range of edge shapes and radii. The parameters for modification edge angle or arc angle range increment of change in angle number of embodiments to produce within the range and slope of change linear geometric parabolic are all preferably user configurable as well as having default settings.

Coat With a Material This morph will coat an object or set of objects with materials from the material database.

Change Basic Configuration This morph changes the configuration of the selected objects to one of the possible configurations in the configuration database. For example if the baseline entity comprises four objects in a linear configuration the Change Basic Configuration Morph can create morphed entities in rectangular triagonal pyramid planar tri star T and Y configurations. The choices of configurations to apply within this morph may be selected by the user or generated automatically by the system. Impossible configurations such as a square configuration when only three objects are selected are preferably unavailable as possible selections by the user and are not generated automatically by the system.

Change Internal Texture This morph transforms uniform solids into non uniform solids. For example when applied to an object composed of solid cement the morph will produce objects made of bricks of cement packed balls of cement crushed cement pulverized cement and other non solid forms. This morph can also add internal patterns of spaces such as channels or porosity to a selected object.

Fuse Segment This morph fuses identical components into one or breaks down uniform objects into segments.

Grid Morphs This morph will add or delete rows or columns in an object as well as varying grid alignments to a variety of known grid configurations. For example in a toothbrush the bristles are grouped and arranged in a grid pattern. This morph would add or delete rows or columns of bristles or change the grid pattern in which those bristles are arrayed.

Artistic Filter Morphs These morphs are similar to the filters available in many commercially available graphic arts software such as Adobe Photoshop . These morphs are most useful when the system and method of this invention are applied to baseline entities in the design and graphic art fields but may also be employed in any fields wherein a selected object comprises a graphical element to be morphed.

Reverse Arrow Direction Morph This morph is for use in conjunction with baseline entities that comprise an object that is a flow chart e.g. a business plan software design database design military planning etc. . The morph reverses arrow directions in the flow chart and allows for creating permutations of arrow directions.

Other pre existing CAD and graphic arts tools can also be employed as morphs in the systems and methods of this invention including but not limited to extrusion warp deform transform skew distort and various alignment functions.

Text specific morphs may also be included in the methods and systems of this invention. These include many text changes that are found in commercially available word processing programs such as WordPerfect and Microsoft Word . They include but are not limited to change case change style e.g. bold italic underline etc change color alignment change font and employing word art styles. These morphs are useful when an object in the baseline entity comprises text such as a logo instructions on use literature and any other writings.

Other morphs that may be incorporated into the system and method of this invention are morphs that are typically utilized in genetic algorithms. These are well known in the art and are incorporated herein by reference.

It will be apparent from above that certain morphs that are capable of altering selected objects over a range of parameters e.g. morphs that alter distance between objects morphs that alter the angle of an object etc. and will potentially produce multiple morphed baseline entities. The choices of parameters involved in these morphs will determine the number of morphed baseline entities produced and are preferably user adjustable. For example the application of a bend object morph requires parameters of the range of bending e.g. 10 to 90 degrees the increment of change in the bend between morphed objects e.g. 10 degree increments or begin with a 10 degree increment and end with a 20 degree increment and the progression through which the morph steps e.g. linear asymptotic or custom . Alternatively the user may select the number of morphed baseline entities to be produced and have the system select one or more of the range increment and progression.

In one embodiment the progression is displayed as a graph. The user may alter the progression by altering the shape of the progression graph. This may be achieved by a selection mechanism such as dragging a handle on the graph with a selection device to alter the shape of the graph and thus the desired progression. Similarly the user may adjust the range of the morph by selecting handles on the ends of the graph to shorten or lengthen the end points of the morph. The alteration of the progression graph may alternatively be accomplished through the use of keyboard shortcuts or other selection mechanisms well known in the art.

The database of morphs has a vast array of different morphs to apply to an object. In a preferred embodiment the system will make available to the user or utilize in an automated mode only those morphs that can apply to the chosen object s of the baseline entity.

The starting baseline entity with the morphed object may be rendered in the modeling environment. Furthermore the system can automatically generate and render a multitude of morphs to one or more of the objects or all of the objects of the starting baseline entity. As such the present invention may generate a very large set of different versions of the starting baseline entity each representing a possible invention. Each of the morphed versions of the starting baseline entity can be selected based on the usefulness of the invention and the uniqueness over any prior art. The innovation engine and database may provide attributes associated with morphs and objects of the starting baseline entity to assist in providing selection criteria. For example useful characteristics of a material such as strength cost consumer appeal and durability may be provided to assist in selecting the morphed embodiment of the baseline entity. These characteristics may be used to filter the choices of morphs to apply to a selected object to form a morphed baseline entity.

Certain morphs may produce morphed baseline entities in which two or more objects are not perfectly aligned or contain unwanted gaps or overlaps. While these renderings are likely to be sufficient to provide the concept of the morphed baseline entity to the user it may be desirable to clean up the rendering. Thus in one embodiment the modeling environment would allow for manual suggested or automatic adjustment of the morphed baseline entity to correct these errors.

Furthermore the systems and methods provided herein can be applied repetitively to the same starting baseline entity. For example in one case the same starting baseline entity may be modeled in the modeling environment with a different set of objects or with a different granularity. Then morphs can be applied accordingly to the defined objects. Additionally an object of a starting baseline entity may be used as a starting baseline entity to focus inventing to that object. Then this object may be further defined by its fundamental components and elements. Moreover any of the generated morph versions of a starting baseline entity may be selected as a new starting baseline entity to start the inventing process with.

Additionally a patent application can be automatically generated from any model in the modeling environment such as for a selected set of one or more morphed baseline entities. The generation of the patent application may include any portion of or all of a patent application suitable for filing with the United States Patent and Trademark Office USPTO or any foreign patent office. For example the present invention may output all the alternative embodiments of a generated morphed baseline entity into a specific embodiment database thus providing lists tables and information for the detailed description and the claims of a patent application. From the graphical rendering of selected inventions figures can be automatically generated for representing the invention in the patent application. In other embodiments the present invention may provide an entire application including claims directed towards the generated inventions.

Additionally the computing device may include a network interface to interface to a Local Area Network LAN Wide Area Network WAN or the Internet through a variety of connections including but not limited to standard telephone lines LAN or WAN links e.g. 802.11 T1 T3 56 kb X.25 broadband connections e.g. ISDN Frame Relay ATM cluster interconnection Myrinet peripheral component interconnections PCI PCI X wireless connections or some combination of any or all of the above. The network interface may comprise a built in network adapter network interface card PCMCIA network card card bus network adapter wireless network adapter USB network adapter modem or any other device suitable for interfacing the computing device to any type of network capable of communication and performing the operations described herein. Moreover the computing device may be any computer system such as a workstation desktop computer server laptop handheld computer or other form of computing or telecommunications device that is capable of communication and that has sufficient processor power and memory capacity to perform the operations described herein.

The illustrative embodiment of the present invention is directed towards a computer aided inventing environment for modeling an entity and providing systematic assistance in determining inventions related to the entity. Referring now to an illustrative embodiment of a system for practicing the present invention is depicted. In brief overview the computer aided inventing environment includes a modeling environment an innovation engine a patent application generator a prior art searching tool and an innovation database which are capable of and configured to execute on the computing device . The computing device may be any type of computing device as described above and as depicted in may be a standalone system or a single node in a computer network.

The modeling environment may comprise an environment for modeling any type of system hardware device product part component item or any other naturally occurring or man made system process method item or composition. In an exemplary embodiment the modeling environment is a graphical modeling environment in which any type of graphical model may be generated or otherwise provided. For example the modeling environment may be a CAD CAM modeling environment or a block diagram modeling environment of a technical computing system. In the modeling environment a model may be created such as a block diagram model or a 2 D or 3 D model that may depict an entity to be considered for computer aided inventing. The modeling environment may include a graphical user interface for interactively creating and working with a model . As such a model may be created modified edited saved or otherwise managed in the modeling environment . In one embodiment the modeling environment may provide for the free form creation editing and managing of models such as using a vector based drawing mechanism. In other embodiments the modeling environment may provide for graphical user interface widgets from a toolbox to provide for the formation of models . In further embodiments graphical images icons or other graphical representations may be retrievable from any suitable means such as file or a database to form a model or a portion thereof.

The modeling environment may be able to read the model from a file a database or any other suitable storage medium either locally or from a remote location. Alternatively the modeling environment may obtain a model from making a function call application programming interface API call or by otherwise using a suitable interface to another system or application providing access to the model . Additionally the modeling environment may also provide for simulating or testing the model .

The modeling environment may also include a configuration mechanism . The configuration mechanism provides for defining any elements and properties of or associated with the model and or the modeling environment . The configuration mechanism may comprise any type of user interface such as a graphical user interface. As such it may comprise any conventional user interface mechanisms such as menu items forms toolbars sliders check boxes etc. to provide a user interface to receive user input with regards to configuration. Furthermore the configuration mechanism may also provide for defining the model and or the modeling environment by other suitable means such as reading configuration information from any medium accessible and or readable by the modeling environment . In an exemplary embodiment the configuration mechanism of the present invention will provide a configuration mechanism such as a graphical user interface to define the model and the modeling environment for systematically providing computer aided inventing. As will be described in more detail below the configuration mechanism will be used for applying one or more morphs to a selected object. By way of the toothbrush model illustration the object representing the handle of the toothbrush may be selected and the configuration mechanism may provide a choice of morphs to select for applying to the selected object of the toothbrush handle. For example the configuration mechanism may access the innovation database and present on a pop up menu a list of morphs. In another example the configuration mechanism may be used for providing a set of filters or filter criteria for selecting a set of one or morphs to the selected object. Although generally described herein as defining using the configuration mechanism in the modeling environment one ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate that defining may also be referred to as and include configuring setting up describing or otherwise inputting data and or setting values. One ordinarily skilled in the art will also recognize the variety of configuration mechanism that can be used in practicing the operations of the present invention as described herein.

The modeling environment may also include a selection mechanism . The selection mechanism may include any suitable pointing device such as a mouse or optical pen which allows elements of the model the configuration mechanism or the modeling environment to be clicked selected moved modified changed or otherwise manipulated in a suitable manner. The selection mechanism may provide a suitable means for grouping and or ungrouping portions of a model in the modeling environment . For example the selection mechanism may provide for a box of varying size to be drawn around elements of a model to be selected as a group. The selection mechanism may include any type of suitable indicator such as a visual indicator to indicate a change in a selection state of an element in the modeling environment . In one embodiment the selection mechanism may change the color of an element as it is toggled between selected and unselected states. In another embodiment the background color may change. In another embodiment a group of elements may be highlighted with a border or box to indicate the group is selected together. Alternatively the selection mechanism may include any form of input from any type of input device such as a touch screen or a keyboard that can be used for selecting. One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize the various selection mechanisms that could be used in the modeling environment for selecting elements of a model configuration mechanism or the modeling environment in practicing the operations of the present invention described herein.

The selection mechanism may be associated with menus such that selected objects may be further characterized. For example such menus may offer the user a choice as to whether the selected object should be treated as one or multiple objects to be morphed. The menu may also offer the user the a choice as to whether multiply selected objects are to be treated individually or as having a parent child relationship commonly utilized in many commercially available drawing and CAD programs.

The modeling environment may also include a rendering mechanism for rendering an image of the model or for otherwise providing a graphical representation of the model . The rendering mechanism processes graphics data such as vertex coordinates to display print or export a figure drawing or model . The rendering mechanism presents information in a form such as a 2 dimensional or 3 dimensional model that a human can read and interact with. The rendering mechanism may include software hardware firmware or both for providing graphical representations of models in the modeling environment or any other element of the modeling environment requiring graphical representation. The rendering mechanism may use any suitable type of rendering methods such as using vector graphics or bitmap raster graphics. In another embodiment either a software or hardware OpenGL method of rendering may be used. In further embodiments a graphical processing unit GPU method of rendering may be used. The GPU may be used to offload graphical processing from a central processing unit by performing buffering and any other desired computations. One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize the various types of rendering methods that may be used in any combination of hardware and software and will further appreciate the use of rendering in practicing the operations of the present invention.

Still referring to the computer aided inventing environment includes an innovation engine and an innovation database . The innovation engine is in communication with the innovation database and the modeling environment by any suitable interface and communication means and or mechanisms. For example any type of API s message passing schemes and communication protocols may be used. The innovation engine comprises business rules functionality operations algorithms or any logic required to perform the computer aided assistance and related operations of the present invention that will be described further below.

The innovation database may comprise any type of database such as a file system a file such as an Excel spreadsheet a relational database such as any version of the SQL Server database manufactured by Microsoft Corporation of Redmond Wash. and any version of the Oracle database from Oracle Corporation of Redwood Shores Calif. or any other form of storage that may store and organize information in a logical manner and accessible by either the modeling environment or the innovation engine . In one embodiment FileMaker manufactured by FileMaker Inc. of Santa Clara Calif. may be used as the innovation database . In one embodiment the innovation database may comprise data structures of a program library or other form of executable instruction or may comprise data stored in some form of memory. In an exemplary embodiment the innovation engine may communicate with the innovation database using a database access technology such as for example the Open Database Connectivity standard ODBC or Java Database Connectivity JDBC . As will be discussed in more detail below the innovation database comprises information for defining elements of a model and for providing changes or morphs to the model in practicing the computer aided inventing process of the present invention.

In a preferred embodiment the innovation database may be incorporated into an existing design or CAD program as a plug in an add on or a series of macros which controls the program. Examples of such existing programs include but are not limited to SolidWorks Mechanical Design Software Pro Engineer Wildfire PTC Pro CONCEPT Parametric Technologies AutoCAD AutoCAD LT Inventor Autodesk SolidEdge UGS other freeware CAD shareware CAD open source CAD and JAVA based CAD software Visio and PowerPoint Microsoft or other drawing and rendering programs. The websites www.autodesk.com www.solidworks.com www.ptc.com www.microsoft.com and www.ugs.com product features and product specifications of the aforementioned programs are incorporated herein by reference.

The computer aided inventing environment of may also include a patent application generator for generating a patent application from any selected morphed models stored in a specific embodiments database or otherwise from any model provided in the modeling environment . The patent application generator may be in communication with the modeling environment and or the innovation database by any suitable communication or interface mechanisms or means known to one ordinarily skilled in the art. From the definition and configuration of models in the modeling environment and from any information or data available in the innovation database as will be described in further detail below the patent application generator can generate any type of document in a text based format or in any other suitable format such as a portable document format or a format of a word processor that includes suitable contents directed towards a patent application to be filed in the United States Patent and Trademark Office or any foreign patent office. In one embodiment the patent application generator may use the technique of structured input from a user or a database to generate the patent application and claims.

In another embodiment the patent application generator may use any patent application and claim generation techniques known in the art such as those used by the software program PatentEase manufactured by Inventorprise Inc. of Vestal N.Y. In an exemplary embodiment the patent application generator uses data stored in a database associated with selected embodiments of morphed baseline entities generated or provided by the computer aided inventing environment of the present invention. As such the patent application generator may generate a document including one or more of the following sections of a patent application an abstract field of invention background summary of the invention description of drawings detailed description claims and formal or informal figures.

Additionally the patent application generator may use any suitable input file or files to provide content for the patent application or to otherwise configure or direct the patent application generator to generate a suitable patent application . In one embodiment the patent application generator may reference load or otherwise use template input files which may contain content to setup the structure of or provide snippets of content for the patent application. In other embodiments the patent application generator may reference load or otherwise use business rules libraries or other forms of configurable functionality that instruct the patent application generator to generate patent applications in a certain way. In a further embodiment the patent application generator may include any suitable user interface such a graphical user interface or command line interface for a user to configure edit or provide content or templates for a patent application . The patent application generator may produce output in a form exportable to a format compatible with electronic submission of patent applications adopted by the USPTO and other Patent Offices. In one embodiment the patent application generator produces various sections of a patent application which is then edited reviewed and added to by a patent practitioner. Once this process is completed the patent application generator can format the patent application appropriately export it to a format for electronic submission and actually transmit the document to the Patent Office.

Additionally a user via the user interface may be able to configure or provide additional instructions to the patent application generator .

In another embodiment the patent application generator would further comprise a language translation module capable of outputting one or more sections of a patent application in a language other than English not shown in . The language translation module may also be supplied as a plug in or add on based upon a commercially available language translation program.

In yet another embodiment the computer aided inventing environment of may also include a patent application database preferably in communication with the patent application generator . The patent application database would contain fields corresponding to portions of the patent application as well as other informational fields. The fields can be populated directly from the specific embodiments database from the patent application generator or from the patent application or may be manually entered.

The fields corresponding to the patent application may include one or more of the Title Cross reference to Related Applications Federally Sponsored Research Background of the Invention Summary of the Invention Brief Description of the Drawings Detailed Description of the Invention Sequence Listing Claims Abstract and Drawings. In one aspect of this embodiment certain of these fields may be broken down further. For example the patent database may contain fields breaking down the Background of the Invention into field of the invention prior art and objects and advantages of the invention. The Detailed Description may be broken down into fields for description of preferred embodiment operation of preferred embodiment description of additional embodiments operation of additional embodiments and conclusion ramifications and scope of the invention. The claims may be broken down into independent claims and dependent claims. The drawings may include a further field for reference numbering used for elements in the drawings.

The informational fields may include one or more of internal docket number and name date filed serial number prosecution status licensing status assignment status sales and licensing revenue inventor names conception date distinctions from the prior art patent number and related applications such as foreign counterparts. depicts an illustrative embodiment of a patent application database that may be included in this invention.

In another aspect the drawings and the claims may be present in separate databases from the rest of the above information.

The computer aided inventing environment of may also include a prior art searching tool for . The prior art searching tool may be in communication with the modeling environment and or the innovation database by any suitable communication or interface mechanisms or means known to one ordinarily skilled in the art. From the selection and storage of morphed baseline entities and from any information or data available in the innovation database as will be described in further detail below the prior art searching tool can search any type of information or data source for patents patent applications publications and any other printed reference. In some embodiments the prior art searching tool may use any suitable interface mechanisms and means to perform prior art searching over the Internet such as XML or web services. In one embodiment the prior art searching tool may perform a search of the patent and patent application databases available via the searching utilities of the web site of the United States Patent and Trademark Office at www.uspto.gov.

In other embodiments the prior art searching tool may search any foreign patent office web site such as www.epo.org or www.wipo.net or any other storage location accessible or available over the Internet comprising prior art related references. In other embodiments the prior art searching tool uses any search engines available over the Internet or any search engine tools or utilities to perform searching on the Internet for prior art references. For example the prior art searching tool may perform a prior art reference search using the web site or any search tools manufactured by Google Inc. of Mountain View Calif.

In other embodiments the prior art searching tool may perform searches on any type of device readable medium accessible via the computing device of the computer aided inventing environment such as a DVD ROM or a CD ROM comprising prior art references. In a further embodiment the prior art searching tool may perform searches on any type of storage accessible via the computing device of the computer aided inventing environment such as a local hard drive or a file system of another computing device in a network.

In performing prior art searches the prior art searching tool may use any type of keywords to perform the search. In an exemplary embodiment the prior art searching tool uses keywords associated with selected embodiments of morphed baseline entities generated or provided by the computer aided inventing environment of the present invention.

As will be described in further detail below selected embodiments of morphed baseline entities may be stored in a database with data describing elements of the entities. This data can be used to provide any type of combination of one or more keywords for performing a search.

For example referring to an insert new object morph has been applied to a toothbrush to add a speaker to the toothbrush. The prior art searching tool will interface with the modeling environment and or the innovation database to generate the search string ABST toothbrush AND ABST speaker or ACLM toothbrush AND ACLM speaker and submit that search string to the USPTO patent search server and published application search server. If the added object may also be designated by alternate terms e.g. entries in the synonyms field of the record for that object the search string will include those synonyms in the search string using the OR operator. Analogous search strings would be generated for submission to other sites to search for published patents and applications.

The computers can connect to the network through a variety of connections including standard telephone lines LAN or WAN links e.g. T1 T3 56 kb X.25 SNA DECNET broadband connections ISDN Frame Relay ATM Gigabit Ethernet Ethernet over SONET cluster interconnections Myrinet peripheral component interconnections PCI PCI X and wireless connections or some combination of any or all of the above. Connections can be established using a variety of communication protocols e.g. TCP IP IPX SPX NetBIOS Ethernet ARCNET Fiber Distributed Data Interface FDDI RS232 IEEE 802.11 IEEE 802.11a IEEE 802.11b IEEE 802.11g and direct asynchronous connections . The network connection and communication protocol may be of any such network connection or communication protocol capable of supporting the operations of the present invention described herein.

In the network each of the computers are configured to and capable of running at least a portion of the present invention. As a distributed application the present invention may have one or more software components that run on each of the computers and work in communication and in collaboration with each other to meet the functionality of the overall operations of the present invention as described herein. Each of the computers can be any type of computing device as described in connection with and respectively configured to be capable of computing and communicating the operations described herein. For example any and each of the computers may be a server a multi user server server farm or multi processor server. In another example any of the computers may be a mobile computing device such as a notebook or PDA. One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize the wide range of possible combinations of types of computing devices capable of communicating over a network.

The network and network connections may include any transmission medium between any of the computers such as electrical wiring or cabling fiber optics electromagnetic radiation or via any other form of transmission medium capable of supporting the operations of the present invention described herein. The methods and systems of the present invention may also be embodied in the form of computer data signals program code or any other type of transmission that is transmitted over the transmission medium or via any other form of transmission which may be received loaded into and executed or otherwise processed and used by any of the computers to practice the present invention.

Each of the computers may be configured to and capable of running the modeling environment the innovation engine the innovation database the patent application generator or the prior art searching tool . The modeling environment the innovation engine the innovation database the patent application generator or the prior art searching tool may run together on the same computer or may each run separately on different computers and . The innovation database may also run on a computing device different than the computing device of the innovation engine .

Furthermore the modeling environment the innovation engine the innovation database the patent application generator or the prior art searching tool can be capable of and configured to operate on the operating system that may be running on any of the computers and . Each computer can be running the same or different operating systems. For example computer can be running Microsoft Windows and computer can be running a version of UNIX and computer a version of Linux. Or each computer can be running the same operating system such as Microsoft Windows. Additionally the modeling environment the innovation engine the innovation database the patent application generator or the prior art searching tool can be capable of and configured to operate on and take advantage of different processors of any of the computing devices . For example the modeling environment can run on a 32 bit processor of one computing device and a 64 bit processor of another computing device . Furthermore the modeling environment and or the innovation engine and or the innovation database and or the patent application generator and or the prior art searching tool can operate on computing devices that can be running on different processor architectures in addition to different operating systems. One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize the various combinations of operating systems and processors that can be running on any of the computing devices.

Although depicted in the system of with a single modeling environment innovation engine innovation database patent application generator and prior art searching tool one or more modeling environments innovation engines innovation databases patent application generators and prior art searching tool may be running on one or more computing devices to practice the present invention in a distributed manner. Each and any of the multiple copies of the modeling environment the innovation engine innovation database patent application generator and prior art searching tool may communicate over the network by any suitable interfacing means or mechanisms to perform the operations described herein in a distributed manner.

In summary one ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate that the modeling environment the innovation engine the innovation database patent application generator and prior art searching tool may be deployed across a wide range of different computing devices different operating systems and different processors in various network topologies and configurations. One ordinarily skilled in the art will further appreciate the various ways the present invention may be distributed in a networked system and how any of the components of the present invention may communicate with each other.

In one aspect the present invention is directed towards an invention lexicon database to support and drive the computer aided inventing system. Referring now to illustrative embodiments of the present invention of the innovation database is depicted. The innovation database comprises or otherwise provides the invention lexicon database. As such the innovation database provides a knowledge base of words data items processes and any other suitable entity in the vocabulary of a language for systematic inventing in accordance with the present invention. In one aspect the innovation database comprises a terminological ontology. As such the innovation database provides a specification of how to represent the objects concepts and other entities that exist in the area of inventing and the relationships that are held among them.

The contents of the innovation database provide data and information for supporting and driving the definition of models for applying changes to the models through morphing for storing selected embodiments of morphed models and for otherwise supporting the systematic approach to inventing of the present invention. The following description of an exemplary structure of the innovation database is provided for illustrative purposes. As one ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate any other suitable data structures and organization may be used to form the innovation database of the present invention.

The innovation database may include data associated with model classes and morphs . Depending on the implementation of the innovation database the data may be organized in files tables or other storage structures. For example in an exemplary embodiment of a relational database each of the model classes and morphs may be a set of one or more database tables. The model classes portion of the innovation database may further include object classes configuration classes and materials classes . The model classes may also include a context portion of the innovation database . The morphs database may include material morphs configuration morphs and object morphs which may be referred together as morphs . As depicted in and for the exemplary illustration of the innovation database the object classes may further include element classes component classes functional box classes and product classes . Although the innovation database is shown with model classes and morphs in a certain arrangement any arrangement may be used.

Furthermore other types of classes and sub classes for the model classes and morphs portion of the innovation database may be used for practicing the present invention. Moreover each of the classes and and any sub classes may be implemented in separate databases of different types or the same type on the same or a different computing device. In the illustrative examples of the innovation database to follow records and or fields of the innovation database may be described using tabular form such as tables depicted in . Although depicted in tabular form the records and fields may be arranged in the innovation database in any suitable manner. In particular records and fields of the innovation database may be organized into levels or groups to form a hierarchy. A hierarchy provides a classification of relationships in which each item except the top one is a specialized form of the item above it. Each item can have one or more items below it in the hierarchy. A first or top level may represent the highest or top level description of a group. The one or more levels below the top level provide a graded series of order by which data can be arranged by a ranking specialization characteristic or other relationship. For example a top level category may be materials with wood being a second level and cherry wood a third level to form a portion of a hierarchy of materials. Alternatively in the materials example wood may be considered a top level or near top level category with cherry word being a second level. A top level class may be referred to as a primary class or primary level and a sub class as a secondary class or secondary level and likewise for further subclasses e.g. tertiary quaternary . . . etc.

In one embodiment a field of a record in the innovation database may be used to indicate the name and or number of a level of a category i.e. a hierarchy to which the record is associated with. Since a record may be associated with different categories at different levels in other embodiments there may be multiple fields of a record to describe the names and or numbers of the category levels for which the record is associated with. In some embodiments as depicted in through described below the record may have a hierarchical level field to indicate what hierarchical level the record represents such as primary secondary tertiary etc. or 1 2 3 4 etc. For example a material record in the materials classes may represent the secondary class of oak wood which is associated with the primary class of wood. In this case the hierarchical level field may indicate the record for the type of material is for a secondary class e.g. the field has a value of secondary or 2. Additionally the record for oak wood in the material classes may also include a next higher level class to indicate the name of the next higher class level to which the oak wood record is associated with. In the case of oak wood the next higher level class may be the primary class of wood and the next higher class level field of the oak wood record may be set to reference the primary wood class. Furthermore one ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize that there are various database techniques to provide keys indexing and normalization of databases to provide a hierarchical representation of data and associating data with different and multiple groups and or class levels.

The hierarchical representation of data in the innovation database is useful for filtering data from the innovation database to apply in operation of the present invention as described in detail below. For example the hierarchical data representation e.g. groups and sub groups allows the user and or the computer aided inventing environment to select and apply data at different levels of breath or granularity. Additionally the hierarchical data representation provides for limiting the selection of the vast array of data that may be stored in the innovation database in an ordered logical or desired manner. In an exemplary embodiment there may be five or less levels in the hierarchical representation of data in order to provide a more user friendly or manageable hierarchy.

The material classes of the innovation database illustrated in may provide an extensive and exhaustive list of different types of materials that may be used in an invention being systematically generated in the modeling environment . The materials classes may be used for defining a model by providing a list of materials to the modeling environment for a user to select from to associate with a model or an object of the model . Furthermore the materials classes may provide substitute and or alternative materials to use for a component or element of the model to assist in creating an invention.

The table of FIGS. E through E provides an illustrative example of the list of materials that may be provided in the materials classes section of the innovation database . In one embodiment the system of the invention comprises a materials database comprising at least 40 50 or 70 of the materials listed in FIGS. E through E. In a preferred embodiment the system comprises a materials database comprising at least 80 of the materials listed in FIGS. E through E. Even more preferred is a materials database that comprises at least 90 of the materials listed in FIGS. E through E. Most preferred is a materials database that comprises all of the materials listed in FIGS. E through E. The table of is a small sample of the types of materials or class of materials that may be represented in the materials classes . One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize and appreciate that materials classes portion of the database may comprise a much more extensive listing that includes an exhaustive list of all known materials that may be applied during the systematic invention process of the present invention. Although shown as a single column list in table that may depict either a top level or near top level category the materials classes may be further organized into groups of materials with sub classes including specific types of that material. For example the material class of wood may represent a class of wood materials with sub classes for pine oak cherry etc. In another example steel may represent a material class with stainless steel being a sub class or type of steel.

Furthermore for any of the materials listed in the material classes there may also be other information stored and associated with each material either at a class or sub class level. In one embodiment the material classes database may include a performance characteristic operational characteristic quality attribute or any other attribute or characteristic of each material. depicts an illustrative table providing examples of fields for a record representing a material in the material classes database. The illustrative table may identify the material record by name date entered description color and a unique serial number. Additionally the material record may include one or more fields to identify the hierarchical class level the material is associated with. Furthermore illustrative table may include one or more fields to indicate and describe the novelty attractiveness typical functionality and any other material related attribute such as a user specified attributes. In the case of mixture based materials the illustrative table of shows additional and or alternative fields that may be used to describe the mixture type the components in the mixture a value of the component such as a quantity value related to a unit of measurement and a percentage range of the component of the mixture. In one embodiment this additional information may indicate whether the material may be useful to use in certain circumstances or in other cases not useful to use. For example liquid crystal temperature sensitive colored plastics would have a high score for products marketed to children.

The configuration classes of the innovation database illustrated in may provide an extensive and exhaustive list of different types of configurations that may be used in an invention being systematically modeled and generated in the modeling environment . The configuration classes can be used to identify the arrangement of one or more objects in a model in the modeling environment or for suggesting or otherwise providing substitute or alternate configuration for the entity of the model from which to generate inventions. The table shown in provides an illustrative example of the list of configuration that may be provided in the configuration classes section of the innovation database .

Thus according to another embodiment the system of this invention comprises a configurations database comprising at least 40 50 or 70 of the configurations listed in . In a preferred embodiment a system of this invention comprises a configurations database comprising at least 80 of the configurations listed in . Even more preferred is a configurations database that comprises at least 90 of the configurations listed in . Most preferred is a configurations database that comprises all of the configurations listed in . One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize and appreciate that configuration classes portion of the database may comprise a much more extensive listing that includes an exhaustive list of all possibly desired configurations that may be applied during the systematic invention process of the present invention. The configurations classes may be further organized into groups of configurations with sub classes representing a set or group of configurations such as pyramid type configurations. For example a linear array class of configuration may represent a class of linear array configurations with a sub class for a curved linear array or another shaped linear array.

Furthermore for any of the configurations listed in the configuration classes there may also be other information stored and associated with each configuration either at a class or sub class level. In one embodiment the configuration classes database may include a performance characteristic operational characteristic quality attribute or any other attribute or characteristic of each material. depicts an illustrative table providing examples of fields for a record representing a configuration in the configuration classes database. The illustrative table may identify the configuration record by name date entered description image and a unique serial number fields. Additionally the configuration record may include one or more fields to identify the hierarchical class level the configuration is associated with. Although not shown in illustrative table the configuration records may also include one or more fields to indicate and describe the novelty attractiveness typical functionality and any other material related attribute such as a user specified attributes. Illustrative table depicts additional fields associated with the configuration record to describe positional and orientation coordinates of the configuration. The positional and orientation coordinates are used to identify the configuration of an object of a model in relation to a reference coordinate system and scale. These characteristics and or attributes may indicate how useful the configuration is to use in certain circumstances or in other cases not useful to use.

The object classes of the innovation database illustrated in may provide an extensive and exhaustive list of different types of elements components products and contexts that may be applied to an invention being systematically generated in the modeling environment . The object classes can be used to identify and or describe objects of an entity represented by a model in the modeling environment . Additionally the object classes may provide a source of data for suggesting or otherwise providing substitute alternate or additional types of objects for the entity of the model from which to generate inventions. Furthermore the context may provide a contextual environment in which the entity under consideration for inventing can be applied.

As the object classes can represent a very vast array of existing products components and elements of any thing or process from which to form a knowledge base for practicing the present invention the object classes is described in three parts as shown in . Since a component of one entity can be a standalone product or product on its own accord a product class listing may also be listed as a component class and vice versa. In a similar manner a component of an entity may also be considered an element or feature of the entity and therefore a component class listing may also be included in the element class.

It should be noted that the object classes are not limited to physical objects. For example virtual objects such as operating systems Microsoft Windows Unix Linux MacOS etc. programs word processing photo editing drawing spreadsheets databases and features of programs spell checker calculator a search window graphics file viewer are also object classes that may utilized with the system and method of this invention. These objects also have a hierarchal nature Operating System Programs Features that is employed when they are included in the objects class.

The Table I provides an illustrative example of the list of object classes and the class types that may be provided in the model classes portion of the innovation database by any of the elements classes component classes product classes and the context . Table I is an illustrative example of the types of objects and object classes that may be represented in the objects classes portion of the innovation database .

In one embodiment the system of the invention comprises an objects database comprising at least 40 50 or 70 of the objects listed in Table I. In a preferred embodiment the system of this invention comprises an objects database comprising at least 80 of the objects listed in Table I. Even more preferred is an objects database that comprises at least 90 of the objects listed in Table I. Most preferred is an objects database that comprises all of the objects listed in Table I.

In another embodiment the system of this invention comprises an objects database comprising at least 40 50 or 70 of the objects listed in each of the class types component product product context product component element component element product component and product context component in Table I. In a preferred embodiment the system of the invention comprises an objects database comprising at least 80 of the objects in each of the class types listed in Table I. Even more preferred is an objects database that comprises at least 90 of the objects in each class type listed in Table I. The class type product context includes objects classified as either product context or context product. The class type component product includes all objects classified as either component product or product component.

One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize and appreciate that the objects classes portion of the innovation database may comprise a much more extensive listing that includes an exhaustive list of all possibly desired objects and object classes that may be applied during the systematic invention process of the present invention. For example any of the object classes may be defined in accordance with the art groups and technology classifications provided by the United States Patent and Trademark Office. In another example the object classes may be configured to have one or more of the products parts or components provided by any one or more retailers or wholesalers such as Wal Mart Stores Inc. of Bentonville Ark. The Home Depot Inc. of Atlanta Ga. or Toys R Us Inc of Wayne. N.J. In yet another example the object classes may be configured to have products parts or components provided by a food retailer or wholesaler garden store or any type of catalog such as an automobile catalog. Additionally the object classes may include any categories defined by any of the local Yellow Page books provided by a local telephone company or provided by the YellowPages.com Inc. of Henderson Nev. In another embodiment the object classes may include CAD parts libraries. These libraries may be accessed on the worldwide web e.g. www.3Dcontentcentral.com . In yet further embodiments the object classes may include a company s list or inventory of products so that the computer aided inventing system of the present invention may be directed to improving the company s products. For example a scientific reagent company may list all of their products in an effort to put together novel kits containing multiple reagents as well as possibly other objects already in the innovation database . One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize and appreciate the vast amount of products components and elements that may be populated in the innovation database .

The object classes may be further organized into groups of products elements and components with sub classes representing a set or group of each class. Each class may be referred to as a primary class and a sub class as a secondary class. In one embodiment the object classes database may include a performance characteristic operational characteristic quality attribute or any other attribute or characteristic of each product component element or context. These characteristics and or attributes may indicate the usefulness or non usefulness of using the type of object. depicts an illustrative table providing examples of fields for a record representing an object in the objects classes database. The illustrative table may identify the object record by name date entered description image a unique serial number and type of object fields. The type of object field may indicate whether the object is a component element or feature a product a functional black box or a context. Additionally the object record may include one or more fields to identify the hierarchical class level the object is associated with. Additionally the object record may also include one or more fields to indicate and describe the novelty attractiveness cost size typical functionality typical field of use synonyms and any other object related attribute such as a user specified attributes.

One example of such a user specified attribute are pre existing part descriptions and properties that are present in CAD programs such as SolidWorks.

In another embodiment an object record or a material may also include a field for enablement references. Such a field is used in conjunction with a patent application generator which can access and insert the references in that field into the generated patent application to help describe the invention in an enabling manner. For example if a morphed baseline entity incorporated a silicon coating the material record for silicon would include in the enablement references field a citation to art describing methods of coating a surface with silicon. If enablement references do not exist an inventor may wish to perform experiments or construct prototypes to establish an enabling description. The enablement references field would then be linked to a write up or a rendering of such experiments or prototypes.

Similarly a materials or object record may contain a field for species elaboration. Such a field would contain citations to prior art containing descriptions or listings of species within the genus of the material or object. This field is also useful in conjunction with a patent application generator . The patent application generator can access this field and insert the citations in a patent application so as to effectively disclose species and sub species of the particular material or object disclosed.

It will be readily apparent that another source of species and sub species disclosure will be inherent in the hierarchal nature of the object or material class utilized in the system and method of this invention. As set forth above each object and material record may also include one or more fields to identify the hierarchical class level the object or material is associated with. That field which is also accessible by the patent application generator will be linked to species and sub species of that object or material that exist in the system. Those species and subspecies may also be inserted into the generated patent application. In a further embodiment the innovation database may comprise contents from any type of dictionary such as the dictionary from Merriam Webster Inc. of Springfield Mass. In other embodiments the innovation database may comprise contents from a specific technical dictionary such as a dictionary of computer terms or some other technical art. Furthermore the dictionary content may be organized in such a manner as to provide or facilitate a reverse lookup. For example the word ball could be looked up in the dictionary content of the innovation database to find all the other words that are defined using the word ball . In this example additional objects or object classes may be determined such as types of balls e.g. basketball football etc. or categories such as sports equipment. In this manner the classes and sub classes of the object classes may comprise the reverse lookup capabilities inherent in a dictionary. An illustrative example of object classes are shown in Table I below.

The inclusion of the contents of a dictionary can also provide a source for synonyms of words used to define an object. Such synonyms may be used to populate a synonym field in the record of that object. Alternatively the synonym may be used by the prior art searching tool and or the patent application generator.

In yet a further embodiment the innovation database may have functional black box classes that comprise contents representing products components elements features and materials of the model classes to form a model in a functional manner. In one embodiment any of the model classes may be described as a functional equivalent such as a black box comprising a function or operation the black box performs provides or accomplishes. In this way a specific embodiment of the functionality does not need to be defined. By way of illustrative example a fan product or fan component can be described as a black box comprising the function of an air blowing device a light can be described as a source of illumination and a computer as a programmable electronic machine for processing information. In this manner the innovation database can provide content to support computer aided inventing of the present invention from a functional perspective. In another embodiment the functional black box classes may also be used to provide content to support computer aided inventing from a goal perspective. For example a functional black box may be used to describe an element of a model from a goal perspective such as flexibility controllability attractiveness novelty etc. In another embodiment the fields related to any records of the material classes configuration classes and object classes may be used to provide a functional black box class definition of a portion of a model .

In another aspect the morphs database or morphs portion of the innovation database comprises a plurality of morphs that may be applied to the systematic inventing process of the present invention. Morphs are any actions that can be taken to modify transform change add to subtract from divide extend reduce improve manipulate or otherwise cause some type of change to an object of an entity or the entity itself being represented by the model in the modeling environment . shows a table of morphs that may be used in practicing the present invention.

Thus according to one embodiment the present invention provides a system comprising a morphs database comprising at least 40 50 or 70 of the morphs listed in . Preferably the system of the invention comprises a morphs database comprising at least 80 of the morphs listed in . Even more preferred is a morphs database comprising at least 90 of the morphs listed in . Most preferred is a morphs database comprising at least all of the morphs listed in .

Although the table of is shown as a single list of morphs the morphs may be organized into separate portions of the morphs database . In an exemplary embodiment morphs related to changes in materials present in the materials classes may be organized into a materials morphs database. Morphs related to changes in configurations present in the configuration classes may be organized into a configuration morphs database. Additionally morphs related to changes in object classes may be organized into an object morphs database which may include morphs for products components and elements features of the object classes . Furthermore the morphs may represent morphs to product classes or any other class that may be provided in the model classes of the innovation database . In other cases the morphs may not be associated with any of the model classes and may be generic global or otherwise applicable to any portion of the Model .

Furthermore for any of the morphs listed in the morphs database there may also be other information stored and associated with each morph. In one embodiment the morphs database may include a performance characteristic operational characteristic quality attribute or any other attribute or characteristic of each material. depicts an illustrative table providing examples of fields for a record representing a morph in the morphs database . The illustrative table may identify the morph record by name date entered description code or command to implement the morph in a graphical rendering image and a unique serial number fields. Additionally the morph record may include one or more fields to identify the hierarchical class level the morph is associated with. Although not shown in illustrative table the morph records may also include one or more fields to indicate and describe the novelty attractiveness typical functionality and any other morph related attribute such as user specified attributes. These characteristics and or attributes may indicate how useful the morph is to use in certain circumstances or in other cases not useful to use. The illustrative table shows other fields to indicate what object configuration and or material the morph is applicable to. For example this applicability field may be specified by any hierarchical class level or by the name or serial number associated with the applicable records for the object configuration and or material. Additionally the record for a morph as shown in illustrative table may include fields to indicate if the morph should be included in the specification and or the claims of a patent application generated by the patent application generator .

For multi parameter morphs such as those relating to shape or configuration a record for a morph will also include parameter fields for implementing the morph such as low end of range high end of range distribution number of embodiments and increments.

In one embodiment the choice of morphs to apply is controlled by user configurable task bars comprising buttons representative of all morphs that may be applied to an object or set of objects. In a further aspect of this embodiment the task bar would indicate to the user those morphs that were recently used.

In yet another aspect the innovation database will optionally track the morphs objects materials and configurations utilized by a user or a specified set of users in both baseline entities and morphed baseline entities. By tracking a history of use a preferred set of morphs objects materials and configurations can be assembled and offered to the user in future sessions. It should be apparent however that limiting the innovation database to such preferred sets of records will tend to lock in trends rather than foster full creativity. As such the use of the preferred sets is preferably offered to the users as an option rather than a requirement.

In another aspect of the invention fields scoring popularity marketability or attractiveness in each of the objects and materials components of the innovation database may be routinely updated based upon consumer surveys marketing trends and desirability determinations. This allows the innovation database to remain current in terms of existing trends. For example currently the use of silver metallic alloy in the casing of cell phones is very trendy and desirable but just a few years ago colored plastic was the material most popular in cell phone cases. Children now like items with blinking LED lights but in the future such lights may be less desirable or replaced by a different type of light. An objects and materials database that is up to date with current trends will more accurately predict which morphed baseline entities will be commercially successful.

Marketing trends and consumer surveys can also assist in determining which morphs may produce a commercially successful morphed baseline entity. For example if sleek and aerodynamic shapes are in style morphs which tend to lead to such shapes would be given a higher score and alert the user that they are more likely to result in an attractive product.

The results of marketing trends and consumer surveys can be converted into scores for fields present in the innovation database and these updated scores can be imported into the innovation database. In one embodiment the user of the innovation database can obtain the updated scores from a remote server and access to such information and updates could be on a subscription or pay per use basis.

The output of the morphed baseline entities may be presented to the user for review in either text or graphical form. Textual output would at a minimum list all of the objects present in the morphed baseline entity the relative position and orientation of those objects and which objects had been morphed compared to the original baseline entity. More preferably the output would be in graphical form.

Graphical representation of morphed baseline entities may be in the form of 2 dimensional or 3 dimensional renderings. Three dimensional renderings may be of the type that requires the use of a stereoscopic viewing device or other 3 dimensional viewing and displaying devices well known in the CAD art. Alternatively the three dimensional rendering may be the product of fused deposition modeling printer www.axisprinter.com www.stratasys.com or other three dimensional printers that produce prototypes www.zcorp.com www.prometal.com www.dimensionprinting.com www.solid scape.com . Graphical representation also includes dynamic moving images that depict animation of the morphed baseline entity. Dynamic moving images are particularly useful in allowing the user to view an entire range of morphed baseline entities produced by a multi parameter morph. When dynamic moving images are employed to display morphed baseline entities it is preferred that those images be associated with a selection mechanism that allows the to choose preferred entities either during the animation or after stopping the animation.

The number of morphed baseline entities produced may become very large depending upon the number and types of morphs applied as well as the objects materials and configurations used in those morphs. For example a baseline entity is parsed into 9 objects. Each of those objects is potentially subjected to a morph that produces a single morphed version of that object. The number of different morphed baseline entities resulting from this exercise is 2or 512.

Because of this the method and system of this invention preferably provides a number of different ways of viewing the outputted morphed baseline entities. One way of displaying multiple results is in one or more grids containing pictures of the different morphed baseline entities. It will be readily apparent that the size of the grid must be sufficiently small so that differences between the morphed entities in each cell of the grid can be visualized yet large enough to rapidly sort through multiple morphed baseline entities. Such grids are preferably 1 3 1 4 2 2 2 3 3 1 3 2 3 3 and 4 1 for larger morphed baseline entities and 4 4 and 5 5 for smaller morphed baseline entities. Associated with the grid output would be tools to increase and decrease the size of the individual morphed baseline entities as well as selecting individual entities. Selected entities from each grid may be saved and then redisplayed in grids to allow further screening by the user. Another way of displaying multiple morphed baseline entities is the use of transparent overlaid images. This display type would also be associated with a tool for selecting individual entities of interest.

Yet another display method is the use of a slideshow type presentation of the individual morphed baseline entities. Such a presentation would preferably allow the user to control how long each embodiment would be displayed as well as the ability to go backward and forward at various speeds and to skip the display of one or more embodiments. In one aspect of this display method the outputted morphed baseline entities may be exported to presentation software such as Microsoft PowerPoint.

For a smaller number of morphed baseline entities another display method would present individual morphed baseline entities in different windows on a display screen. The windows could be tiled cascaded or otherwise arranged at the user s discretion. The user would be able to select preferred morphed baseline entities by clicking at a designated point within a window or by some other similar means.

Yet another method to display multiple morphed entities is a simple list that the user may scroll through and select preferred entities. The list may be graphical representation descriptive text or both.

In addition to the selection techniques associated with specific display methods set forth above other methods of selecting preferred morphed baseline entities may be utilized in this invention. These include for example check boxes with the ability to select all or multiple entities using a single click or combination of keyboard strokes and mouse clicks e.g. SHIFT click to select an entire range CTRL click to select multiple entries . Controllers such as joysticks gamepads controllers or other pressure sensitive devices may also be used to select preferred morphed baseline entities. Alternatively such controller may be used to rate morphed entities so that they may be later grouped by rating for further selection by the user.

In yet another embodiment the selection or rating of preferred morphed baseline entities may be achieved through the use of physiological response monitors attached to the user. These include devices that measure breathing heartbeat electrical response etc. that may be used to measure the excitement or enthusiasm of the user for individual morphed baseline entities. This embodiment provides the advantage or requiring no user input other than observation. Such selection methods will allow the user to screen more entities during a given time period than embodiments requiring additional user input.

An additional method of screening and selecting morphed baseline entities is through the use of user controlled filters. Such filters would be based upon one or more of the quality fields included in the objects and materials databases e.g. cost size attractiveness novelty or other user defined attributes and would be user configurable as to cut off points for various quality attributes. In one embodiment the system of this invention would display to the user the number of morphed baseline entities produced in the session or after the application of one or more filters. This provides feedback as to how the parameters for each quality attribute should be adjusted in order to produce a reasonable number of entities for storing in the specific embodiments database discussed below.

In another aspect the present invention is related to storing selected embodiments of morphed baseline entities in the specific embodiments portion of the innovation database . In one embodiment the specific embodiments database may be implemented as a separate database from the innovation database . As will be described in further detail below with respect to the operation of the present invention the specific embodiments database is used by the patent application generator to generate patent applications and by the prior art searching tool to perform prior art searches related to selected and stored specific embodiments. Referring now to illustrative table is depicted to show examples of fields for records in the specific embodiments database . Illustrative table describes records and fields that may be stored to represent a selected specific embodiment of a morphed baseline entity. In table each bucket . . . n represents an object defined in the model of a selected morphed baseline entity. If the specific embodiment of a morphed baseline entity were broken down into 3 objects there would be three buckets or records to store data associated with the object. For each object record in table the object would be identified by a name and or the serial number such as the name and serial number of an object record as described in conjunction with . Additionally each object record of table may also include data identifying and or describing the qualities of the object the material of the object the qualities of the materials and the positional and orientation coordinates of the object. Any of the data stored in these fields may be obtained from the corresponding object record of the object classes material record of the material classes and the configuration record of the configuration classes

Illustrative table of depicts prior art searching related fields to be stored associated with each specific embodiment of a baseline embodiment stored as represented by table in the specific embodiments database . For a specific embodiment stored in the specific embodiments database the prior art searching tool may perform a search of any prior art data sources using any of the fields that may be used by illustrative table . For example the prior art searching tool may use any combination of object names to perform a patent and or patent application search at the USPTO website. The prior art searching tool may perform one or more searches for a specific embodiment and store fields identifying and describing the results in illustrative table . The fields representing the results generated or provided by the prior art searching tool may identify the number of matching patents and websites a list of matching patents and web sites and the sources searched. The fields may also identify and describe the score of the overall prior art and the subjective usefulness of the prior art. Additionally there may be fields in illustrative table that indicate whether any of the prior art searching results for a specific embodiment stored in illustrative table should be included in the specification and or claims of a patent application .

The user s selection of preferred morphed baseline entities may occur either before or after outputted entities are placed into the specific embodiments database . In the latter case the unselected entities are removed from the database or tagged in some manner to distinguish them from the selected entities. In the former case only the selected embodiments are used to populate the specific embodiments database . Other fields that may exist in the specific embodiments database are the baseline entity from which the specific embodiment was derived and the specific morph applied to produce the specific embodiment.

The specific embodiments database may become very large. Accordingly the system and method of this invention provide mechanisms by which that database can be reduced in size without deleting any records. For example if the records include a color graphical representation of the morphed baseline entity that representation may be converted to black and white. Alternatively the graphical representation may be stored in a separate database linked to the specific embodiments database and displayed only when the user selects the specific embodiment. For example the specific embodiments database would only comprise references to objects that make up an embodiment without comprising the actual image of the part. This information would be automatically addressed from the objects or materials databases when the user desired to have an image of the specific embodiment rendered.

Another alternative is to store the graphical representation as thumbnail sketches or lower resolution graphics. Employing hyperlinks to various fields of information may also reduce the size of the specific embodiments database . For example the prior art reference field may simply be a link to the actual reference patent publication article or website .

The specific embodiments database may also be compressed zipped or otherwise reduced in size for storage purposes. Decompression or unzipping will occur when the user chooses to view the record for specific embodiments.

In an alternate embodiment the system of this invention will alert the user when the specific embodiments database is becoming too large. The size at which the alert occurs may be either a preset user defined size or at some default size. The warning may occur either during the selection of morphs to apply or during generation of morphed baseline entities stage after application of a morph. Once alerted the user will be presented choices as to how to reduce the number of morphed baseline entities. Such choices may include deleting every second third fourth etc. . . . morphed baseline entity allowing the user to step back and define one or more morphs more stringently e.g. limiting an insert object morph to electrical components or to primary classes of components applying more stringent filters to objects materials or morphs etc.

The specific embodiments database will be compatible with multiple file formats and will be capable of being displayed in a variety of format. One such format envisioned by the invention is a printable format suitable for pasting into an idea or laboratory notebook to verify conception as required by the Patent Laws of the United States. Another format will include numbering for each object in a specific embodiment. This format produces an output that is suitable for use as a drawing in a patent application and may be utilized by the patent application generator to produce informal or formal drawings.

In a preferred embodiment data may be imported into and exported out of any component of the innovation database e.g. objects database materials database configuration database morph database specific embodiments database prior art searching tool patent application generator . Thus it is intended that the file format of one or more components of the innovation database be compatible with CAD file formats e.g. CADL CGM CIF DMC DXF EDIF IISF SAT SET IGES STEP PDES VDA FS DIN 66301 VDA IS UNV etc. Microsoft Excel Word PowerPoint and Access file formats Standard Worldwide Web formats XML HTML PDF etc. FileMaker Pro file format EndNote file format and other major commercially available database word processing spreadsheet and reference manager program file formats. In yet another embodiment the file format of one or more components of the innovation database is compatible with commercially available drawing program formats and standard graphic file formats JPEG MPEG TIFF BMP etc. .

The various components of the innovation database may be implemented in Java code and may employ in part Java Libraries. The innovation database components may also be linked to external databases for modification and updating. The innovation database components may also be saved or served as web pages so that multiple remote users can access update edit and use the innovation database through the internet an intranet a VPN etc. When the innovation database is network enabled the system and method of this invention may optionally include web based meeting features such as shared workspace and other features which are known in the art to be used in conjunction with web enabled commercially available programs. These features can be used to view and discuss morphed baseline entities produced.

In yet another embodiment the methods and systems of this invention can implement security features into various components of the innovation database such as encryption and password protection. These security features will limit access and prevent hacking of the innovation database . They are particularly useful in conjunction with the specific embodiments database given the likely confidential nature of the inventions generated by the method and system of this invention.

In another embodiment the system and method of this invention would comprise features that would enhance the user experience and productivity when interacting with the innovation database . These features may include one or more of the following object linking and embedding research tool such as present in Microsoft Office tracking of changes such as present in Microsoft Office macro support add on or plug in support tiling and cascading of individual windows customization of toolbars menus keyboard shortcuts etc. and undo redo step forward and step backward functions.

In summary the innovation database comprises data used for creating and defining an entity represented by a model in the modeling environment . In this manner the model may be broken down or defined into objects representing products components or elements which are also referred to as features and further defined by materials and configurations. The innovation database provides a lexicon and specification framework for breaking down defining organizing or otherwise specifying a model in a flexible and dynamic manner to support the computer assisted inventing of the present invention. The organization and population of the model classes of the innovation database supports a vast array of ways and combinations to represent an entity of a model .

Moreover the innovation database includes a list of morphs that may be applied to any portion of the model to create a morphed changed or otherwise manipulated version of the entity represented by the model . The organization and population of the morphs portion of the innovation database supports creating a multitude of changes to additions to combinations alternatives or otherwise new versions of the entity of the model or in creating new types of entities from the existing entity of the model . The innovation engine interfaces between the modeling environment and the innovation database to apply the model classes and the morphs to the model in the modeling environment in a logical manner as will be further discussed below. Furthermore the innovation database includes storage of specific embodiments of selected morphed baseline entities in order to provide prior art searching and the generation of patent applications.

Moreover the materials configuration and object classes of the innovation database not only provide for the definition of a model but also provide the diversity for the morphs. For example when a morph adds additional objects or replaces objects the morphs may use one more or all of the objects available in the object class of the innovation database . In another example when a morph changes a material the morph may use any material listed in the materials classes. In yet a further example a morph may change the configuration of an object by using any of the configuration choices in the configuration classes. As such the innovation database provides a vast array of ways to break down a model but also provide a vast array of items to be applied by a morph.

In one aspect the present invention is directed towards identifying and defining a model in a modeling environment to represent any type of entity under consideration for computer aided inventing. The entity represented by the model may be any man made or natural thing or process. As such the entity may be any composition item or a process. depicts an example model for illustrative purposes. The model represents a toothbrush as an example of an entity to be used for describing an illustrative embodiment of practicing the present invention. Although a toothbrush is used as the model the model is not meant to be limited to a toothbrush and a model of any type of entity can be used as one ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate. depicts a second model representing the brush portion of the toothbrush model depicted in . The brush model may represent a drill down or separate view of the toothbrush model . Furthermore the brush model may also represent a focused area of interest for applying the systematic computer aided inventing system of the present invention.

Referring now to an illustrative method of performing the systematic computer aided inventing system of the present invention is depicted. This illustrative method will be described using the example of the toothbrush related models and of with the illustrative embodiment of the system depicted in . In reading the following detailed description one ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate that this illustrative method may be practiced in a similar manner with any other type of model and other embodiments of the system of the present invention.

In operation a model is obtained or provided in the modeling environment at step of illustrative method . In one embodiment the model may be created edited or otherwise generated using the modeling environment . In one embodiment the model may be created using any suitable drawing tools or model generation components of the modeling environment . For example any type of 2 D 3 D simple images or 3D CAD rendered drawings may be used to provide the model . In one embodiment the modeling environment may be a block diagram modeling environment which provides blocks to be placed and arranged in a manner to form a model . In another embodiment the model may be provided by using object classes material classes and configuration classes present in the innovation lexicon database . In one another embodiment the model or any portion thereof may be obtained by reading in a file reading from a database such as an existing model saved in the innovation database or from any other suitable storage location. For example the model may be imported in from a file generated by another modeling tool. In the illustrative example of the toothbrush model shown in the model of the toothbrush is obtained or provided by the modeling environment such as a user drawing a graphical representation of a toothbrush. Additionally a graphical representation of the brush portion of the toothbrush is obtained or provided in a second model in the modeling environment . One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize and appreciate the various methods of obtaining or providing a model that may be used in practicing the present invention.

At step of the illustrative method a starting baseline entity to perform the other steps of the illustrative method is identified. The starting baseline entity is the entity represented by a model from which it is desired to systematically generate inventions. As such the starting baseline entity becomes a scope from to which to apply the systematic computer aided inventing steps of the illustrative method . In one embodiment a user will use the selection mechanism to select a model from one or more models that may exist in the modeling environment . In another embodiment a user may select via the selection mechanism a portion of a model . In the illustrative example the user may choose via the selection mechanism the toothbrush model of as the starting baseline entity from which to invent. Alternatively the user may choose via the selection mechanism the brush model of as the starting baseline entity. The model or portion thereof may be selected as the starting baseline entity by any suitable selection mechanism from any provided means of the configuration mechanism . In one embodiment a menu item may be selected in association with a model to indicate that the model is to be used for the inventing process. For example the model may be selected and the right mouse button clicked via the selection mechanism to pop up a menu window of the configuration mechanism from which the model can be identified as the starting baseline entity. In another embodiment if there is only one model in the modeling environment the model may automatically be selected by default or otherwise to be the starting baseline entity. One ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate the plenary of ways to select and identify a model or portion of a model as a starting baseline entity.

At step of the illustrative method the objects of the starting baseline entity are identified in the model . From another perspective objects materials and configuration are defined to form in combination the starting baseline entity. In one embodiment a user via the selection mechanism selects a portion of the model to indicate that portion as an object of the model . For example in the toothbrush example of the user may select a first portion of the model to identify as a first object of the model . This first object in later steps of the illustrative method may be defined to represent the handle of the toothbrush. The user may select a second portion of the toothbrush model to identify a second object of the model . This second object may later be defined to represent the brush portion of the toothbrush. Additionally the entire portion of the toothbrush may be selected to identify a third object to represent the toothbrush.

In a similar manner the user may identify objects of the second model of the brush portion of the toothbrush model . The user may select a first portion of the brush to identify a first object of the brush to represent the base of the brush. The user may then select a second portion of the brush to identify a second object of the brush to represent the interface or securing mechanism between the bristles of the brush and the base of the brush. Additionally the user may select a third portion of the brush model to identify a third object of the brush to represent the individual bristles of the brush. After identifying portions of the models and as objects these portions may be referred to and described as objects further herein. In this manner objects of the model are portions of the model to be defined at step in the illustrative method . The objects or portions of the model can be identified as the portions of the graphical representation of the model .

At illustrative step the user may identify the objects of the model by any suitable means. In one embodiment the user via the selection mechanism draws a selection box around a portion of the model to identify that portion. In another embodiment the model is provided by a graphical representation with segmented portions such as in a block diagram model that are more readily identifiable. In this case the segmented portion of the model may be highlighted or otherwise selected to indicate that portion is to be associated with an object. In a further embodiment the modeling environment and or the innovation engine may have functionality or logic to automatically identify portions of the model in an intelligent way. For example the modeling environment may be configured via the configuration mechanism to recognize the model is for a toothbrush. The modeling environment may communicate with the innovation engine and or innovation database to determine components or parts of a toothbrush. The modeling environment may have logic or functionality to then interpret the graphical representation of the model such as by the rendering mechanism to identify the parts or components of the model . One ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate and recognize the various ways to identify one or more portions of a model as one or more objects.

At step of the illustrative method the one or more objects identified at step are defined or otherwise described to provide a representation of the object in a desired manner. The user may define an identified object using the configuration mechanism and selection mechanism of the modeling environment . In one embodiment a first portion of the model or first object may be selected and a mouse button clicked to provide a graphical user interface to configure the object. In another embodiment the configuration mechanism may provide a fixed menu form in the modeling environment . Configuration and selection choices may be provided via the modeling environment and or the innovation database . As described above the innovation database comprises model classes including object classes configuration classes and material classes . The model classes provide a lexicon and specification for defining the objects of the model . In an exemplary embodiment the model classes provide a multi level hierarchical representation of objects configurations and materials such as via primary and secondary classes. As such the innovation database acts as a specification framework for describing the identified objects of the model .

Additionally with the multi level hierarchical database structure of the innovation database a user is able to filter object classes configuration classes and material classes by the level in hierarchy to areas and scope of initial interest. Once a higher level of any of these classes is determined to be desired or of interest then the user can expand review or otherwise use lower levels of any of these classes in performing the operations of the present invention described herein. This allows the user to initially scan at higher class levels in order to limit the number of choices to work with and to reduce the time it takes to review all the possible choices and possibilities provided by the innovation database . In one embodiment the selection of various hierarchal levels of the different classes may be presented to the user as a series of submenus wherein the choice of an object configuration or material at a given level triggers a submenu of objects configurations or materials at the next lower level and so on see for example . In other embodiments if desired choices are not available from the innovation database the user can manually enter add edit or otherwise provide user defined choices for defining objects of the model . In another embodiment the user may be able to define via the modeling environment any new object material or configuration class record or field in performing the operations of the present invention described herein and store such information in the innovation database .

By way of example of the illustrative example of the toothbrush model a user may define the third object so that the object is defined to be a toothbrush. In this case object represents the entire portion of the model which in turn represents the toothbrush. Via the configuration mechanism and selection mechanism of the modeling environment the user may be able to view and select one or more listing of products from the products classes of the object classes portion of the innovation database . A product class of toothbrush may be presented as a primary class choice. In another embodiment toothbrush may be a secondary or lower subclass choice from a class group provided by the products classes database. For example the toothbrush selection may have been found and selected under a product class primary group of Health and Beauty or Dentistry. In yet another embodiment the toothbrush product selection may have been found under multiple product group classes. For example the user may have selected toothbrush from either a Health and Beauty primary class or a Dentist primary class or any sub classes defined under these primary classes. With the flexibility of the innovation database the toothbrush listing may also be found under another class of the model classes . In one embodiment the toothbrush listing may be considered a component in the component classes . For example toothbrush may be considered a component or part of a dental kit or sleepover kit product and therefore may be found in the component classes database.

Additionally the user may define the first object or first portion of the model to be a handle of the toothbrush. Via the configuration mechanism and selection mechanism of the modeling environment the user may be able to view and select from a listing of components from the components classes of the object classes portion of the innovation database . The handle listing may be provided as a primary class or a sub class in the components classes . The components classes may provide additional suitable selections such as toothbrush handle brush handle or rod which allow the user to define the object in a desired manner. The user may also view and select from a listing of elements classes of the object classes portion of the innovation database to select handle or any other desired object definition.

In a similar manner the user may define the second object of the model to represent the brush portion of the toothbrush. Via the configuration mechanism and selection mechanism of the modeling environment the user may be able to view and select from a listing of components from the components classes or elements from the elements classes either as a primary or secondary class or some other class level in the hierarchy of the innovation database . As such the user may select a component or element such as a brush brush head bristles etc. to define object .

Although the illustrative example of the toothbrush model is described as associating either a product component or element from the respective classes in the model classes portion of the innovation database more than one association can be applied to an object. For example the first object may be defined as a handle from a component class and may also be defined as plastic from the materials classes . Additionally the first object may also be defined as bent from an element class . In this manner the first object results in a definition and configuration of a bent plastic handle. One ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate the permutation of combinations that may be used to define objects in accordance with the present invention.

Furthermore a context can be associated with the starting baseline entity to provide an indication of an environment a background or any other type of context. In one embodiment the context may represent a technology area practice area art area or other environment associated with the starting baseline entity. The context can provide another form of scope to apply the systematic inventing system of the present invention. By way of the illustrative example of the toothbrush model the context may be defined to represent a healthcare dentistry home goods or any other desired category to which the starting baseline entity is associated with. Alternatively it can represent a context under which to generate inventions from. For example although a toothbrush may be more logically associated with the context of healthcare maybe the context is defined to be automobile or hardware to define a different scope for the systematic inventing process and to achieve different results.

With steps and the user can identify and define objects of the model to represent products components and elements of the baseline entity in a desired manner and to associate the baseline entity with any type of context . With the flexibility of the modeling environment and the comprehensive lexicon framework of the invention database a user has great flexibility in perspective granularity and creativity to identify and define objects of a starting baseline entity for the systematic inventing process of the present invention. The same model can be broken down into different objects. In one case for example the toothbrush model may identify three objects as in the above illustrated example or in another case five objects may be identified. For example the brush portion of the toothbrush may be further identified to have objects representing the bristles and the interface of the brush to the handle. In yet another example maybe only one object is identified such as the handle as that is the only area of interest for generating inventions. Furthermore the same object may be defined differently. For example the object representing the handle portion of the toothbrush may be defined to be a wooden handle in one case and in another case a bent rod or in another case a cylindrical stick. The different ways to identify and define objects of a starting baseline entity impacts the computer aided inventing process of the present invention and will lead to different results. As such the present invention gives the user flexibility in the granularity and scope of the invention process.

For example although the user provided a toothbrush model as in the user may decide either before or after completing one or more of the remaining steps of illustrative method to model the brush portion of the toothbrush in more detail. The user may want to focus the inventive process on the brush portion. In another case the user may learn from the results of the illustrative method as described below that it may be desirable to further detail the model of the brush. By way of a further illustrative example the second model may have been used as the starting baseline entity. In one embodiment the modeling environment allows the user to drill down on the second object representing the brush in the toothbrush model to create obtain or otherwise provide the second model . In another embodiment the second model may be obtained or provided as a new model separate from the first model of the toothbrush.

In the illustrative example of the brush model the user may define a first object from any of the data provided by the model classes of the innovation database to represent a bristle holder brush base flat plastic stand or any other desired product component or element available from the model classes . Additionally the first object of the brush model may further be defined to comprise any desired material such as wood metal etc. Furthermore the first object may also be defined comprise any element or feature such as curved concave etc. available from the model classes . The second object of the brush model may be defined to be an element such as a surface matrix of openings interface flat exterior or any other description that may be provided by the element classes . Additionally the second object of the brush model may be defined to comprise a certain material from the materials classes such as plastic. A third object may be defined to represent the bristles of the brush model . The bristles of the third object may be described to be a component of rods rope etc. made up of a material such as plastic nylon etc and having a configuration of a matrix array linear array and additionally with an element or feature of curved or bent .

As one ordinarily skilled in the art can appreciate by the above description of the models and the present invention enables great latitude in defining the models to form starting baseline entities in any desired manner. Furthermore the flexibility of the present invention allows for creative or non intuitive configuration of objects. In one embodiment although the model may represent a toothbrush as in the objects of the model may be defined to represent any component element product material that may not be graphically represented by the model . For example the first object of the model may be defined to be a pen or a straw instead of a handle or rod. In a similar manner the context applied to the model may be logically associated with the entity represented by the model or otherwise may be more creatively defined. In this manner the user of the present invention can inject his or her own creativity into the systematic inventing process of the present invention.

Although the above steps are generally described as the modeling environment interfacing with the innovation database to provide configuration data for a model the innovation engine may also be used and applied to any of the steps of the illustrative method . In one embodiment the modeling environment obtains configuration data from the innovation engine which in turn may interface with the innovation database . In a further embodiment the innovation engine may perform any suitable logic for selecting filtering suggesting or otherwise providing configuration choices and information to the modeling environment . In one embodiment the innovation engine may comprise business rules algorithms or any other logic to intelligently apply the lexicon and specification framework of the innovation database to the identifying and defining steps and of the illustrative method . For example the innovation engine may limit the configuration information to a scope defined by the context or any model class associated with the model . Additionally the innovation engine may be configured with business rules representing a standard or user configured means for applying the lexicon of the innovation database to a model under the invention process. In this way the innovation engine may provide configuration data based on user defined choices or a standard of terms used in a certain context . One ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate how the innovation engine may apply logic to the configuration process as depicted by steps and of illustrative method of .

In one aspect the present invention is directed towards automatically applying morphs to the starting baseline entity to form new inventive entities or versions of the baseline entity. At step of the illustrative method one or more objects are selected to be morphed. These objects are selected in order to generate different versions or forms of the starting baseline entity or different entities as derivatives from the starting baseline entity. In one embodiment and in relation to the illustrative model of all the identified objects and may be automatically selected by default or otherwise to be morphed. In another embodiment the user via the configuration mechanism or the selection mechanism may select one or more objects to be morphed. For example the user via the selection mechanism may select the first object for morphing and then select a menu item or command from the configuration mechanism to indicate to run the morphing process as described at step below.

In another embodiment the modeling environment and or the innovation engine may provide information for the user to determine which objects to morph first. For example the modeling environment may display to the user the total number of applicable morphs for the definition of each object and may further suggest the object with the highest number of potential morphs to be selected. In another case the modeling environment and or the innovation engine may use any characteristic or attribute data associated with the definition of the object of the baseline entity to determine which object may have the highest quality of morphs to apply thereby providing a higher opportunity for useful morphed versions of the starting baseline entity.

The illustrative method of the present invention at step applies one or more morphs to the selected objects. This step may be performed manually or automatically. In manual mode the user may select via a selection mechanism a choice from one or more lists of morphs provided via the configuration mechanism . The lists of morphs may be hierarchical and represent classes and sub classes of the morphs database or any portion thereof. For example a material morph a configuration morph and an object morph or any combination thereof such as a combined material and configuration morph may be provided via the configuration mechanism . The user can select a desired morph and visually see the impact of the morph on the selected baseline entity of the model in the modeling environment .

When the morph is selected manually to be applied to the starting baseline entity the modeling environment and the innovation engine may work in collaboration with each other. The modeling environment may communicate a command instruction or other form of communication to the innovation engine to indicate that the morph has been selected. The innovation engine may retrieve from the innovation database any data or information associated with the morph . For example the innovation engine may retrieve an operational characteristic or attribute of the morph to determine how to apply the morph to the model . In another embodiment the innovation engine may comprise one or more business rules libraries or any other configurable logic or functionality for applying a morph . In an exemplary embodiment the innovation engine such as via business rules will use information associated with each object material or configuration of a starting baseline entity to determine how to apply morphs or how to filter morphs to apply. The business rules may be configurable from a configuration mechanism such as that provided by the modeling environment . In some embodiments the business rules of the innovation engine are user adjustable to provide any type of level of stringency granularity filtering or scope to which to apply morphs . In some embodiments the depth of the hierarchical class level may be selected by the user for applying morphs . In other embodiments any of the attributes such as cost novelty etc stored in any of the records as depicted in illustrative tables of through I may be used for applying morphs or for filtering morphs to apply. Furthermore the user may able to adjust the filtering of or selection of morphs by any of these attributes shown in through I . In other embodiments the innovation engine and or the modeling environment may retrieve from the innovation database or any other suitable source any data or information related to graphically representing the morph or for graphically representing the morph applied to the model .

Step of the illustrative method may also automatically apply one or more morphs to the starting baseline entity. In one embodiment the user may select via a selection mechanism a menu item or command from the configuration mechanism to automatically apply the morphs . In response to the selection the modeling environment may communicate a command instruction or any other form of communication to the innovation engine to automatically apply the morphs to the starting baseline entity. The modeling environment may provide or the innovation engine may obtain any information about the model associated with the starting baseline entity. In one embodiment the modeling environment provides to the innovation engine the model and or all the definition and configuration of the objects related to the starting baseline entity of the model . In another embodiment the innovation engine obtains information about the starting baseline entity of the model from the innovation database . In another embodiment the innovation engine obtains information about the starting baseline entity from any other storage location that the modeling environment may store the model and or the definition of the objects of the model .

For each of the objects of the starting baseline entity of the model the innovation engine will apply one or more morphs selected from the innovation database . In one embodiment the innovation engine may apply the morphs to the one or more objects in any desired or determined order For example the innovation engine may apply all the morphs selected from the innovation database to a first object and then apply all the selected morphs to a second object. In another example the innovation engine may apply a first morph to a first object and then the first morph to a second object. In a further embodiment the innovation engine may apply morphs in an order determined by an operational characteristic performance characteristic or any other attribute of the morph . For example the innovation engine may apply morphs in a ranking based on quality information associated with the morph . In this manner the morphs that may provide more desired results are ranked highest and applied first. In yet a further embodiment morphs may be ranked by which ones have been applied more frequently or which have had better results. For example in step of the illustrative method described below the user provides positive and or negative selection feedback on the application of the morph to the starting baseline entity. This information may be stored in the innovation database and used by the innovation engine to intelligently apply morphs . One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize the different orders from which the innovation engine may apply the morphs .

In one embodiment the innovation engine applies all the available morphs from the innovation database to the objects of the starting baseline entity selected for morphing or in another embodiment all the objects of the starting baseline entity. In another embodiment the user may have selected a class of morphs to automatically apply. For example the user may select to apply one or more of a material morph configuration morph feature morph or a component morph . The user may be able to select in any suitable manner and by any suitable selection criteria from the modeling environment any subset of morphs in the innovation database to automatically apply. In another embodiment the innovation engine intelligently applies morphs based on the definition and configuration of the objects selected for morphing. The innovation engine may have business rules or any other suitable logic to determine which morphs from the morphs database are suitable to apply to an object of the starting baseline entity. For example the innovation engine may only apply a material morph if a material is defined for the object. In another example the innovation engine may compare adjacent objects to determine if there is a morph or set of morphs applicable to an interface between the adjacent objects. Based on the vast array of objects materials and configurations that may be applied to a model one ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate that likewise there is a vast array of ways to apply morphs to a model and to intelligently filter rank select use or otherwise apply a morph to a model .

In one embodiment the innovation engine applies the morph to the model in the memory of the innovation engine and provides the morphed version of the model to the modeling environment . In another embodiment the innovation engine applies the morph to the model by providing commands instructions or any other form of communications to the modeling environment to apply the morph to the model . As such the modeling environment may be responsible for applying the morph to the model . In yet another embodiment the innovation engine is a component of the modeling environment and the modeling environment automatically selects and applies the morph . One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize that the application of the morphs can occur by and in any component of the computer aided inventing environment .

As the morphs are applied to the starting baseline entity of the model either in manual mode or automatic mode the resulting baseline entities may be rendered in the modeling environment as indicated by step of the illustrative method . The rendering mechanism of the modeling environment renders a graphical representation of the model with a morph or a plurality of morphs applied. The modeling environment may render graphical representations of the morphed versions of the starting baseline entity in any suitable manner. In one embodiment the modeling environment generates and renders each morphed version of the starting baseline entity in a separate model e.g. and the rendered graphical representation is displayed in a window form or other graphical user interface separate from other morphed versions and the starting baseline entity of the model . In another embodiment the morphed versions are rendered and displayed in the same model . For example the morphed portion of the model may be highlighted or otherwise visually indicated in the model to distinguish how the morph was applied. In one embodiment the model is annotated with either graphics and or text to indicate how the morph was applied. In another example the starting baseline entity of the model may be repeated with each morph applied in the same window form or graphical user interface displaying the model . In this manner each morphed version of the starting baseline entity are displayed in proximity to each other such as in set of thumbnail views arranged in any suitable manner for comparison.

Although illustrative step is generally discussed as rendering a graphical representation of a morph applied to the starting baseline entity of the model any other suitable means for indicating generating showing conveying or otherwise providing a representation of the resulting morphed entity or entities may be used in practicing the present invention. In one embodiment the modeling environment and or innovation database generates a listing such as a table of the resulting entities. For example the listing may be a word description of the starting baseline entity the morph and the resulting baseline entity. This listing may be any in form suitable for reading by a human user such as text file a document or a web page. In another embodiment the modeling environment may present the listing in a graphical user interface form for a user to select a morphed version to graphically render in the modeling environment . In this manner only a subset of the automatically applied morphs of illustrative step may be graphically rendered in the modeling environment . One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize the variety of ways each morphed version may be rendered in the modeling environment or otherwise provided to the user in any other form.

From illustrative step the user can visually inspect any resulting morphed baseline entity and determine if any of the morphed versions provide an innovation of or invention from the starting baseline entity. In other cases the user may determine from inspection of the morphed versions how to redefine and reconfigure the model at steps and of the illustrative method to focus optimize or otherwise interactively progress to a desired result. In further cases the user may at illustrative step select one of the morphed versions to be the starting baseline entity and start the systematic inventing process of illustrative method with this morphed version. In other cases the morphed versions may provide ideas suggestions recommendations or otherwise act as some form of catalyst for a user to generate innovations or other inventions. For example the user may learn or discover some technical areas to research based on any generated morphed version. Additionally the user may provide or generate a new model in the modeling environment based on information learned from an execution of the steps of illustrative method .

In some embodiments if an object has been morphed into two or more possibilities then the modeling environment may indicate in the model that the object has multiple morphed versions. In one embodiment the modeling environment shimmers the object to graphically indicate the object has multiple possible morphs. Alternatively the multiple possibilities of the object could be constrained by selecting and or deselecting from the multiple possibilities of the object. For example a user may select on the shimmering object to get a list of the multiple possibilities for that object as well as for selecting individual possibilities for viewing entry into the specific embodiments database inclusion in a patent application drafted in part by the patent application generator a prior art search by the prior art searching tool further morphing further selection of choices in lower hierarchal classes or use as a new starting baseline entity. Unwanted or erroneous object choices may be deselected and no longer considered for any of the above actions.

In model of a morph may have been applied to the object of model of to form a morphed version of the object . In the illustrative example of the toothbrush model object may have been defined to represent a handle or a rod of the toothbrush. By way of example object of model may represent a feature morph applied to the handle object . The feature morph may indicate to bend the handle to morph the object into a bent handle object . The feature morph may have further been applied to bend the handle at the top near the interface to or otherwise adjacent to a second object such as object of model of representing the brush portion of the toothbrush. In other cases a feature morph may have indicated another location along the handle to apply the bending. In a further example not shown in model other morphs could have also been applied such as twisting the object to form a morphed object of a twisted handle. In another embodiment the object may have been further defined to be made of a certain material such as plastic. In such a case a material morph may have also been applied to the object to form the morphed object made up of a different material such as wood. The material morph may be applied separately or in conjunction with the feature morph that provides for bending the handle.

Additionally in applying morphs to one or more objects of a starting baseline entity the user may be able to define any ranges and increment functions that may be applicable to the morph . In one embodiment the user via the configuration mechanism of the modeling environment may be able to select a value range and step increments in the range as may be applicable to the morph . For example a morph may be applied to bend the handle of the toothbrush represented by an object of the starting baseline entity. When bending the handle the bending can be applied at various angles and various angle increments. As such the present invention allows the user to indicate the angle range and angle increments. For example the present invention may apply multiple morphs to bend the handle from 0 to 90 degrees in 1 5 10 or any other user desired increments. In this manner the present invention will apply multiple morphs to the starting baseline entity to render multiple morphed baseline entities for each instance of an angle in the range according to the step increment see .

Although user selectable ranges and increments are generally discussed with respect to a bending morph and angles one ordinarily skilled in the art will appreciate and recognize there will be many other morphs where ranges and or increments are applicable. For example ranges and increments may be provided to define positional and or orientation coordinates of where to add an object to a starting baseline entity. In another example range and increments may be identified for quantities weights mixtures or compositions.

In model of one or more morphs may have been applied to the object of model in to form a morphed version of object and the morphs may have been applied to add an additional object . In this illustrative example the morphed object may represent a bent or twisted handle as described in the morphs of Model . However the present invention provides also for the morph of adding additional objects to the starting baseline entity. In one embodiment the object may represent any object from the object classes of the innovation database . For example object may represent a mirror a tooth picking device a musical playing device a speaker a timing device an LED or any other object available from the innovation database . In this manner model may represent a morph to the toothbrush of a bent handle with an object of a musical device or speaker attached at one end. The morphs applied in the example of model may also indicate where and how the object is attached. For example the object may be attached at either end or anywhere in the middle of the handle object . In a further example the morph may indicate the orientation of the attachment of the object . For example one side of the object may be attached to face away from the bending of the handle in either direction or from an adjacent object.

In a further example of morphing the toothbrush model of model of shows a morph applied to object of the toothbrush model . In model object may represent the morphed version of object representing the brush portion of the toothbrush model . Object may represent a morph applied to the brush head of the toothbrush. In one embodiment object may represent any component class from the innovation database . In another embodiment object may represent the result of a reverse lookup of dictionary content in the innovation database . For example the object may have been defined to be a brush. A reverse lookup may have been performed on the term brush in the innovation database to determine all the different types of brushes. As such the object may represent a different type of brush that is being applied as a morph . For example maybe object represents a sponge type of brush and therefore the resulting brush head of the toothbrush is a sponge.

The user may have modeled the toothbrush in model to define the brush portion of the toothbrush e.g. object at a relatively course level of granularity. In this case the illustrative method may have only applied morphs according to this definition and configuration of object as a brush. For example only different brush types may have been applied as shown in morph N of model of . The user can define the brush portion of the toothbrush for finer course of granularity to obtain different computer aided inventing results in practicing illustrative method for the toothbrush. shows additional illustrative examples of morphs applied to the brush model of as if it was chosen as the starting baseline entity at step . In brief overview of the modeling environment shows multiple graphical representations of morphs i.e. morph . . . morph n which may have been generated in practicing the illustrative method on model of . Model shows morph model shows morph and model shows morph N.

In the case of morphed model of a morph may have been applied to object of model of to generate a morphed object . Object may have been defined to be a flat base. The present invention may have applied a feature morph to provide a bending morph to the flat base of object as shown in model . The feature morph may have further indicated to bend the flat base in the middle. Although this example shows a particular morph any morph available from the innovation database may have been applied.

In the case of morphed model of a morph may have been applied to the object of model of representing the bristles of the brush. Object may have been defined to be thin rods to model the bristles. The morph may have generated a morphed object representing thick rods twisted rods or any other combination of a morph from the morph database to the rods of object . Additionally although object may have not been defined to be a certain material the present invention may also provide the morphed object with a material morph . For example morphed object may represent a twisted rod made of rope material.

In the case of morphed model of a morph may have been applied to the object of model of representing the interface between the bristles of object and the flat base of object . In this example morphs may be applied to provide different versions or methods to interface the rods of object to the base of object as represented by the morphed interface object . For example the morphed interface object may represent an interface that attaches the rods i.e. the bristles of object first to a thin flat plate that is attached to the flat base of object by a fastener mechanism at the four corners. In another example not shown by model the morphed object may represent a matrix of threaded openings on the base of object for the rods of object to be screwed into. In accordance with the present invention any morph from the innovation database may be applied.

The hierarchal grouping of materials and objects into classes sub classes sub sub classes etc. can aid the user to more quickly scan through multiple possibilities and to zoom in on a class that is of interest.

The morphs applied do not have to be logically associated with the starting baseline entity of the model or model and in some cases it may be preferred to generate morphed versions from morphs that are not logically associated with the starting baseline entity. For example the morphs may add products components elements from the object classes or apply material classes and configuration classes B that are not technologically or otherwise related to any portion of a model . In other examples morphs may alter modify change or manipulate any object of the starting baseline entity in a manner that the starting baseline entity is not originally designed for. As such the present invention may produce morphed versions of baseline entities and new baseline entities that are creative and in such a manner that is not intuitive straightforward or logical. Furthermore the present invention may produce resulting entities that may at first seem bizarre strange or not all that practical or innovative. However these results may act as a catalyst for further innovation. For example further inspection and or reflection upon the results may lead to other creative alternatives from the user to redefine and reconfigure a starting baseline entity in the modeling environment for further processing by illustrative method . In another example the user may use the results from the present invention to invent an invention in any other suitable means.

At illustrative step a selection process is performed on the one or more resulting morphed entities generated at step and provided at step . For any generated resulting morphed entity the user may be able to select via the selection mechanism and configuration mechanism an indicator of a positive or negative selection of a resulting morphed baseline entity. In one embodiment the user may be able to select a model such as any of the models and invoke a graphical user interface that provides for the selection choices. One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize that there are a variety of means and mechanisms to provide for and obtain a selection from a user. In one embodiment the modeling environment may provide a selection of usefulness for a morphed entity. In another embodiment the modeling environment may provide a selection of novelty or inventiveness over any prior art. In a further embodiment the modeling environment may provide a matrix of selection criteria including and related to one or more of usefulness novelty creativity commercialization marketability costs performance user friendliness or any other criteria that may be suitable for providing and associating a positive or negative indicator with the morphed entity or a morph itself. The selection may be determined to be positive or negative based on any suitable indicator such as a scaled ranking a binary choice a weighted sum of criteria or any other suitable means to indicate a selection in a positive or negative manner.

At step of illustrative method one or more of the morphed baseline entities selected at step may be stored in the specific embodiments database . As will be discussed further below the specific embodiments database is used by the prior art searching tool to perform prior art searches and by the patent application generator to generate patent applications . In one embodiment the modeling environment may automatically store the selected baseline entities to the specific embodiments database . In another embodiment the user may choose which selected morphed baseline entities to store to the specific embodiments database . For example the user may via the configuration mechanism of the modeling environment choose from a menu item of a popup form which selected morphed baseline entities to store to the specific embodiments database .

The modeling environment stores information from the modeling environment and or the innovation database related to and representing the selected morphed baseline entity into the specific embodiments database . In one embodiment one or more of the fields of the records from the object classes for each of the objects of a selected morphed baseline entity is stored in the specific embodiments database as illustrated by the example table of . For example the name of each object along with any object attributes as identified in the fields illustrated by the example of table of may be stored in the specific embodiments database . In one embodiment one or more synonyms for the names of the object may also be stored in the specific embodiments database . Likewise any of the fields of the records from the configuration classes and material classes associated with the selected morphed baseline entity may also be stored in the specific embodiments database . For example any of the fields for records of configuration classes illustrated by the example of table and of may be stored with the records for the selected morphed baseline entity in the specific embodiments database . In a further example any of the fields for records of material classes illustrated by tables and may also be stored in the specific embodiments database and associated with the selected morphed baseline entity. Additionally any information available from the modeling environment related to the selected morphed baseline entity may be stored in the specific embodiments database . For example positional and orientation coordinates of objects of the selected morphed baseline entity as rendered in the modeling environment may be stored in the specific embodiments database . In this manner the specific embodiments database will comprise information representing the specific embodiment of the possible invention of the selected morphed baseline entity. A selected morphed baseline entity stored in the specific embodiments database may also be referred to as a specific embodiment.

The user may then select those embodiments to claim in a patent to be produced in part by the patent application generator . In the user has selected embodiments 1 and 4 causing the Claim field to indicate Yes .

The present invention also provides a very dynamic and interactive computer aided inventing approach wherein a starting baseline entity at step can be selected during any of the steps to re start the computer aided inventing process of the illustrative method . For example when the user is identifying objects of the baseline entity at step the user may determine to focus the practice of the computer aided invention process of method on an identified object. As such the user may identify an object at step and then select at step the object as the starting baseline entity. The user may then at step identify additional objects of the object as the starting baseline entity and continue to practice one or more of the other steps of illustrative method . Also after generating morphed versions of the starting baseline entity at steps and the user may select a morphed entity or any object or portion thereof as the starting baseline entity at step and repeat illustrative method . Furthermore the user may also after performing the selection process of step select one or more of the resulting morphed versions based on any selection criteria of step to be the starting baseline entity at step . In this manner an extremely wide range of branches of permutations and combinations can be generated in different granularities and perspectives to produce nearly an endless supply of different resulting morphed entities.

At step of illustrative method the present invention also performs automated prior art searching. The prior art searching tool may by any suitable interface mechanism and or means be triggered to perform a prior art search as one or more selected morphed baseline entities are stored to the specific embodiments database . In one embodiment the prior art searching tool may use database triggers to be notified of new selected embodiment records being stored to the specific embodiments database . In another embodiment the prior art searching tool may be instructed by the modeling environment to perform prior art searches any time the modeling environment stores a selected morphed baseline entity to the specific embodiments database . Alternatively the prior art searching tool may be requested by the user to perform a prior art search via the modeling environment for one or more selected morphed baseline entities in the specific embodiments database .

The prior art searching tool may use any of the fields of the record of the specific embodiment in the specific embodiments database to perform searching. In one embodiment the prior art searching tool forms a search expression from a combination of one or more of the names and or synonyms of the objects materials configuration and morphs stored or associated with the selected embodiment. In some embodiments the names and or synonyms of an object can be obtained from a database other than the innovation database of the present invention such as a database accessible via the Internet. In further embodiments the names and or synonyms of an object can be obtained from a dictionary type web site on the Internet. For example various alternative names for an object may be obtained from the web site of www.dictionary.com or from the dictionary like capabilities provided by the searching utility of www.google.com. One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize and appreciate that the prior art searching tool may form one or more search expressions for the select embodiment from any combination of terms phrases and words available in the innovation database and or from any other source such as the Internet.

In some embodiments the prior art searching tool performs a prior art search of patents published patent applications and any other prior art using the search expression and interfacing with the web site of the USPTO i.e. www.uspto.gov any other patent office web site or any other Internet accessible source. In another embodiment the prior art searching tool performs a search via an Internet search tool such as Google using the search expression formed from data stored with the selected embodiment. In a further embodiment the prior art search tool performs the search with the search expression on any accessible storage location or device readable medium. The prior art searching tool may automatically perform multiple searches via multiple sources such as multiple patent office web sites an Internet search tool and a DVD ROM.

Furthermore the prior art searching tool may perform multiple searches using different search expressions formed from the fields associated with the record of the selected embodiment in the specific embodiments database . For example in one search the prior art searching tool may use a broad search expression representing a name for the selected embodiment. In other cases the prior art searching tool may perform a specific search for each of the objects of the specific embodiments. In additional embodiments the prior art search tool can be configured by any suitable mechanisms and or means to determine the number and type of searches to perform automatically or for a specific embodiment.

The prior art searching tool obtains one or more results from the one or more prior art searched it may perform either automatically or manually. In one embodiment the results of the prior art searches may be displayed in the modeling environment by any suitable mechanisms and or means such as via a graphical user interface form. The user may view the results and select the desired results and have the modeling environment store the results in the specific embodiments database . In other embodiments the prior art searching tool may read parse or otherwise interpret the results of the prior art searches to determine information about the results. Furthermore the prior art searching tool may store information about the prior art search results in the specific embodiments database in fields and or records associated with one or more specific embodiments in the specific embodiments database . For example the prior art searching tool may store results in the illustrative example of table of . In other embodiments the prior art searching tool stores results off line in any suitable storage. For example the prior art searching tool may download patents and published patent applications as .pdf files for viewing by a user of the present invention. Additionally the prior art searching tool may include a reference or link to such downloaded content in the results portion of the specific embodiments database .

Additionally at step of the illustrative method the present invention can generate via the patent application generator a patent application or any portion thereof representative of a baseline entity selected at step or at any time any model or any morphed model and in the modeling environment . The user via the configuration mechanism and selection mechanism may choose in the modeling environment to generate a patent application for one or more models that may be loaded or otherwise referenced in the modeling environment . In another embodiment a patent application may automatically be generated for any resulting morphed entity or entities indicated with a positive selection at step of the illustrative method . In a further embodiment one or more patent applications may automatically be generated to represent one or more of the resulting morphed entities generated by automatically applying the morphs at step of illustrative method . In an exemplary embodiment the patent application generator generates a patent application for one or more specific embodiments stored in the specific embodiments database . The patent application generator utilizes the data stored in the fields and records of a selected embodiment in the specific embodiments database as content to process to generate a patent application .

The patent application generator may use any of the graphical representations provided by the rendering mechanism of the modeling environment to provide informal or formal drawings for the patent application . The modeling environment and or rendering mechanism may be able to provide different views or graphical representations of a model to be used for figures for the patent application. For example the modeling environment and or rendering mechanism may be able to provide a top level view of a model and then provide detailed views of each object or any section or portion of the model . In other embodiments the patent application generator may obtain graphical representations of objects of models or for products components elements of a model that may be available from the innovation database or any other database the patent application generator may be configured to access. In another embodiment one or more graphical representations of the objects of the selected embodiments stored in or referenced in the specific embodiments database . In other embodiments the patent application generator uses the positional and orientation coordinates to determine how to provide graphical representations of the selected embodiments in the figures of the patent application .

The patent application generator can name and label the figures in any suitable manner and in such a manner to be used consistently in the detailed description of the patent application. For example the patent application generator may place a label in the figure for each identified object in a model . Furthermore the description of the drawings portion of the patent application can be generated to provide a description of the figures generated by the patent application generator .

From the innovation database or any other database or from any built in or loadable logic functionality or information the patent application generator may obtain textual content to form any of the sections of the patent application . In one embodiment the patent application generator uses data from or references to data in the specific embodiments database to obtain content for the patent application . In another embodiment for each object defined in a model the patent application generator obtains a name description and any associated characteristics and attributes stored in the innovation database and generates a narrative arranging the obtained information in a suitable manner in the patent application document . For example the narrative may be placed in the detailed description section of the patent application and may also include references to the labels placed on any corresponding objects in the figures generated by the patent application generator . In a similar manner the claims background abstract field of invention and summary may be generated by the patent application generator . Furthermore a user via any suitable input means such a user interface may able to add to update revise edit or change the patent application generated by the patent application generator in a manner to produce a patent application suitable for filing. In one embodiment a user may load into a word processor the patent application document generated by the patent application generator and complete and or finalize a version of the patent application for filing with a patent office.

The patent application generator may use any fields of records associated with one or more selected embodiments of the specific embodiments database or any object material configuration or morph of the innovation database to determine what should or should not be included in the patent application . For example the illustrative example of table of has fields for morphs to determine whether the morph should be included in the specification and or the claims. Likewise any records of the specific embodiments or innovation database may have fields to indicate whether the items should be included or otherwise considered by the patent application generator . Additionally the patent application generator may include information from the results of the prior art search performed by the prior art searching tool . The patent application generator may obtain results information from the prior art search results stored in association with one or more selected embodiments in the specific embodiments database . The prior art search results in the specific embodiments database may have fields to indicate whether the results should be included in the patent application or otherwise considered by the patent application generator .

In another aspect the present invention is directed towards the innovation database being updated growing evolving or otherwise reflecting results from practicing the present invention. At step of the illustrative method the innovation database may be updated with any information or data produced derived from or otherwise provided by using the present invention. In one embodiment the user via the modeling environment or any other suitable means can configure and update the innovation database with user provided entries for any of the model classes and morphs or any attributes associated with the model classes and morphs . In another embodiment the user may be able to edit modify annotate add to change or otherwise manage any of the information or data in the innovation database to provide desired results or have the present invention perform in a desired manner. In a further embodiment the modeling environment may automatically update the innovation database with morphed objects and resulting morphed entities to form new model classes and new morphs to use in practicing the present invention. In one embodiment the innovation database is updated with external sources of information such as new technical dictionary. In another embodiment the innovation database may be linked to or otherwise updated from other available knowledge bases or knowledge sources. One ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize that the content of the innovation database may be continuously updated to provide new and different computer aided inventing results which can in turn be reflected in the innovation database to further provide additional new and different computer aided inventing results and this cycle can be repeated continuously.

Although the illustrative embodiment of the present invention is generally described for entities comprising a structure such as an apparatus one ordinarily skilled in the art will recognize and appreciate the present invention can be applied in a similar manner to any system function process method or from any perspective. For example a model such as block diagram model can be provided in the modeling environment to model any design system process method function or functionality such as a model based design of a process operation computation algorithm that may be performed in any computational hardware device. The innovation database can include model classes and morphs directed to modeling processes and functionality and applying morphs to processes and functionality. Accordingly the starting baseline entity of a model can have objects identified and defined from a process oriented perspective a functional perspective or from any perspective that may be provided or supported by the lexicon and specification framework of the innovation database . Additionally the different modeling perspectives may be mixed in that a starting baseline entity model may represent portions of an apparatus a method or functionality that may be implemented either as an apparatus or a method. The steps of the illustrative method would in a likewise manner apply to any such starting baseline entity models. In one implementation a device method or computer program for aiding the process of authoring text includes lexicon databases of words lexicon databases of phrases and a database of sentence structures. The device method or computer program is capable of generating a database of variations of the text by applying morphs to a word phrase or sentence structure. The device method or computer program additionally allows for the application of morphs to all or portions of the generated morphed text and generates a database of morphed texts. In another implementation a device method or computer program for aiding the process of music composition and orchestration comprising databases of sounds such as a flute siren voice notes melody elements series of notes and chords. The device method or computer program is capable of generating a database of variations of the music by applying morphs to the orchestration melody elements duration volume or tone of the notes change note change duration change instrument or sound . The device method or computer program permits the user to select or the device method or program to randomly generate one or multiple variations of orchestration duration tone and volume. The device method or computer program additionally allows for the application of morphs to all or portions of the generated morphed music. The device method or computer program then plays back the variations allowing the user to select the most desirable output.

In view of the structure functions and operations of the illustrative embodiment of the present invention described herein the present invention provides a systematic approach to computer aided inventing in a modeling environment using an innovation engine and innovation database. The innovation database provides a lexicon specification framework and knowledge base for generating via the innovation engine a vast array of inventions innovative improvements intermediate inventive prototypes brainstorming models creativity assisting models alternative or otherwise morphed embodiments of a starting model or portion of a model in the modeling environment. Any resulting morphed inventive embodiment may comprise an invention that is useful and novel or may comprise an intermediate form of a series of embodiments that leads to an invention or the discovery of an invention. In other cases the computer aided inventing system of the present invention may provide creative or brainstorming suggestions to facilitate or expedite the innovation process. For example the present invention may be used in a collaborative session where participants from different backgrounds and disciplines come together to creatively brainstorm towards a directed innovation. The present invention provides a framework and systematic approach to facilitate the session and provides alternative embodiments to further trigger the creativity of the participants and the collaborative brainstorming activity. In summary the present invention provides an innovation environment for a purposeful and structured approach to the innovation process.

Many alterations and modifications may be made by those having ordinary skill in the art without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. Therefore it must be expressly understood that the illustrated embodiments have been shown only for the purposes of example and should not be taken as limiting the invention which is defined by the following claims. These claims are to be read as including what they set forth literally and also those equivalent elements which are insubstantially different even though not identical in other respects to what is shown and described in the above illustrations. In cases where an example table of morphs objects materials or configurations is presented here it is recognized that the invention can be useful with subsets of these fists for example there can be at least 25 33 40 50 70 80 or 90 of the members of each list used depending on the particular application of the invention.

