---

title: Method and apparatus for integrating phone and PDA user interfaces on a single processor
abstract: Separate processors, a PDA processor, and a baseband processor are maintained in a PDA having an integrated telephone device. The PDA processor runs PDA related programs and a user interface for the telephone device. A link between the PDA processor and baseband processor transfers data and commands from the user interface to a phone control program executing on the baseband processor. The base band processor is connected to the telephone device, and the phone control program controls operation of the telephone device. The separation of processors reduces vulnerability of the telephone device to hacker rogue applications that invade or program crashes that occur on the PDA processor.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07813486&OS=07813486&RS=07813486
owner: Access Systems Americas, Inc.
number: 07813486
owner_city: Sunnyvale
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051213
---
This application is a continuation application of application Ser. No. 09 687 987 entitled Method and Apparatus for Integrating Phone and PDA User Interfaces on a Single Processor filed Oct. 13 2000 to be issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 976 217 the subject matter in the above identified and commonly owned application is incorporated herein by reference.

This invention relates generally to user interfaces. The invention is more particularly related to user interfaces for phone and Personal Digital Assistants PDAs . And the invention is yet more particularly related to combining phone and PDA user interfaces on a single processing device.

Personal computer systems and their applications have become common tools in modern society. To organize their lives many personal computer users use personal information management applications such as an address book and a daily organizer on their personal computers. Although such applications have proven useful for personal information management their utility is limited by the fact that the person must be sitting at their personal computer system to access the information.

To remedy this limitation palmtop computers electronic organizers and other handheld devices commonly known as personal digital assistants PDA s have been introduced. The PDA is a computer that is small enough to be handheld or placed in a pocket and allows a user and run various applications including personal information management applications such as address books daily organizers etc. These applications make. people s lives easier.

The most popular brand of PDA is the Palm . However the Palm is much more than a simple PDA. A basic configuration of the Palm 100 is shown in . This small slim device about the size of your wallet can hold 6000 addresses 5 years of appointments 1500 to do items 1500 memos 200 e mail messages and can run many different software applications.

The front of the PalmR3 100 is a large LCD screen which is touch sensitive and allows a user to enter and manipulate data. A stylus not shown is provided with the Palm to help in making touch screen inputs. By using the stylus or another handheld pointer to interact with a touch sensitive screen a palmtop user can easily navigate through a host of built in programs software and other applications.

Today the Palm PDA and other handheld computing devices offer Internet connectivity capabilities as well as a vast array of hardware and software choices. Palmtops have evolved from simple organizers into a new kind of handheld that people use to instantly manage all kinds of information from email to medical data to stock reports.

Mobile telephones cell phones PCS satellite phones etc are also common tools in today s world. Many cell hones include rudimentary functionality for maintaining call lists or phone book information to help alleviate the burdens associated with managing contacts and tracking phone numbers.

However despite the great capabilities and conveniences of the modern PDA and the cell phone many innovations are needed for expanding the capabilities and for increasing the convenience of using PDAs and cell phones.

The present inventors have realized that the integration of mobile telephone technology into a PDA is one area where innovations are greatly needed to improve the performance convenience and usability of PDA and or other devices having mobile telephone capabilities. The present inventors have also realized that the integration of cell phones into a PDA have some drawbacks that make operation of the combined devices less efficient. For example a PDA having an integrated cell phone has more processing capability than needed if the cell phone is simply added to the PDA. A PDA having integrated cell phone capability which uses a single processor to run both the cell phone and PDA is subject to invalid spurious rogue or hacker initiated signals if the PDA processor runs user programs and controls the radio functions of the cell phone.

The present invention is a PDA or other electronic device having integrated cell phone technology. The user interfaces for the cell phone and the PDA are run on a single main processor PDA processor for example . A second phone control processor controls the radio functions of the cell phone. A proprietary link is established for communications between the PDA processor and phone control processor. The proprietary link isolates the phone control processor and radio equipment of the cell phone from spurious commands instituted because of hacker s programs program crashes etc. that occur on the PDA processor.

The invention may be embodied as a handheld computer or electronic device comprising a display screen a first processor configured to run user applications and send outputs of the user applications to the display screen the user applications including a telephone user interface configured to capture user inputs for telephone related operations and display current telephone operations information on the display screen a telephone device a baseband processor connected to the telephone device and configured to control operations of the telephone device and a communications link between the first processor and the baseband processor for communicating user inputs and selections from the telephone user interface to the baseband processor.

The invention includes an electronic device comprising display means a first processing means for running user applications and sending outputs of the user applications to said display screen said user applications including a user interface means for at least capturing user inputs for telephone related operations and displaying current telephone operations information on said display means a telephone communication means a baseband processing means for controlling operations of said telephone communication means and a link means for communicating data between said first processing means and said baseband processing means said data including user inputs and selections from said user interface means to said baseband processing means.

The present invention includes a method of operating an electronic device having an integrated telephone device comprising the steps of running a telephone user interface program on a first processing device running a telephone device control program on a second processing device communicating user data and actions from the telephone user interface program to the telephone device control program via a communications link between the first processor and the second processor and controlling operation of the integrated telephone device via the telephone device control program according to the user data and actions communicated.

Portions of the present invention may be conveniently implemented on a general purpose computer such as a modern PDA Palm cell phone satellite phone or networked computers and the results may be displayed on an output device connected to any of the general purpose PDA Palm networked computers or transmitted to a remote device for output or display.

Referring again to the drawings wherein like reference numerals designate identical or corresponding parts and more particularly to thereof there is illustrated a block diagram of selected components of a handheld computer that includes cell phone technology. The handheld computer includes a processing device for executing applications and an operating system of the computer a memory device for storing the operating system data and the applications. A memory bus is utilized to transfer programs and data from memory to the processing unit .

A display screen is provided preferably a touch sensitive screen for display of Operating System prompts buttons icons application screens and other data and for providing user inputs via tapping or touching or drawing in the Graffiti area via a stylus or other touch mechanism. Hardware interface connects to physical hard buttons and switches located on a body of the computer and provides signals to applications running on the processing unit .

A mobile radio device provides connectivity to a cellular telephone network not shown . A system bus carries data and commands to from the processing unit from to other devices within the computer . For example user applications running on the computer send application screens and other data outputs to display screen for display via the system bus . User inputs Graffiti area drawing or tap selection for example are detected by the screen and sent to the processing unit via the system bus .

In addition to the operating system and user selected applications another application a phone device executes on the processing unit . Phone calls from the network directed toward the mobile radio device are detected by the mobile radio device and sent in the form of an incoming call notification to the phone device executing on the processing unit . The phone device processes the incoming call notification by notifying the user by an audio output such as ringing not shown .

The phone device also includes a method for the user to answer the incoming call. For example tapping on a phone icon or pressing a hard button designated or preprogrammed for answering a call signals the phone device to send instructions via system bus to the mobile radio device to answer the call.

Outgoing calls are placed by a user by entering digits of the number to be dialed and pressing a call icon for example. The dialed digits are sent to the mobile radio device along with instructions needed to configure the mobile radio device for an outgoing call. The instructions may include for example 1. Access a base station 2. Send digits 3. Retrieve and forward ring indication if any 4. Connect call 6. manage call and 7. await further instructions. Many other instructions may be utilized. For example in the AT command set more than 100 commands are available. Similar instructions may be sent for handling an incoming call by the phone device after receiving and processing an incoming call indication from the mobile radio device .

The mobile radio device is a device configured send signals on exact frequency requirements FCC certified for example . Base stations that communicate with the mobile radio device are also precision devices sending and receiving on specified radio frequency channels. One difficulty arising with the design as shown in is that application program crashes on processor can cause unwanted or inconsistent signals to be generated on system bus and potentially causing problems with the mobile radio device such as spurious radio emissions. In addition the design of also is susceptible to hacker or rogue programs that may be executing on processing unit also potentially causing spurious radio emissions from mobile radio device . The potential spurious emissions might for example cause radio broadcasts in an unintended or unapproved frequency range potentially cause problems at one or more base stations unintentionally causing a base station re boot for example or cause interfere with other mobile radio devices.

Preferably the PDA has interactive hardware and software that perform functions such as maintaining calendars phone lists and at least one voice or audio related functions integrated or attachably integrated via a connector device for example not shown so as to be configured for use with cellular telephone capabilities of the PDA. Several examples of a configuration and details of connector devices for connecting or integrating voice function devices to a PDA are described in Maes et al. application Ser. No. 09 675 872 entitled INTEGRATING VOICE FUNCTION INTO A PDA filed Sep. 29 2000 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

The software including a phone user interface operating system and other applications word processors spreadsheets databases etc. are stored in memory device along with program data graphics and other data and executed on a processing device . A touch sensitive display device and hard button interface are also provided as similarly discussed above. A system bus provides data command and possibly other types of communication as directed by any one of the devices including display screen hardware interface and processing unit to the other devices.

Processing unit runs applications including the operating system OS including a User Interface UI of the OS and other user applications word processor and word processor user interface for example as directed by user inputs. The user applications display outputs on the display screen and receive inputs from taps tap hold and writing operations on the display screen and from programmed hard buttons attached to hardware interface .

A phone application and phone application user interface are provided and execute on the processing unit . The main function of the phone application is to service the phone application user interface and transfer required data to and from the phone control application running on the phone control baseband processor .

A PDA baseband link is used to communicate data between the phone application on processing unit and the phone control application on phone control baseband processor . The PDA baseband link is an AT Command interface over a serial link. The PDA baseband link separates processing performed on processing unit and processing performed on the phone control baseband processor providing a separation that reduces chances that a hacker program other rogue application or a program crash on the processing unit has any improper influence on the phone control baseband processor or the phone control application hence providing a more stable environment for operation of the mobile radio device and assuring no adverse impact on the operation of the cellular network e.g. preventing unwanted interference signals that could adversely affect other users .

In one embodiment the AT Command over serial link used on the PDA baseband link is proprietary to Palm and or utilizes other protocol stacks. In other embodiments the PDA baseband link is a parallel interface. In the embodiments using a proprietary link proprietary protocol and or proprietary protocol stack the format of the important over and above proprietary link is not particularly normal protocol considerations byte economy ease of use etc but keeping the link proprietary assures that rogue applications affecting operation of other PDA devices are unlikely to have the present invention. The protocol that is updateable any effect on a device according to PDA baseband link includes a by downloading an updated protocol from a vendor web site and installing the updated protocol on each of the processing unit and phone control baseband processor .

The type of interface used over the PDA baseband link may be selected based on criteria of the phone control baseband processor which may already have communication ports configured for either parallel or serial communications. The selected protocol is a choice between the available protocols for a particular baseband processor or a protocol that may be developed by the producer of the baseband processor and the producer of a device utilizing the present invention. No advantage in the type of protocol utilized is envisioned except that an industry standard protocol such as the AT command interface discussed above may be more familiar to development engineers implementing a product and may reduce development time.

At step any user operation may be performed power down set preferences arrange icons etc. or user selected application word processor Internet etc. may be invoked and used. Step identifies that the user has selected a phone application that is intended to control mobile phone capabilities built into the system mobile radio for example .

When the phone application is started it sends a signal across the PDA baseband link that signals the phone control OS to boot and start a phone control application that runs on the phone control processor step . Alternatively the phone control OS is booted upon power up of the system and waits in a hibernation state until a signal is received to start the phone control application. In the former case an on off recognizer identifies whether a signal on the PDA baseband link is an on off command and boots or shuts down the phone control OS and processor accordingly. In the latter case the phone control OS recognizes start and shut down commands that are applied to the phone control application.

Once started the PDA processor unit and phone control processor begin communicating from phone application to phone control application over the PDA baseband link step . User actions step controlling PDA functions or directly phone operations step are implemented.

Another example phone operation is making a call illustrated in steps . First the phone application collects digits entered by the user via the phone application user interface running on PDA processing unit step . A step of sending a wake up or configuration signal step to the phone control application running configuration signal step to the phone control application running on phone control processor may be performed to wake the phone control application in the case where the phone control application is in a sleep mode from a period of in operation for example and signal the phone control application to configure the mobile radio device so as to be ready to make a call power up awake form sleep etc. . Step may be performed as soon as the phone application knows that a call is being made such as upon phone application boot or when a first digit of a phone number is received as in step for example . At step the digits collected at step are communicated from the phone application to the phone control application signaling the phone control application to initiate a call to that number.

Another example phone application is receiving an incoming call as illustrated in steps . At step an incoming call indication is received by the phone application from the phone control application running on ph call processor . At step the phone application is configured to receive the call set up audio channels wake phone applications etc. . At step the phone application presents an incoming call notification to the user ringing vibration visual display combination etc. . Finally at step a user acts to answer the call presses a talk button or icon for example which directs the phone application to connect the call or a user acts to send the call to voicemail or ignore by pressing an end button or icon for example. Alternatively if a user does nothing the call is left unattended call directed to voicemail by network for example or if the user has preferences set the preferences are used to direct operations of the phone application. Examples of user preferences for directing phone operations during periods of user inaction and other conditions such as how to notify a user of an incoming call are described in Maes et al. application Ser. No. 09 675 874 entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR SETTING AND USING USER PREFERENCES filed Sep. 29 2000 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

Another example operation of the phone control processor is shown in steps for making a call. The phone control processor receives a communication from the phone application having the digits of a user entered telephone number step the phone control processor programs the mobile radio device to contact a base station and initiate the call step and the phone control application administers performs any functions needed to maintain the connection the call step .

A final example operation answering an incoming call is illustrated in steps . An incoming call indication is received from the network step . The phone control processor configures the mobile radio device to answer the call step and sends an incoming call notification to the phone application step . If a user action prompted action message hang up send to voicemail or answer for example is returned from the phone application a phone control application process is then initiated downstream from connector A to perform that process. If no user action is occurs the incoming call notification is resent no branch of Step .

Alternatively the phone application is pre programmed to continue any ringing or other notification until a lost call signal is received from the phone control application indicating that there is no longer an incoming call already diverted to voice mail by the network or caller hung up for example . The above processes are examples and other features or processes may also be performed by the phone control processor periodic network checks or sending network ID information to the phone application for example .

Concurrently hosted on the Palm or electronic or computer device is the phone application. An example phone application is shown in . The phone application includes a dialer screen that includes keypad digits 1 9 and and a set of operation keys. The operation keys include Talk Note Mute and End . In one embodiment user activation of the Talk key initiates a phone call of previously entered digits or answers an incoming call. User activation of the Mute key mutes the caller at the other end of the line other caller which keeps the other caller from hearing any conversation initiated at the users side of the call. User activation of the End key terminates the call that the user is currently participating or immediately transfers an incoming call to voicemail other opt ions as specified in user preferences for example . Other functions may be assigned or programmed into the keys and additional or alternative keys and functions may also be provided. The Palm OS or other operating system decides which of the concurrent applications is currently being executed on the processing device the remain application s in an inactive state.

While on a call the Note key activates an in call note taking service allowing the user to take notes about the call and return to the dialer screen for control of other telephone options after completing the note. Details of a note taking program and other options are described in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 675 363 entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR TAKING A NOTE WHILE IN A PHONE CALL filed Sep. 29 2000 the contents of which are incorporated by reference in their entirety.

A voicemail flag envelope icon for example indicates a voicemail or other message short messaging service for example received by the phone application or network administering the telephone capabilities of the Palm 300. Ringer preferences are shown as two icons a bell with a line drawn through it and a vibrator icon illustrating the current options for notification of incoming calls. Either the bell icon or vibrator icon may be tapped to change the status of the option. For example tapping the bell with a line drawn through it changes it to bell without a line. Tapping the vibrator icon changes it to a no vibrate icon. In this manner user preferences or options may be changed. The phone application is one example of a phone application that may be utilized in conjunction with the present invention. However it should be understood that variations and or other phone applications may be utilized.

Although the present invention has been described using the specific example of integrating phone and PDA user interfaces on one processor and maintaining phone control on a separate processor the invention may be applied to applications other than phone and PDA based systems. For example combining a wireless internet device replacing and another electronic device e.g. PDA electronic inventory system etc. or any other wireless communication system and another electronic device each having a user interface.

Portions of the present invention may be conveniently implemented using a conventional general purpose or a specialized digital computer or microprocessor programmed according to the teachings of the present disclosure as will be apparent to those skilled in the computer art.

Appropriate software coding can readily be prepared by skilled programmers based on the teachings of the present disclosure as will be apparent to those skilled in the software art. The invention may also be implemented by the preparation of application specific integrated circuits or by interconnecting an appropriate network of conventional component circuits as will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art.

The present invention includes a computer program product which is a storage medium media having instructions stored thereon in which can be used to control or cause a computer to perform any of the processes of the present invention. The storage medium can include but is not limited to any type of disk including floppy disks mini disks MD s optical discs DVD CD ROMs micro drive and magneto optical disks ROMs RAMS EPROMs EEPROMs DRAMS VRAMs flash memory devices including flash cards magnetic or optical cards nanosystems including molecular memory ICs RAID devices remote data storage archive warehousing or any type of media r device suitable for storing instructions and or data.

Stored on any one of the computer readable medium media the present invention includes software for controlling both the hardware of the general purpose specialized computer or microprocessor and for enabling the computer or microprocessor to interact with a human user or other mechanism utilizing the results of the present invention. Such software may include but is not limited to device drivers operating systems and user applications. Ultimately such computer readable media further includes software for performing the present invention as described above.

Included in the programming software of the general specialized computer or microprocessor are software modules for implementing the teachings of the present invention including but not limited to placing and receiving telephone calls transferring audio and voice data serial parallel and proprietary communications between processors user interfaces and the display storage or communication of results according to the processes of the present invention.

Obviously numerous modifications and variations of the present invention are possible in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described herein.

