---

title: Methods and systems for providing end-to-end testing of an IP-enabled network
abstract: Systems and methods are disclosed for providing network testing. The disclosed systems and methods may include connecting to at least one element within a network. Furthermore, the disclosed systems and methods may include performing a test on the network through at least one element. The test may be associated with at least one addressable device connected to the network. In addition, the disclosed systems and methods may include analyzing data associated with the test.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07940676&OS=07940676&RS=07940676
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property I, LP
number: 07940676
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051213
---
Under provisions of 35 U.S.C. 119 e the Applicants claim the benefit of U.S. provisional application No. 60 670 509 filed Apr. 12 2005 entitled METHODS AND SYSTEMS FOR PROVIDING AN END TO END TEST TOOL which is incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention generally relates to methods and systems for providing network testing. More particularly the present invention relates to providing end to end testing of An IP enabled network.

Service providers wish to deploy internet protocol IP vertical services on a network. Vertical services may include but are not limited to a Voice over IP and IPTV for example. In order to deploy IP vertical services service providers need to effectively provision and troubleshoot network elements included in the network. For example such a network may employ open system interconnection OSI standard for communications including upper layers and lower layers as illustrated in . Layers 7 through 4 comprise the upper layers and layers 3 through 1 comprise the lower layers.

OSI transport services include layers 1 through 4 and are collectively responsible for delivering a complete message or file from sending to receiving station without error. Layer 7 is the application layer. This top layer defines the language and syntax that programs use to communicate with other programs. The application layer represents the purpose of communicating. For example a program in a client workstation uses commands to request data from a program in the server. Common functions at this layer are opening closing reading and writing files transferring files and e mail messages executing remote jobs and obtaining directory information about network resources.

Layer 6 is the presentation layer. When data are transmitted between different types of computer systems the presentation layer negotiates and manages the way data are represented and encoded. For example it provides a common denominator between ASCII and EBCDIC machines as well as between different floating point and binary formats. This layer is also used for encryption and decryption.

Layer 5 is the session layer and provides coordination of the communications in an orderly manner. It determines one way or two way communications and manages the dialog between both parties for example making sure that the previous request has been fulfilled before the next one is sent. It also marks significant parts of the transmitted data with checkpoints to allow for fast recovery in the event of a connection failure. In practice this layer is often not used or services within this layer are sometimes incorporated into the transport layer.

Layer 4 is the transport layer. This layer is responsible for overall end to end validity and integrity of the transmission. The lower layers may drop packets but the transport layer performs a sequence check on the data and ensures that if for example a 12 MB file is sent the full 12 MB is received.

Layers 3 through 1 are the lower layers and are responsible for moving packets from the sending station to the receiving station. Layer 3 is the network layer. The network layer establishes the route between the sender and receiver across switching points which are typically routers. The most ubiquitous example of this layer is the IP protocol in TCP IP. IPX SNA and AppleTalk are other examples of routable protocols which means that they include a network address and a station address in their addressing system. This layer is also the switching function of the dial up telephone system. If all stations are contained within a single network segment then the routing capability in this layer is not required.

Layer 2 is the data link layer. The data link layer is responsible for node to node validity and integrity of the transmission. The transmitted bits are divided into frames for example an Ethernet Token Ring or FDDI frame in local area networks LANs . Frame relay and ATM are also at Layer 2. Layers 1 and 2 are required for every type of communications.

Layer 1 is the physical layer. The physical layer is responsible for passing bits onto and receiving them from the connecting medium. This layer has no understanding of the meaning of the bits but deals with the electrical and mechanical characteristics of the signals and signaling methods. For example it comprises the RTS and CTS signals in an RS 232 environment as well as TDM and FDM techniques for multiplexing data on a line. SONET also provides layer 1 capability.

In the context of the OSI model as described above conventional systems include some testing capabilities at the layer 1 and layer 2 levels however there is no large scale end to end network view. For example conventional testing consists primarily of legacy narrowband troubleshooting tools vendor specific diagnostics and home grown testing solutions. In applying the conventional systems service providers have learned to interpret and make best guess estimates with the conventional testing solutions. For example a customer may call a customer service representative with the service provider and may say I can t connect I can t reach this web address there s something the matter with my e mail or there s something wrong with my phone which rides over my IP connection. Without an end to end test tool the service provider may have difficulty isolating the problem. This may lead to not resolving the customer s problem on the first call or having hand offs between different departments. This may further lead to customer dissatisfaction because the service provider may not be able to resolve the customer s problem on the first call because the service provider may not be able to accurately pinpoint the problem.

Furthermore conventional systems increase the service provider s operating cost. For example the service provider may send out equipment because they think the modem is bad but in the end the customer s equipment is defective. Or the service provider may dispatch a truck and technician but then it turns out it is the wrong technician because the problem is in the customer s computer.

In order to be able to deploy IP vertical services it is desired to be able to effectively provision and troubleshoot network elements that make up the end to end IP network using an end to end test tool. Looking forward with the expansion of broadband and complex broadband vertical services service providers are faced with the reality that today s narrowband tools are inadequate to resolve tomorrow s troubles. For example layer 1 and layer 2 testing will no longer suffice in resolving the customers issues. True end to end broadband testing may be obtained and utilized to accurately troubleshoot not only basic broadband service but all the planned services offered on top of broadband.

Consistent with embodiments of the present invention systems and methods are disclosed for providing network testing.

In accordance with one embodiment a method for providing network testing comprises connecting to at least one element within a network performing a test on the network through the at least one element the test associated with at least one addressable device connected to the network and analyzing data associated with the test.

According to another embodiment a system for providing network testing comprises a memory storage for maintaining a database and a processing unit coupled to the memory storage wherein the processing unit is operative to connect to at least one element within a network perform a test on the network through the at least one element the test associated with at least one addressable device connected to the network and analyze data associated with the test.

In accordance with yet another embodiment a computer readable medium which stores a set of instructions which when executed performs a method for providing network testing the method executed by the set of instructions comprises connecting to at least one element within a network performing a test on the network through the at least one element the test associated with at least one addressable device connected to the network and analyzing data associated with the test.

It is to be understood that both the foregoing general description and the following detailed description are exemplary and explanatory only and should not be considered restrictive of the scope of the invention as described and claimed. Further features and or variations may be provided in addition to those set forth herein. For example embodiments of the invention may be directed to various combinations and sub combinations of the features described in the detailed description.

The following detailed description refers to the accompanying drawings. Wherever possible the same reference numbers are used in the drawings and the following description to refer to the same or similar parts. While several exemplary embodiments and features of the invention are described herein modifications adaptations and other implementations are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. For example substitutions additions or modifications may be made to the components illustrated in the drawings and the exemplary methods described herein may be modified by substituting reordering or adding stages to the disclosed methods. Accordingly the following detailed description does not limit the invention. Instead the proper scope of the invention is defined by the appended claims.

Systems and methods consistent with embodiments of the present invention provide network testing. Embodiments of the invention include providing trouble shooting a network from an end to end perspective. In other words embodiments of the invention include trouble shooting the network including customer premises equipment at a customer s location a local loop and an IP network e.g. the internet. The customer premises equipment may comprise for example any device that may have an IP address. For example the customer premises equipment comprises a personal computer PC a telephone a set top game box a digital video recorder. The customer premises equipment may connect to the local loop through a local area network LAN which may include a modem and or a router. The local loop may include a digital subscriber line access multiplexer DSLAM a Broadband Remote Access Server BRAS or other types of equipment in the outside plant network.

Consistent with embodiments of the invention the test tool emulates a customer experience with the network and is able to isolate and test trouble anywhere on the network. For example embodiments of the invention allow the customer service representative to emulate the customer s equipment and look at the customer s IP traffic. This may be accomplished for example by remotely connecting into the BRAS or other network elements to conduct ping testing continuity testing trace routes and other testing types. Furthermore the test tool may test the customer s access to the e mail server to confirm the trouble is not between for example the BRAS and the e mail server.

In the context of the aforementioned OSI model conventional systems include testing capabilities for the layer 1 and layer 2 levels but do not include testing capabilities at layer 3. Embodiments of the invention test at the layer 3 level for example by performing packet inspection on the network for example down to an individual customer level. This may include the ability to look at a packet s header information for example to determine where the packet is to go and why the packet is having problems getting to its destination.

An embodiment consistent with the invention comprises a system for providing network testing. The system comprises memory storage for maintaining a database and a processing unit coupled to the memory storage. The processing unit is operative to connect to at least one element within a network. In addition the processing unit performs a test on the network through at least one element. The test is associated with at least one addressable device connected to the network. Also the processing unit is operative to analyze data associated with the test.

Consistent with an embodiment of the present invention the aforementioned memory processing unit and other components are implemented in an end to end test system such as an exemplary end to end test system of . Any suitable combination of hardware software and or firmware may be used to implement the memory processing unit or other components. By way of example the memory processing unit or other components may be implemented within any element of including for example a test tool server in combination with system . The aforementioned system and processors are exemplary and other systems and processors may comprise the aforementioned memory processing unit or other components consistent with embodiments of the present invention.

By way of a non limiting example illustrates system in which the features and principles of the present invention may be implemented. As illustrated in the block diagram of system includes the test tool server a local loop customer premises equipment CPE a DSL modem and an IP network . Local loop includes a DSLAM an asynchronous transfer mode ATM or Ethernet switch or some other type of layer 2 switch wide area network WAN switches and an BRAS and any egress router . IP network is a customer facing network that may include the internet. The internet may comprise a collection of interconnected public networks. A service provider s physical contribution to the public network includes but is not limited to a high speed edge router HER a service management system SMS router and an interexchange carrier IXC . Access to the test tool server may be provided both by a web services application programming interface API or via a provided expert graphical user interface GUI as part of the test tool. Both the API and the GUI may be integrated with other tools such as a service activation and repair SAR tool and a FastAccess Troubleshooting Tool FTT .

Test tool server the server may be implemented using a high availability cluster computing environment. Then in addition to the computing environment the test tool may include the following using a personal computer network computer mainframe or other similar microcomputer based workstation. The overall computing environment may comprise any type of computer operating environment such as hand held devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable sender electronic devices minicomputers mainframe computers and the like in addition to the server. The server may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices. Furthermore the overall computing environment may comprise a mobile terminal such as a smart phone a cellular telephone a cellular telephone utilizing wireless application protocol WAP personal digital assistant PDA intelligent pager portable computer a hand held computer a conventional telephone or a facsimile machine. The aforementioned systems and devices are exemplary and the processor may comprise other systems or devices.

From stage where test tool server connects to at least one element within the network exemplary method advances to stage where test tool server performs a test on the network through at least one element. The test may be associated with at least one addressable device e.g. CPE connected to the network. For example the test may be performed by executing software module on processing unit . During execution software module may perform a variety of network testing functions. A plurality of exemplary network testing functions are described below however other functions may be performed by software module .

A first network testing function comprises the ability to log monitor traffic on the network and have it sent for example to support groups. This function enables a remote logging capability that may capture for example the following information ATM cell traffic counters OAM traffic IP traffic HEC errors CRC errors retransmits PPP PPPOE session identification detailed LCP NCP negotiation detailed authentication logging CHAP PAP. This function also provides the ability to retrieve line stats including sync rates noise margins bits per tone and sync retrains. Furthermore it provides the ability to look at two way traffic to determine for example packets transmitted and received and display to a customer service representative. Moreover it provides a view of the network traffic e.g. gaming VoIP file sharing telnet etc. going both ways port traffic open or no encryptions.

A second network testing function comprises the ability to setup thresholds and alarms for proactive support. This function provides the ability to track port utilization for known abused ports e.g. UDP and TCP and to receive an alarm or notification from the test tool when thresholds reach a user definable level by for example network element lata and region. This function provides the ability to acknowledge and log the alarm receipt from the test tool and the ability to specify certain user admin privileges i.e. certain users may not be able to clear the alarms would be view only etc. In addition this function maintains a historical record of alarms notifications sent in a specified rolling time period e.g. 24 hours. It also provides the ability to retrieve historical data of alarms notifications that have been sent for example in past 90 days store historical data of alarms notifications that have been sent for 90 days and super users may have the ability to establish maintain abused port list based on industry trends e.g. port UDP TCP toggle virus worm Trojan etc. name . This function also provides the ability to detect and log viruses provides the ability to detect and log spyware activity and provides the ability to configure detection of new threats and removal of old threats.

A third network testing function comprises the ability to perform trace route and ping tool information from for example service provider owned looking glass in the core of the network to CPE Voice over IP call complex DNS and Radius servers and email servers. This function provides the ability to remotely perform a trace route to the CPE from the looking glass provides the ability to display a trace route from the CPE provided via CPEMS or provides the ability to perform a ping to the CPE from the looking glass. Furthermore it provides the ability to display the results of a ping test from the CPE provided via CPEMS and may provide the ability to access the BRAS future BRAS or IP DSLAMS and source the customer s IP pool interface and ping trace the Radius DNS IM and email servers and ping trace to a web site. If a ping trace run above fails this function may send a trap to the Network Operations Center on any failure specifying the IP pool and device.

A fourth network testing function comprises the ability to provide network authentication general information. For example this function provides the ability to display authentication server Radius BRAS etc. and to reject errors example bad password invalid username etc. 

A fifth network testing function comprises the ability to conduct point to point connectivity tests from the network core to the CPE. For example this function provides performance testing of TCP IP sessions. In addition it provides the ability to validate ATM layer connectivity via a layer 2 test tool and provides the ability to test the physical layer via a layer 1 test tool.

A sixth network testing function comprises optimizing via PSD for sync and throughput. For example this function provides the ability to remotely set the PSD shaping setting of the CPE to on off auto. The PSD shaping is used to adjust the upstream power so that reflections from inside wiring don t adversely interfere with the received signal. When these reflections are bad this lower power usage on the upstream signal can achieve a better downstream sync rate.

A seventh network testing function categorizes line parameters for upgrade service qualification. For example this function provides the ability to gather line parameters including for example noise margin attenuation max sync rate capacity NOT throughput . Max sync rate capacity may only be displayed to users with appropriate permissions. Also this function has the ability to provide DSLAM port level qualifications of ADSL2 bonding and ADL1 i.e. is the port provisioned for this service able to support ADSL2 Bonding ADL1 etc. 

An eighth network testing function comprises the ability to turn on maintenance profile. For example this function provides the ability to remotely push a new maintenance profile to the CPE.

A ninth network testing function comprises for example remote PPP session generation with the capability to generate at various network points. For example this function provides the ability to generate the PPP PPPoE session at the BRAS the DSLAM network cards or the Edge devices.

A tenth network testing function comprises the remotely detecting CPE . For example this function has the ability to remotely detect the CPE status and the ability to identify the CPE type.

An eleventh network testing function comprises a deep packet inspection or packet mirroring capability at BRAS with packet decoder. This function for example provides the ability to remotely sniff and decode packets in the end to end IP path of the broadband traffic. In addition it provides the ability to capture data for a period of time and to log for the specified time period. In addition it provides the ability to sort customer traffic by protocol and packet size.

A twelfth network testing function comprises the ability to create a network map and to determine connectivity per subscriber listing at BRAS other IP devices AAA Radius DNS email etc. and to include real time stats for each hop and utilization of the facilities. In addition it provides the ability to generate a network map for an individual subscriber that may include the following DSLAM ATM edge routers core routers IP devices radius DNS. In addition it provides the ability to pull real time stats for each hop and provides the ability to display utilization for each device shown on the network map.

A thirteenth network testing function comprises retrieving traffic counters on a per subscriber level. This function provides the ability to retrieve individual subscriber traffic counts from each device or hop and to provide the ability to pull IP layer stats at each network element.

A fourteenth network testing function comprises an auto test when multiple subscribers exhibit the same issues. For example when multiple subscribers exhibit the same issues on a given network element within a time period e.g. user definable an auto test is executed against all subscribers in that network element and provides alarm notification to a monitoring group.

A fifteenth network testing function detects capacity device and general congestion issues and reports at which segment the congestion is occurring. This function provides the ability to log performance monitoring stats at the ATM. In addition it provides the ability to log performance monitoring stats at the IP layer and provides the ability to log performance monitoring stats at the physical layer.

A sixteenth network testing function comprises the ability to differentiate access levels for different users user classes . In addition it provides the ability to designate different user classes ex. Admin read only etc. 

A seventeenth network testing function comprises the test tool being accessible via other applications. For example data may be stored and made accessible via an API such that existing customer facing applications ex. FTT eRepair SAR can initiate tests retrieve the data and present to user.

An eighteenth network testing function comprises the system response time being within acceptable levels. For example historical queries have 

A nineteenth network testing function comprises providing deep packet inspection of IP and up e.g. layer 3 to 7 . The function determines what protocols are running peer to peer http von video etc ports and aggregate volumes of each. In addition it provides the ability to see individual flow of traffic e.g. could be many per subscriber . In addition it provides the ability to determine application e.g. if voice protocol seen is it Vonage 

Once test tool server performs the test on the network through at least one element in stage exemplary method continues to stage where test tool server analyzes data associated with the test. For example based on the test performed test tool server may determine that a new modem should be sent to the customer or to dispatch a service technician. Furthermore if the test tool server detected for example that DSLAM or that BRAS are down test tool server may determine that personal at a network operating center NOC should be involved in clearing any problem the customer may have.

After test tool server analyzes data associated with the test in stage exemplary method proceeds to stage where test tool server provides a response based on the analysis. For example based on the analysis test tool server may provide a response to a customer service representative that a new modem should be sent to the customer that a service technician should be dispatched or that the NOC should be involved in clearing any problem the customer may have.

Moreover test tool server may display reports on computer monitor with ability to save in standard format ex. MS Word Excel and print locally. One such report comprises an ad hoc report that may provide the ability to perform report generation capabilities providing the user the ability to derive customized reports from logs. Also the report may comprise an agent activity report that displays agent activity by test transaction functionality. Table 1 shows an exemplary output for the agent activity report.

Furthermore the report may comprise an uptime by customer report that comprises a canned report should provide display of uptime by customer derived from logged data. Also the report may comprise a tests run by center location report that provides a report that displays the tests run by a given center location. After test tool server provides the response based on the analysis in stage exemplary method ends at stage .

Furthermore the invention may be practiced in an electrical circuit comprising discrete electronic elements packaged or integrated electronic chips containing logic gates a circuit utilizing a microprocessor or on a single chip containing electronic elements or microprocessors. The invention may also be practiced using other technologies capable of performing logical operations such as for example AND OR and NOT including but not limited to mechanical optical fluidic and quantum technologies. In addition the invention may be practiced within a general purpose computer or in any other circuits or systems.

The present invention may be embodied as systems methods and or computer program products. Accordingly the present invention may be embodied in hardware and or in software including firmware resident software micro code etc. . Furthermore the present invention may take the form of a computer program product on a computer usable or computer readable storage medium having computer usable or computer readable program code embodied in the medium for use by or in connection with an instruction execution system. In the context of this document a computer usable or computer readable storage medium may be any medium that can contain or store the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device.

The computer usable or computer readable storage medium may be for example but not limited to an electronic magnetic optical electromagnetic infrared or semiconductor system apparatus or device. More specific examples a nonexhaustive list of the computer readable storage medium would include the following a portable computer diskette a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM an erasable programmable read only memory EPROM or Flash memory and a portable compact disk read only memory CD ROM .

The present invention is described above with reference to block diagrams and or operational illustrations of methods systems and computer program products according to embodiments of the invention. It is to be understood that the functions acts noted in the blocks may occur out of the order noted in the operational illustrations. For example two blocks shown in succession may in fact be executed substantially concurrently or the blocks may sometimes be executed in the reverse order depending upon the functionality acts involved.

While certain features and embodiments of the invention have been described other embodiments of the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from consideration of the specification and practice of the embodiments of the invention disclosed herein. Furthermore although embodiments of the present invention have been described as being associated with data stored in memory and other storage mediums one skilled in the art will appreciate that these aspects can also be stored on or read from other types of computer readable storage media such as secondary storage devices like hard disks floppy disks or a CD ROM or other forms of RAM or ROM. Further the steps of the disclosed methods may be modified in any manner including by reordering steps and or inserting or deleting steps without departing from the principles of the invention.

It is intended therefore that the specification and examples be considered as exemplary only with a true scope and spirit of the invention being indicated by the following claims and their full scope of equivalents.

