---

title: Selective disruption of data transmission to sub-networks within a processing unit network
abstract: A network of processing units having at least one switch that allows disruption of the network between a first and a second processing units is provided. Disruption of the network by means of the switch effectively disconnects the first processing unit from the network and couples the first processing unit to a controller of the network. The controller is adapted to exchange data with the disconnected processing unit and thereby allows selective and direct data exchange with a selected processing unit. In particular, in the framework of heterogeneous and hierarchical networks of processing units, the switch techniques provide direct access to processing units and sub-networks and allow for an efficient and fast performance of diagnostic and maintenance procedures of sub-networks and their corresponding processing units, such as performing a flashing procedure.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08131878&OS=08131878&RS=08131878
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 08131878
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050718
---
This application claims the benefit of priority of European Patent Application No. 04105704.3 filed on Nov. 11 2004 and entitled CONCURRENT FLASHING OF PROCESSING UNITS BY MEANS OF NETWORK RESTRUCTURING hereby incorporated by reference herein for all purposes.

Embodiments of the present invention relates to the field of restructuring network embedded systems and in particular without limitation to dividing a network of processing units into various sub networks for diagnostics and maintenance purposes.

The implementation and embedding of electronic control units ECU or processing units is constantly growing in particular within the framework of automobile technology industrial manufacturing technology as well as home entertainment or home appliances. In all these systems a processing unit has to fulfill a distinct predefined function. Electronic systems featuring a plurality of such processing units are therefore denoted as networked embedded systems.

Complex electronic embedded systems have a large number of electronic control units that have to communicate with each other and or have to exchange some data. For example in today s high end automobiles there exist up to about 100 processing units or electronic control units ECU that provide control of the vehicle functions. Typically the plurality of electronic control units is arranged in various individual network branches each of which providing a particular functionality for the vehicle control. Hence each ECU in an automotive environment is designated and designed for a distinct purpose and features different requirements with respect to real time behavior data exchange rate signal transmission and signal processing.

Therefore various control units are arranged in sub networks with respect to their signal processing and signal transmission properties. For example real time demanding processing units like engine control breaking system or body control are arranged e.g. in a static or non reconfigurable sub network making use of a real time and highly reliable bus protocol. Other control units that are e.g. related to passenger comfort or passenger convenience like infotainment related control units may be arranged in a different sub network making use of a less reliable and low cost communication platform and or bus protocol.

Typically the various sub networks feature a gateway unit or a gateway controller that provides interaction and communication between ECUs of different sub networks. Hence the gateway controllers connect the various sub networks and regulate the communication transfer between the different bus systems.

In the automotive environment the overall architecture of the communication platform between the electronic control units features a heterogeneous and hierarchical structure. This is mainly due to continuous adaptive implementation of various communication technologies into existing electronic embedded systems. However the heterogeneous and hierarchical structure is rather disadvantageous because the gateway controllers represent bottlenecks for the data transfer within the network and further represent single points of failures. For example if a particular gateway controller is subject to failure the entire heterogeneous network will break down. At least the functionality of an involved network branch will no longer be available.

For example sub network might be implemented as a control area network CAN bus system or local interconnect network bus system LIN sub network might be implemented as a CAN or any other real time network and sub network might be realized as a Flexray bus system. Moreover the ring bus network may provide communication for processing units that are related to multi media applications. Therefore the ring bus might be implemented as a media oriented system transport MOST bus system.

As can be seen from the gateway controllers represent bottlenecks for communication between any two or various processing units and hamper diagnosis as well as maintenance of the overall network. Most prior art implementations of automobile networked embedded systems feature a diagnostic port that provides external access to any one of the sub networks or to any of the processing units. Typically each processing unit or ECU . . . . . . . . . features a non volatile memory that may e.g. be implemented as EEPROM or flash memory to store runtime programs micro code and some key data in a non volatile way. However in case of failure or availability of a software update an updating or modification of the non volatile memories of various dedicated or of all control units might be required. In particular due to the heterogeneous structure it is often difficult and very cumbersome to exactly allocate a failure of a distinct ECU or a gateway controller. Therefore even a complete flashing of all memories of all ECUs or processing units might be required.

The diagnostic port therefore serves as an access point to the embedded networked system and provides diagnosis as well as feeding of data streams into the various ECUs and sub networks. Due to the complex nature of the heterogeneous and hierarchical networked embedded structure such a complete flashing process requires an insufficient long time because e.g. slow speed buses connect high speed buses and therefore represent indispensable bottlenecks for the flashing procedure. For example for a high end vehicle a complete flashing process may take 10 to 18 hours. Since these re flashing processes have to be performed by trained personnel of vehicle service stations such a re flashing procedure is rather cost intensive and is also associated with an unacceptable downtime of the entire vehicle. Due to the continuous tendency of implementing more and more electronic components and electronically controlled systems in the automotive environment the above described disadvantages may become more and more prominent and need to be solved.

Embodiments of the present invention therefore aims to provide an improved electronic embedded network that allows for an efficient and less time intensive diagnosis and flashing as well as restructuring of electronic control units and entire sub networks of a network of processing units.

A network of processing units having at least one switch that allows to disrupt the network between a first and a second processing units provided. Disruption of the network by means of the switch effectively disconnects the first processing unit from the network and couples the first processing unit to a controller of the network. The controller is adapted to exchange data with the disconnected processing unit and thereby allows to selectively and directly exchange data with a selected processing unit. In particular in the framework of heterogeneous and hierarchical networks of processing units the invention provides direct access to processing units and sub networks and allows for an efficient and fast performance of diagnostic and maintenance procedures of sub networks and the their corresponding processing units such as e.g. performing a flashing procedure.

Embodiments of the present invention provides a network of processing units that comprises at least one switch that is adapted to disrupt the network for establishing at least a first sub network of processing units. The network further comprises a controller that is coupled to any one of the at least one switch. The controller is further adapted to exchange data with any of the processing units of the at least first sub network. Preferably the switch is adapted to physically interrupt the network between a first and a second processing unit of the network.

On the one hand such an disruption serves to disconnect a part of the network from the network or gateway controller. On the other hand by coupling the controller to the at least one switch the controller gains direct access to the disconnected network or network branch. Typically the at least first sub network that is created by disrupting the network of processing units represents a network branch that is disconnected from the overall network of processing units and that is disconnected from its network or gateway controller.

The controller is coupled to any of the at least one switch but data exchange between any of the processing units of the at least first sub network and the controller may only take place if the at least first sub network is actually disconnected from the network. Hence only when the switch disrupts the network and only when the at least first sub network is effectively established the controller may have access to any one of the processing units of the at least first sub network for data exchange. In this way it is effectively prevented that the controller interferes with gateway controllers or network controllers of the network. Consequently the controller only gains access to processing units of the network that were disconnected from the network by means of the at least one switch.

The concept of coupling processing units that were disconnected from a network to a controller is universally applicable to any type of networked embedded system in alternate embodiments. Governed by the positioning of switches into the network various sub networks can be decoupled from the network and can be coupled to the controller. This allows for selective diagnostics and flashing of particular processing units of a network irrespective of the network structure and network topology. Division of the network into various sub networks is mainly limited by the positioning of switches throughout the network.

Embodiments of the present invention are preferably applicable to heterogeneous and or hierarchical networks of processing units that do not inherently allow for a direct and selective access to particular processing units. For example in the automotive environment an ECU of a particular sub network may be accessible via various other sub networks and corresponding gateway controllers. If this particular sub network features switch as described herein the particular ECU may be disconnected from the particular sub network thus allowing for a direct access to this particular ECU by means of the controller.

Since the at least first sub network can be directly coupled to the controller data exchange between the controller and the processing units of the at least first sub network can be performed with respect to the at least first sub network s data exchange and data transmission properties. For example the data exchange can be performed with the maximum data exchange rate of the at least first sub network on the basis of the communication protocol of the at least first sub network.

Hence transmission of data packets representing status information of a processing unit or transmission of data packets for flashing a processing unit no longer have to be transmitted via various sub networks of the network but can be directly exchanged between the controller and the dedicated sub network of processing units. Consequently the negative impact of gateway controllers on data transmission representing bottlenecks of the network can be effectively minimized. This leads to a remarkable increase of the performance of e.g. diagnostic procedures and flashing procedures. Corresponding data throughput and data transmission rates can be effectively increased and the corresponding down times can be remarkably decreased.

Moreover an entire flashing procedure can be performed selectively only for a particular sub network while the remaining network may remain in its original operation mode. For a maintenance or flashing procedure only parts of the network may be sequentially or simultaneously switched to a maintenance mode while the remaining network further operates. Hence by selectively and sequentially or simultaneously performing a flashing procedure to various sub networks a flashing or diagnostic procedure of the network of processing units may be performed even without shutting down operation of the network.

According to an embodiment of the invention the controller is further adapted to control the at least one switch of the network. In this way establishing of the at least first sub network as well as coupling the at least first sub network to the controller for data exchange with the corresponding processing units is entirely controlled by means of the controller. Disruption of the network for establishing the at least first sub network can therefore be effectively correlated to data exchange with any of the processing units of the at least first sub network. Therefore disruption of the network and establishing of the at least first sub network may be performed according to one embodiment only if the controller is actually able to transmit data to the at least first sub network or to receive data from the at least first sub network. In this way it is effectively guaranteed that the at least first sub network is disconnected from the network if the controller demands a corresponding data exchange.

According to a further embodiment of the present invention the controller is adapted to control any of the processing units of the at least first sub network. Preferably the controller only gains control of the processing units of the at least first sub network if the at least first sub network has been disconnected from the network. Moreover the controller may be provided with access to every function of the processing units and may even overrule any interaction between processing units of the at least first sub network. In order to control the processing units the controller is adapted to generate and to transmit appropriate control commands for each of the processing units of the at least first sub network.

According to a further preferred embodiment of the invention the controller is adapted to dynamically reconfigure the at least one switch and to dynamically restructure the at least first sub network. Disruption of the network and establishing the at least first sub network therefore represents a dynamic process that can be reversed or arbitrarily modified. For example the at least first sub network can be disconnected from the network for a sub network specific flashing procedure and after termination of this flashing procedure the sub network may be reconnected to the network by means of the at least one switch. Thereafter a different sub network may be established by means of a different switch.

Alternative to a reconnection of the at least first sub network to the network the at least first sub network may be subject to a further disruption if the at least first sub network features a further switch. In this way the network of processing units can be sequentially divided into various sub networks allowing for selective diagnostics and selective maintenance of the various sub networks. This is of particular advantage for determining and allocating network branches or processing units that are subject to failure.

For example a first sub network having ten processing units can be disconnected from the network for a diagnostic purpose. Performing a diagnostic procedure on the first sub network may provide diagnostic information that at least one processing unit of the sub network is subject to failure. In order to determine the failed processing unit the first sub network may be further divided into two sub sub networks each of which featuring e.g. five processing units. This requires that the first sub network has an appropriate switch between the fifth and the sixth processing unit. However by dividing the first sub network into two sub sub networks each of the sub sub networks can be separately tested. In this way the network of processing units can be iteratively disrupted and divided into smaller sub networks and a malfunctioning processing unit can be determined on a scale of the smallest possible sub network. This smallest possible sub network is mainly governed by a positioning and distribution of the switches in the network structure and therefore depends on the overall design of the network.

According to a further embodiment of the invention the at least one switch further comprises at least one transmission gate. This transmission gate serves as an ideal switch featuring ideal insulating or conductive electrical properties depending on a driving signal. Typically the transmission gate has a negligible impact on the network and generally features a very low leakage. Moreover a transmission gate serves as an electrically controlled switch irrespective of the sign of the signal being carried by the network that is disrupted by means of the transmission gate. Typically the transmission gate is implemented by means of field effect transistors FET that may be realized by means of metal oxide semi conductor MOS technology. Preferably the transmission gate features a pair of contrary coupled NMOS and PMOS transistors.

According to yet a further embodiment of the invention the switch comprises a first and a second transmission gate wherein the first transmission gate provides disruption of the network between a first and a second processing unit and the second transmission gate provides coupling of the first processing unit to the controller. In this embodiment the first and the second transmission gates are coupled by means of an inverter providing a contrary switching of the first and the second transmission gate. In this way the first and the second transmission gates are triggered simultaneously and feature opposite switching states.

Whenever the first transmission gate is in conducting mode the second transmission gate is in disruption mode and vice versa. Making use of such a coupled arrangement of first and second transmission gates the switch inherently provides only two different operation states. In the first operation state the switch disrupts the network and establishes the sub network that is disconnected from the network and is therefore coupled to the controller. In the second state the controller is decoupled from the sub network by means of the switch and the sub network is connected to the network hence the sub network is again coupled into the network.

According to a further embodiment of the invention the controller is adapted to flash the processing units of the at least first sub network simultaneously or to flash said processing units within partially overlapping time intervals. Simultaneous flashing and or flashing within partially overlapping time intervals may refer to individual processing units of a single sub network but also to processing units of a plurality of different sub networks. Hence this simultaneous flashing procedure is not means restricted to a single sub network but various sub networks established by various switches can be flashed simultaneously or within partially overlapping time intervals. In this way by making use of the controller serving as a data stream controller flashing of various sub networks and associated control units no longer has to be performed sequentially.

For example initializing and terminating flashing procedures for various sub networks might be performed at various points of time. Also flashing of various sub networks might be triggered simultaneously but due to a heterogeneous structure and different data transmission properties of the various sub networks the flashing procedure for each sub network may require a different flashing time.

According to a further embodiment of the present invention the controller is adapted to replace the functionality of an at least first gateway controller of a sub network if the at least first gateway controller fails. Additionally the controller may also replace the functionality of a failed processing unit of a sub network. Replacing of functionalities of gateway controllers and or processing units might be realized by interconnecting various sub networks of processing units. For example a failed processing unit of a first sub network might be selectively disconnected from the network by means of at least one switch. This failed processing unit is then coupled to the controller which in turn couples the failed processing unit to a corresponding processing unit of a different sub network. In this way redundant processing units can be shared among various sub networks irrespective of the overall network topology.

Since the controller has separate access to any one of the switches it may compensate for a failure of a particular processing unit and may therefore be adapted to route any data traffic to and from the failed processing unit to a similar processing unit of a different sub network. In this way the network architectures described herein including an embedded controller allow autonomic embedded computing and autonomous compensation of system and or network failures to be realized. In general the controller based implementation of the network allows the effective elimination and replacement bottlenecks and single points of failure of the network of processing units.

According to a further embodiment of the invention the processing units of the network are implemented as electronic control units ECU of a vehicle. Even though the inventive network requires a number of dedicated switches the inventive network might be realized as an extension to existing electronic networks in particular in the framework of automotive electronics. For example the required switches might be incorporated into connectors such like plug and socket connections of existing automotive electronic networks. In this way also existing automotive electronic networks can be retrofitted with the inventive concept of disrupting the network and coupling the disconnected network to a dedicated controller.

According to a further embodiment of the invention the processing units of the network are arranged in sub networks that make use of different communication bus protocols and different network topologies. For instance the sub networks may feature network topologies such as straight bus star network or ring bus and may further make use of different data transmission standards such like CAN C CAN B LIN FlexRay MOST and FireWire. These sub networks represent network branches of the overall network of processing units and may be interconnected by means of gateway controllers.

Depending on the arrangement of the various sub networks and their interconnections the overall network may represent a hierarchical and heterogeneous structure. This type of heterogeneous and hierarchical network is commonly implemented in the automotive environment and the inventive positioning of switches in combination with the controller allows for the selective access of various sub networks for diagnostic and maintenance purposes. By means of the switches in combination with the controller that is coupled to any one of the switches the hierarchical and heterogeneous structure of a network can be effectively broken through. By separately coupling any one of the switches to the controller the network topology becomes rather flat effectively.

In another aspect embodiments of the present invention provide a controller for establishing at least a first sub network of a network of processing units. The controller comprises a switching module for disrupting the network by means of at least one switch and for establishing an at least first sub network. Further the controller comprises a data transmission module for transmitting data between the at least first sub network and the controller. The switching module of the controller serves to trigger and to control the switch that is implemented into the network. Preferably the switching module of the controller controls various switches that are distributed throughout the network and that allow for the selective disconnection of a sub network from the network and coupling of the disconnected sub network to the controller.

The data transmission module of the controller serves as a data stream controller and is adapted to receive diagnostic data from any of the connected sub networks and to transmit flashing data to any of the connected sub networks. The controller therefore serves to dynamically restructure the network of processing units for selectively and directly flashing distinct processing units of the network. Preferably the controller is adapted to simultaneously flash various processing units of various sub networks or to flash said processing units within partially overlapping time intervals.

In another aspect embodiments of the present invention provide a switch for establishing at least a first sub network of a network of processing units. The switch is adapted to be implemented between a first and a second processing unit of the network and comprises a first transmission gate that provides disruption of the network between the first and the second processing unit and further comprises a second transmission gate that provides coupling of the first processing unit to a controller. The first and the second transmission gates are complimentary coupled i.e. when the first transmission gate disrupts the network the second transmission gate couples the first processing unit to the controller and vice versa. In this way the switch effectively serves to disconnect at least one processing unit or a branch of the network from the network and to simultaneously couple the disconnected processing units or disconnected network branch to a controller instead. Hence the switch effectively provides selection of network branches or various processing units and to separately couple selected processing units to a controller for diagnostic or maintenance purposes.

A switch according to one or more embodiments of the present invention may also be realized as an extension component for existing networks of processing units e.g. in the framework of automotive electronic networks. One or more such switches may then be incorporated into plug and socket connections of an existing electronic network. This allows for a cost effective retrofitting of electronic networks with the described disruption and controlling mechanisms.

In another aspect the invention provides a method of flashing processing units of a network of processing units that comprises disrupting the network between at least a first and a second processing unit by means of at least one switch establishing at least a first sub network on the basis of the at least one disruption and coupling of the at least first sub network to a controller that in turn is adapted to flash the processing units of the at least first sub network. The inventive flashing procedure allows to dynamically reconfigure the network of processing units and to selectively flash various sub networks while remaining parts of the network stay in usual operation mode.

Preferably the inventive flashing procedure is not restricted to sequentially disconnecting and flashing various sub networks but also to a simultaneous flashing of various sub networks and their corresponding processing units.

In still another aspect embodiments of the present invention provide a computer program product for a controller of a network of processing units. The computer program product is operable to disrupt the network between at least a first and a second processing unit by making use of at least one switch. The computer program product is further operable to establish at least a first sub network on the basis of the at least one disruption and to couple the at least first sub network to the controller and to flash the processing units of the at least first sub network.

Further network has a number of switches and . Each one of these switches serves to disrupt the network or sub network at a given position. For example switch is adapted to disconnect processing unit from sub network . Switch for instance serves to disconnect a whole set of processing units from sub network . It serves to disrupt the communication bus between processing units and .

Each one of switches and is separately connected to two conductors or wires. Switch is connected to conductor and conductor and switch is connected to conductor and conductor . Each one of these conductors . . . is separately connected to the controller . For instance conductor is coupled to conductor of controller conductor is connected to conductor conductor is connected to conductor and conductor is connected to conductor . All other illustrated switches . . . are connected to controller in a corresponding way.

By means of conductor control signals are submitted to the switch that allow for switching of the switch hence to connect or to disconnect processing unit to or from sub network . Conductor in turn serves to provide data transmission between switch and controller . It effectively serves for data transmission between controller and any processing units of a disconnected sub network.

Switches . . . allow for a dynamic restructuring of network . This is of particular advantage for diagnostic and maintenance purposes e.g. when various processing units of the network have to become subject to a software update or a flashing procedure. Instead of shutting down the network and feeding flashing data into diagnostic port that has to be routed to e.g. a remotely located processing unit embodiments of the present invention allow selective disconnection of particular processing unit from network and selective performance of a flashing procedure of processing unit without interfering with the general network traffic. The network does not have to be shut down during a flashing procedure. Instead only a selected branch of the network is disconnected from the network and becomes subject to a diagnostic or maintenance procedure.

A selective flashing is by no means restricted to a single particular processing unit . Moreover a flashing procedure can be applied to a plurality of processing units forming a sub network that can be disconnected from the network by means of the switch . Based on this sub network featuring the three processing units a sub sub network featuring only one processing unit can be divided by means of the switch . In this way a diagnostic procedure can be iteratively applied to smaller and smaller network branches for localizing and determining a particular failure of a processing unit.

Moreover by making use of both switches also processing units can be effectively disconnected from sub network . Switching of switch in general disconnects all three successive processing units from sub network . However by switching switch processing unit can be disconnected from the sub network formed by these three processing units and might be coupled to processing unit via switch and controller . In a similar way also the processing units can be decoupled from the sub network or bus and their functionality can be coupled to other sub networks e.g. sub network or .

Hence with embodiments of the present invention sub networks can be dynamically established disconnected from sub networks and might be coupled to other network branches of network . This allows for a dynamic reconfiguration of the network and serves to break through the hierarchical and heterogeneous structure of network . This additionally allows implementation of redundant processing units into network that can be coupled to various network branches or sub networks of the network on demand e.g. when a comparable processing unit becomes subject to failure. In this way dynamic reconfiguration of the network by means of the controller and the various switches allows compensation for failures of processing units and network branches. Consequently single points of failure of a network can be effectively eliminated and the failsafe as well as the reliability of the entire network may remarkably increase.

Network also provides temporary reconfiguration of the network in order to perform diagnostics and flashing procedures only with respect to selected processing units or network branches. In particular controller is further adapted to perform numerous flashing and or diagnostic procedures in parallel. For instance processing unit as well as processing unit may be simultaneously disconnected from their corresponding network branches and a flashing procedure for both processing units can be performed simultaneously or at least within partially overlapping time intervals. This is of general advantage because of the simultaneous flashing the overall flashing time can be remarkably reduced. Also when processing units require the same set of flashing data a respective simultaneous flashing of processing units and with a common set of flashing data generally allows data storage requirements for the flashing procedure to be reduced.

Also by separately connecting various processing units to controller a flashing procedure can be performed with respect to the individual data transmission properties of the processing units and with respect to their communication protocol. In this way it is effectively prevented that flashing data has to be routed through a sub network that features a limited or very poor data transmission rate.

The dynamic selection of sub networks their disconnection from sub networks and network and coupling to controller is mainly governed by the position of switches in the network . Therefore switches are preferably placed into network with respect to the functionality of the processing units. Also switches might be placed with respect to reliability and importance of neighboring processing units. For instance when sub network features a real time network that is related to security systems like engine control or breaking system of a vehicle it is reasonable to introduce a large amount of switches. In case of failure even a single failed processing unit can be disconnected from sub network and the entire sub network may remain intact.

Other sub networks such as network that are related to less important functions of a vehicle like infotainment or comfort related functions of the vehicle may be provided with less switches because a failure of a particular processing unit or of the entire network branch has a comparatively minor impact on the overall functionality of overall network and the general functionality of the vehicle. Therefore placing and positioning of the switches may be performed with respect to the general architecture of network the functionality of the processing units the reliability of the processing units as well as their impact on the network in case of a failure.

The concurrent and simultaneous providing of flashing data to various electronic control units e.g. control units . . . leads to a significant increase of data transmission bandwidth of the overall network and serves to improve the flashing speed.

Additionally flashing and diagnostics module may identify malfunctioning of processing units and may autonomously compensate a failure of a processing unit by invoking disconnecting a similar processing unit from a different sub network that is adapted to take over the functionality of the failed processing unit. This similar processing unit then effectively replaces the functionality of the failed one and is effectively coupled to the sub network of the failed processing unit. In this way flashing and diagnostics module may trigger switch control to control appropriate switches that allows to effectively replace a failed processing unit by a corresponding redundant processing unit that may be located in a different sub network.

Controller is coupled to switch via two conducting wires and . Conductor effectively controls switching element and provides triggering sequences generated by controller to switching element . Conductor is connected to flashing and diagnostics module of controller and allows transmission of diagnostics and flashing data between controller and processing unit . The conductor effectively replaces the functionality of data bus and effectively couples processing unit to controller which in turn may couple processing unit to a different sub network.

Inverter serves to invert the switching signal transmitted via conductor and therefore guarantees that transmission gates are oppositely driven. Hence transmission gates are always in different switching states. When transmission gate is open and therefore disrupts sub network transmission gate is closed and connects processing unit with conductor . In the opposite scenario when transmission gate is open transmission gate is closed and sub network remains non disrupted and processing units and are effectively coupled to each other.

The circuit diagram illustrated in represents a switch with an almost ideal switching behavior. It features a high resistance and a low leakage when disrupting bus and provides a low electrical resistance in conducting mode i.e. when the transmission gate is closed. Especially in the closed state a transmission gate features a low electrical resistance and therefore has a negligible impact on bus .

Logical conductor effectively couples processing unit and processing unit and logical conductor effectively couples processing unit and processing unit . In this way ring bus is divided into two sub networks as indicated by circles and . In this way two sub networks and are established by means of an appropriate switching of switches and . In particular sub network couples processing units and and sub network effectively couples processing unit and processing unit . In this way embodiments of the present invention not only provide temporary disconnection of processing units and network branches from the overall network but also allows dynamic reconfiguration of a given network topology.

Even though embodiments of the present invention are preferably applicable to heterogeneous networks in the automotive environment the scope of embodiments of the present invention is by neither limited to applications in the framework of automotive technology nor to heterogeneous and hierarchical network structures. Rather embodiments of the present invention are universally applicable to various network architectures and various technical fields making use of networked processing units.

