---

title: Immunosuppressive Ningalin compounds
abstract: The present invention provides compositions and methods comprising ningalins for use in modulating immune responses to infection, injury, allergy and/or transplantation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08138170&OS=08138170&RS=08138170
owner: Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
number: 08138170
owner_city: New York
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050829
---
This application is filed under 35 U.S.C. 371 as the U.S. national phase application of International Application No. PCT US2005 030532 having an international filing date of Aug. 29 2005 and claiming priority from U.S. application Ser. No. 60 605 326 filed on Aug. 27 2004 the contents of which are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference.

Each of the applications and patents cited in this text as well as each document or reference cited in each of the applications and patents including during the prosecution of each issued patent application cited documents and each of the PCT and foreign applications or patents corresponding to and or claiming priority from any of these applications and patents and each of the documents cited or referenced in each of the application cited documents are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and may be employed in the practice of the invention. More generally documents or references are cited in this text either in a Reference List before the claims or in the text itself and each of these documents or references herein cited references as well as each document or reference cited in each of the herein cited references including any manufacturer s specifications instructions etc. is hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference.

The United States Government has certain rights in this invention by virtue of grant number CA 08748 from the National Institutes of Health.

The present invention relates to ningalin compounds and methods for use in modulating immune responses. Compositions and methods of the invention can be used for example to provide immunosuppression during transplantation.

Inflammatory reactions can provide an essential defense to infection and injury. At the same time many human diseases or treatments are aggravated by excessive inflammatory reactions brought on by immune responses e.g. immune responses to organ transplantation . Presently development of specific and efficacious anti inflammatory treatment modalities is challenging. For example use of pharmacologic anti inflammatory agents e.g. corticosteroids NSAIDs and cytokine antagonists or immunosuppressive agents e.g. cyclosporin A FK 506 and rapamycin is frequently complicated by adverse events limiting their clinical utility. Therefore identification of biocompatible agents that reduce immune responses and preferably inflammation has important therapeutic implications.

Ningalins comprise a family of 3 4 dihydroxyphenylalanine DOPA derived o catechol metabolites that include the tunichromes Bruening R. C. et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1985 107 5289 Bruening R. C. et al. J. Nat. Prod. 1986 49 193 Bayer E et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1992 31 52 Oltz E. M. et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1988 110 6162 Ryan D. E. et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992 114 9659 Taylor S. W. et al. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1995 324 228 . Ningalins are believed to be potent reversing agents of multidrug resistance. Ningalins were not heretofore known to be viable therapeutic candidates for reducing inflammation or mediating immunosuppression.

It has now been shown that compositions comprising ningalins can be provided to a subject in need thereof to modulate immune responses to for example infection injury allergy and or transplantation.

In one aspect the present invention provides compositions comprising pharmaceutical formulations of one or more ningalins in an amount sufficient to decrease an adverse immune response.

Ningalins of the invention can include but are not limited to N1 N2 N3 N4 N5 and N6 as depicted in Ningalin A Ningalin B and analogs thereof.

The adverse immune response can comprise inflammatory cell activation proliferation and or accumulation.

Inflammatory cells of the invention can include but are not limited to leukocytes lymphocytes natural killer cells and antigen presenting cells. Leukocytes can include neutrophils basophils mast cells eosinophils monocytes and macrophages. Lymphocytes can include B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes. The antigen presenting cells can include dendritic cells and stromal cells.

In specific embodiments the pharmaceutical formulations comprise from about 50 to about 4000 mg mof one or more ningalins.

In one embodiment ningalins of the invention are administered to a subject e.g. a human subject having or at risk of having an adverse immune response.

In another embodiment the adverse immune response can be attributed to various diseases and conditions affecting one or more target sites. Ningalins of the invention can be provided directly to the target site in a subject. Target sites of the invention can comprise one or more organs or organ systems including but not limited to the peripheral nervous system the central nervous system skin appendix gastro intestinal tract including but not limited to esophagus duodenum and colon respiratory pulmonary system including but not limited to lung nose pharynx larynx eye genitalia reproductive system gums heart liver biliary ductal system renal system including but not limited to kidneys urinary tract bladder connective tissue including but not limited to joints cartilage cardiovascular system breast lymphatic system muscle ear endocrine exocrine system including but not limited to lacrimal glands salivary glands thyroid gland pancreas bone skeletal system hematological cells and bone marrow.

Target sites of the invention can also comprise transplanted and implanted organs tissues blood or synthetic materials that bring about an immune response. In a specific embodiment organs tissues blood or synthetic materials can be pre treated with ningalins of the invention to prevent an adverse immune response upon transplantation or implantation into a subject.

In another aspect the present invention provides a method for modulating an adverse immune response in a subject comprising administering to the subject one or more ningalins in an amount effective to decrease the adverse immune response.

In specific embodiments the amount effective to decrease an adverse immune response in a human subject is from about 50 to about 500 m from about 500 to about 1000 m from about 1000 to about 2000 m and from about 2000 to about 4000 mof one or more ningalins per dose.

The adverse immune response can result for example from exposure to an allergen or pathogen or transplantation of heterologous blood organ or tissue.

Accordingly in a specific embodiment the present invention provides a method for inhibiting organ rejection in a subject in whom an organ has been transplanted comprising administering to the subject an effective amount of one or more ningalins prior to simultaneously with or following organ transplantation in an amount effective to inhibit organ rejection.

In yet another specific embodiment the present invention provides a method for providing immunosuppression to a subject in whom an organ has been or will be transplanted comprising administering to the subject one or more ningalins in an amount effective to decrease inflammatory cell activation.

Inflammation can result from inflammatory cell activation proliferation and or accumulation for example at a target site. Accordingly in yet another aspect the present invention provides a method of treating inflammation in a subject in need thereof comprising administering to the subject a pharmaceutical composition comprising one or more ningalins in an amount sufficient to reduce inflammatory cell accumulation.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a method of decreasing inflammation in a subject comprising contacting inflammatory cells undergoing or likely to undergo activation or proliferation with one or more ningalins in an amount effective to inhibit activation or proliferation of the cells.

In another embodiment the present invention provides a method of decreasing accumulation of inflammatory cells at a target site comprising contacting inflammatory cells undergoing or likely to undergo activation or proliferation with one or more ningalins in an amount effective to inhibit activation or proliferation of the cells.

In yet another aspect the present invention provides a method of screening ningalin analogs for immunosuppressive activity comprising the steps of 

In certain embodiments the methods of the invention further comprise obtaining the ningalin ningalin analog used in the methods. In other embodiments the methods of the invention further comprise synthesizing the ninalin ningalin analog used in the methods.

In another aspect the invention provides a kit comprising a ningalin and instructions for immunosuppressive therapeutic use. In a preferred embodiment the ningalin is present in the kit as a pharmaceutical composition comprising a therapeutically effective amount of the ningalin and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

In yet another embodiment the invention provides a composition comprising a container including a ningalin and a label or package insert with instructions for immunosuppressive therapeutic use. In a preferred embodiment the ningalin is present in the composition as a pharmaceutical composition comprising a therapeutically effective amount of the ningalin and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

In this disclosure comprises comprising containing and having and the like can have the meaning ascribed to them in U.S. Patent law and can mean includes including and the like consisting essentially of or consists essentially likewise has the meaning ascribed in U.S. Patent law and the term is open ended allowing for the presence of more than that which is recited so long as basic or novel characteristics of that which is recited is not changed by the presence of more than that which is recited but excludes prior art embodiments.

These and other objects of the invention will be described in further detail in connection with the detailed description of the invention.

A ningalin is a compound which possess a common 3 4 diaryl substituted pyrrole nucleus bearing a 2 carboxyl. Ningalins of the invention include but are not limited to Ningalins denoted as N1 N6 in Ningalin A Ningalin B and analogs thereof. The phrase a ningalin is intended to include one or more ningalins. As used herein the term native ningalin refers to Ningalin A or Ningalin B.

In a preferred embodiment of formula IA R and Rare methyl R Rand Rare H Ris OCHOCH and R Rare methoxy. In another preferred embodiment of formula IA R and Rare methyl Ris OCHOCH Rand Rare H R Rare methoxy and Ris

In a preferred embodiment of formula IB R is methyl and Ris H. In another preferred embodiment of formula IB R is methyl and Ris COH. In yet another preferred embodiment of formula IB R is methyl and Ris COCH. In still another preferred embodiment of formula IB R is methyl and Ris C O N CH .

Particularly preferred ningalins in accordance with the invention are those shown in as follows 1 2 4 Methoxy phenyl ethyl 3 3 4 5 trimethoxy 2 methoxymethoxy phenyl 4 3 4 5 trimethoxy phenyl 1H pyrrole 2 5 dicarboxylic acid dimethyl ester N1 1 3 4 Dimethoxy phenyl 3 2 3 4 dimethoxy phenyl ethyl 7 8 dimethoxy 4 oxo 3 4 dihydro 5 oxa 3 aza cyclopenta naphthalene 2 carboxylic acid methyl ester N2 1 3 4 Dimethoxy phenyl 3 2 3 4 dimethoxy phenyl ethyl 7 8 dimethoxy 3H 5 oxa 3 aza cyclopenta naphthalen 4 one N3 14 3 4 Dimethoxy phenyl 2 3 10 11 tetramethoxy 7 8 dihydro 5 oxa 6b aza benzo f naphtho 2 1 azulene 6 13 dione N4 1 3 4 Dimethoxy phenyl 3 2 3 4 dimethoxy phenyl ethyl 7 8 dimethoxy 4 oxo 3 4 dihydro 5 oxa 3 aza cyclopenta naphthalene 2 carboxylic acid dimethylamide N5 and 1 2 4 Methoxy phenyl ethyl 3 4 bis 3 4 5 trimethoxy phenyl 1H pyrrole 2 5 dicarboxylic acid dimethyl ester N6 .

The term aliphatic group includes organic compounds characterized by straight or branched chains typically having between 1 and 22 carbon atoms. Aliphatic groups include alkyl groups alkenyl groups and alkynyl groups. In complex structures the chains can be branched or cross linked. The term alkyl is intended to include aliphatic groups including saturated hydrocarbons having one or more carbon atoms including straight chain alkyl groups and branched chain alkyl groups. Such hydrocarbon moieties may be substituted on one or more carbons with for example a halogen a hydroxyl a thiol an amino an alkoxy an alkylcarboxy an alkylthio or a nitro group. Unless the number of carbons is otherwise specified lower aliphatic as used herein means an aliphatic group as defined above e.g. lower alkyl lower alkenyl lower alkynyl but having from one to six carbon atoms. Representative of such lower aliphatic groups e.g. lower alkyl groups are methyl ethyl n propyl isopropyl 2 chloropropyl n butyl sec butyl 2 aminobutyl isobutyl tert butyl 3 thiopentyl and the like.

As used herein the term nitro means NO the term halogen designates F Cl Br or I the term thiol means SH and the term hydroxyl means OH.

The term alicyclic group includes closed ring structures of three or more carbon atoms. Alicyclic groups include cycloparaffins which are saturated cyclic hydrocarbons cycloolefins and naphthalenes which are unsaturated with two or more double bonds and cycloacetylenes which have a triple bond. They do not include aromatic groups. Examples of cycloparaffins include cyclopropane cyclohexane and cyclopentane. Examples of cycloolefins include cyclopentadiene and cyclooctatetraene. Alicyclic groups also include fused ring structures and substituted alicyclic groups such as alkyl substituted alicyclic groups. In the instance of the alicyclics such substituents can further comprise a lower alkyl a lower alkenyl a lower alkoxy a lower alkylthio a lower alkylamino a lower alkylcarboxyl a nitro a hydroxyl CF CN or the like.

The term heterocyclic group or heterocycle includes closed ring structures in which one or more of the atoms in the ring is an element other than carbon for example nitrogen sulfur or oxygen. Heterocyclic groups can be saturated or unsaturated and heterocyclic groups such as pyrrole and furan can have aromatic character. They include fused ring structures such as quinoline and isoquinoline. Other examples of heterocyclic groups include pyridine and purine. Heterocyclic groups can also be substituted at one or more constituent atoms with for example a halogen a lower alkyl a lower alkenyl a lower alkoxy a lower alkylthio a lower alkylamino a lower alkylcarboxyl a nitro a hydroxyl CF CN or the like. Suitable heteroaromatic and heteroalicyclic groups generally will have 1 to 3 separate or fused rings with 3 to about 8 members per ring and one or more N O or S atoms e.g. coumarinyl quinolinyl pyridyl pyrazinyl pyrimidyl furyl pyrrolyl thienyl thiazolyl oxazolyl imidazolyl indolyl benzofuranyl benzothiazolyl tetrahydrofuranyl tetrahydropyranyl piperidinyl morpholino and pyrrolidinyl.

The term aromatic group includes unsaturated cyclic hydrocarbons containing one or more rings. Aromatic groups include 5 and 6 membered single ring groups which may include from zero to four heteroatoms for example benzene pyrrole furan thiophene imidazole oxazole thiazole triazole pyrazole pyridine pyrazine pyridazine and pyrimidine and the like. The aromatic ring may be substituted at one or more ring positions with for example a halogen a lower alkyl a lower alkenyl a lower alkoxy a lower alkylthio a lower alkylamino a lower alkylcarboxyl a nitro a hydroxyl CF CN or the like.

The term alkyl includes saturated aliphatic groups including straight chain alkyl groups branched chain alkyl groups cycloalkyl alicyclic groups alkyl substituted cycloalkyl groups and cycloalkyl substituted alkyl groups. In preferred embodiments a straight chain or branched chain alkyl has 20 or fewer carbon atoms in its backbone e.g. C Cfor straight chain C Cfor branched chain and more preferably 12 or fewer. Likewise preferred cycloalkyls have from 4 10 carbon atoms in their ring structure and more preferably have 4 7 carbon atoms in the ring structure. The term lower alkyl refers to alkyl groups having from 1 to 6 carbons in the chain and to cycloalkyls having from 3 to 6 carbons in the ring structure.

Moreover the term alkyl including lower alkyl as used throughout the specification and claims includes both unsubstituted alkyls and substituted alkyls the latter of which refers to alkyl moieties having substituents replacing a hydrogen on one or more carbons of the hydrocarbon backbone. Such substituents can include for example halogen hydroxyl alkylcarbonyloxy arylcarbonyloxy alkoxycarbonyloxy aryloxycarbonyloxy carboxylate alkylcarbonyl alkoxycarbonyl aminocarbonyl alkylthiocarbonyl alkoxyl phosphate phosphonato phosphinato cyano amino including alkyl amino dialkylamino arylamino diarylamino and alkylarylamino acylamino including alkylcarbonylamino arylcarbonylamino carbamoyl and ureido amidino imino sulfhydryl alkylthio arylthio thiocarboxylate sulfate sulfonato sulfamoyl sulfonamido nitro trifluoromethyl cyano azido heterocyclyl aralkyl or an aromatic or heteroaromatic moiety. It will be understood by those skilled in the art that the moieties substituted on the hydrocarbon chain can themselves be substituted if appropriate. Cycloalkyls can be further substituted e.g. with the substituents described above. An aralkyl moiety is an alkyl substituted with an aryl e.g. having 1 to 3 separate or fused rings and from 6 to about 18 carbon ring atoms e.g. phenylmethyl benzyl .

The term alkylamino as used herein means an alkyl group as defined herein having an amino group attached thereto. Suitable alkylamino groups include groups having 1 to about 12 carbon atoms preferably from 1 to about 6 carbon atoms. The term alkylthio refers to an alkyl group as defined above having a sulfhydryl group attached thereto. Suitable alkylthio groups include groups having 1 to about 12 carbon atoms preferably from 1 to about 6 carbon atoms. The term alkylcarboxyl as used herein means an alkyl group as defined above having a carboxyl group attached thereto. The term alkoxy as used herein means an alkyl group as defined above having an oxygen atom attached thereto. Representative alkoxy groups include groups having 1 to about 12 carbon atoms preferably 1 to about 6 carbon atoms e.g. methoxy ethoxy propoxy tert butoxy and the like. The terms alkenyl and alkynyl refer to unsaturated aliphatic groups analogous to alkyls but which contain at least one double or triple bond respectively. Suitable alkenyl and alkynyl groups include groups having 2 to about 12 carbon atoms preferably from 1 to about 6 carbon atoms.

The term aryl includes 5 and 6 membered single ring aromatic groups that may include from zero to four heteroatoms for example unsubstituted or substituted benzene pyrrole furan thiophene imidazole oxazole thiazole triazole pyrazole pyridine pyrazine pyridazine and pyrimidine and the like. Aryl groups also include polycyclic fused aromatic groups such as naphthyl quinolyl indolyl and the like. The aromatic ring can be substituted at one or more ring positions with such substituents e.g. as described above for alkyl groups. Suitable aryl groups include unsubstituted and substituted phenyl groups. The term aryloxy as used herein means an aryl group as defined above having an oxygen atom attached thereto. The term aralkoxy as used herein means an aralkyl group as defined above having an oxygen atom attached thereto. Suitable aralkoxy groups have 1 to 3 separate or fused rings and from 6 to about 18 carbon ring atoms e.g. O benzyl.

The term amino as used herein refers to an unsubstituted or substituted moiety of the formula NRR in which Rand Rare each independently hydrogen alkyl aryl or heterocyclyl or Rand R taken together with the nitrogen atom to which they are attached form a cyclic moiety having from 3 to 8 atoms in the ring. Thus the term amino includes cyclic amino moieties such as piperidinyl or pyrrolidinyl groups unless otherwise stated. An amino substituted amino group refers to an amino group in which at least one of Rand R is further substituted with an amino group.

As used herein the term modulating means regulating or controlling as necessary through preventing eliminating reducing maintaining or increasing a desired effect. The desired effect can be an effect on inflammatory cell accumulation and or proliferation.

An immune response refers to a response in a subject elicited by a stimulus comprising activation of inflammatory cells. Activation comprises recruitment of inflammatory cells from the blood to lymphoid and non lymphoid tissues to the stimulus by a process involving the release of chemokines and other factors that promote adhesion movement and or proliferation of inflammatory cells. As used herein proliferation refers to the expansion by rapid duplication of cells.

 Accumulation of inflammatory cells refers to the build up of inflammatory cells during an immune response. Accumulation can occur for example through cell movement and or proliferation.

A subject is a vertebrate preferably a mammal more preferably a human. Mammals include but are not limited to humans farm animals sport animals and pets.

An adverse immune response refers to any immune response having a detrimental effect in a subject. The adverse immune response can be an inflammatory response. An inflammatory response is an adverse response that produces inflammation. An inflammatory response can result for example from infection autoimmunity as well as transplantation and implantation of organs tissues and synthetic materials that bring about an inflammatory response but it is not so limited.

 Inflammation as used herein refers to an adverse immune response characterized by excessive inflammatory cell build up. Inflammation can be caused for example by pathogenic infection irritation or disease. Inflammation can also be caused by autoimmunity wherein a subject s own antibodies react with host tissue or in which immune effector T cells are autoreactive to endogenous self peptides and cause destruction of tissue.

An inflammatory cell is a cell contributing to an immune response that can include but is not limited to smooth muscle cells follicular dendritic cells Langerhans cells interstitial dendritic cells interdigitating dendritic cells blood and veiled dendritic cells leukocytes lymphocytes B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes monocytes macrophages foam cells tissue specific macrophages such as alveolar macrophages microglia mesangial cells histiocytes and Kupffer cells neutrophils basophils mast cells natural killer cells endothelial cells eosinophils megakaryocytes platelets erythrocytes and polymorphonuclear cells e.g. granulocytes .

The term inflamed tissue can be used to describe any biological tissue that has mounted an immune response to for example foreign agents bacterial fungal viral mycoplasmal prion rickettsial mycobacterial and other infections shear stress or diseases e.g. granulomatous diseases exemplified by sarcoidosis tuberculosis and granulomas immediate type and delayed type hypersensitivity reactions immune responses from transplantation and inflammatory diseases.

The term target site refers to regions aggregates or populations of cells or tissues where an adverse immune response has been mounted that is where inflammatory cells accumulate.

 Immunesuppressive activity refers to the ability of a compound to decrease or eliminate inflammatory cell activation or proliferation.

Compositions and methods of the present invention promote immunosupression through reduction or inhibition of inflammatory cell accumulation at a site of inflammation. Immunosupression can bring therapeutic benefit to patients suffering from inflammation.

As used herein a therapeutically effective amount comprises an amount of a ningalin sufficient to decrease an adverse immune response. Therapeutically effective amounts can include about 50 to about 4000 mof one or more ningalins per dose.

Ningalins of the invention comprise all members of the ningalin class of marine natural products which possess a common 3 4 diaryl substituted pyrrole nucleus bearing a 2 carboxyl. Ningalins of the invention include but are not limited to N1 N2 N3 N4 N5 and N6 Ningalin A Ningalin B and analogs thereof.

Ningalins comprise a family of 3 4 dihydroxyphenylalanine DOPA derived o catechol metabolites that include the tunichromes Bruening R. C. et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1985 107 5289 Bruening R. C. et al. J. Nat. Prod. 1986 49 193 Bayer E et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1992 31 52 Oltz E. M. et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1988 110 6162 Ryan D. E. et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992 114 9659 Taylor S. W. et al. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1995 324 228 . Ningalin A is well described in the art Boger D. L. et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1999 121 54 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference . Ningalin B is the second member of the ningalin family Kang H. Fenical W. J. Org. Chem. 1997 62 3254 . Ningalin B and related analogs are described in U.S. Application Publication No. 20030220320 and Boger D. L. et al. J. Org. Chem. 2000 65 2479 the contents of each which are incorporated herein by reference. N1 N2 N3 N4 N5 and N6 were previously described by Boger D. L. et al. J. Org. Chem. 2000 65 2479 as N10 N11 N13 N14 N15 and N30 respectively. Other ningalins are referenced in Soenen D. R. et al Bioorganic and Med. Chem. Letts. 2003 13 1777 1781 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

Ningalin analogs of the present invention comprise for example analogs having variations in structure but retaining the essential functional activity of a native ningalin i.e the ability to modulate an adverse immune response such as by decreasing inflammatory cell activation or proliferation . As referred to herein an analog having native ningalin activity possesses a functional ability decrease activation or proliferation of inflammatory cells which is at least equivalent to that of the compound in its native e.g. unmodified form. Analogs of the invention may exceed the physiological activity of the compound in its native form. Methods of analog design are well known in the art and synthesis can be carried out according to such methods by modifying the chemical structure of a native ningalin such that the resultant analogs exhibit equivalent or enhanced function U.S. Application Publication No. 20030220320 . These chemical modifications include but are not limited to substituting alternative R groups and varying the degree of saturation at specific carbon atoms of the native molecule. Analogs of the invention can be relatively resistant to in vivo degradation resulting in a more prolonged therapeutic effect upon administration. Assays for measuring functional activity include but are not limited to those described in the Examples below.

In one embodiment methods of the present invention comprise identifying compounds or compositions that mimic exceed or increase native ningalin A or B activity for example ningalin analogs. Accordingly methods of the present invention further relate to screening for compounds that mimic or exceed activity of ningalins presently known in the art.

Design of assays e.g. cell based assays to identify compounds effecting or possessing native ningalin activity is well within the skill in the art. The end point of the assays will typically measure a physiologic effect. The physiologic effect can comprise modulating inflammatory cellular movement and or proliferation in response to interaction with a specific candidate or composition referred to herein as a test compound. Preferably inflammatory cell lines are used in cell based assays.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a method of screening ningalin analogs for immunosuppressive activity comprising the steps of 

Compositions of the present invention are well suited for the preparation of pharmaceutical compositions. The pharmaceutical compositions of the invention can be administered to any subject that may experience the beneficial effects of the compounds of the invention.

The pharmaceutical compositions can be administered by any means that achieve their intended purpose. For example administration can be by topical parenteral subcutaneous intravenous intramuscular intraperitoneal transdermal or buccal routes. Alternatively or concurrently administration can be by the oral route. The dosage administered will be dependent upon the age health and weight of the recipient kind of concurrent treatment if any frequency of treatment and the nature of the effect desired.

In addition to the pharmacologically active compounds the pharmaceutical preparations can contain suitable pharmaceutically acceptable carriers comprising excipients and auxiliaries that facilitate processing of the active compounds into preparations that can be used pharmaceutically. Preferably the preparations particularly those preparations that can be administered orally and that can be used for the preferred type of administration such as tablets dragees and capsules and also preparations that can be administered rectally such as suppositories as well as suitable solutions for administration by injection or orally contain from about 0.001 to about 99 percent preferably from about 0.01 to about 95 percent about 1.0 to about 90 percent or about 10 to about 50 percent of active compound s together with the excipient. Standard texts such as Remington s Pharmaceutical Science 17th edition 1985 Hand Book of Pharmaceutical Excipients 4edition 2003 incorporated herein by reference may be consulted to prepare suitable preparations without undue experimentation. Suitable dosages can also be based upon the text herein and documents cited herein.

The dose ranges for the administration of the compositions of the present invention are those large enough to produce the desired effect without exceeding the maximal tolerated doses whereby for example the adverse immune response is reduced or eliminated or ameliorated. In specific embodiments from about 50 to about 500 m from about 500 to about 1000 m from about 1000 to about 2000 m and from about 2000 to about 4000 mof one or more ningalins per dose is administered. Generally the dosage will vary with the age condition sex and extent of the disease in the patient. The doses should not be so large as to cause adverse side effects such as unwanted cross reactions anaphylactic reactions and the like. Counter indications if any immune tolerance and other variables will also affect the proper dosage. The molecules can be administered parenterally by injection or by gradual profusion over time.

The pharmaceutical preparations are manufactured in a manner that is itself known for example by means of conventional mixing granulating dragee making dissolving or lyophilizing processes. Thus pharmaceutical preparations for oral use can be obtained by combining the active compounds with solid excipients optionally grinding the resulting mixture and processing the mixture of granules after adding suitable auxiliaries if desired or necessary to obtain tablets or dragee cores.

Suitable excipients are in particular fillers such as saccharides for example lactose or sucrose mannitol or sorbitol cellulose preparations and or calcium phosphates for example tricalcium phosphate or calcium hydrogen phosphate as well as binders such as starch paste using for example maize starch wheat starch rice starch potato starch gelatin tragacanth methyl cellulose hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose sodium carboxymethylcellulose and or polyvinyl pyrrolidone. If desired disintegrating agents may be added such as the above mentioned starches and also carboxymethyl starch cross linked polyvinyl pyrrolidone agar or alginic acid or a salt thereof such as sodium alginate. Auxiliaries are above all flow regulating agents and lubricants for example silica talc stearic acid or salts thereof such as magnesium stearate or calcium stearate and or polyethylene glycol. Dragee cores are provided with suitable coatings that if desired are resistant to gastric juices. For this purpose concentrated saccharide solutions may be used which may optionally contain gum arabic talc polyvinyl pyrrolidone polyethylene glycol and or titanium dioxide lacquer solutions and suitable organic solvents or solvent mixtures. In order to produce coatings resistant to gastric juices solutions of suitable cellulose preparations such as acetylcellulose phthalate or hydroxypropymethyl cellulose phthalate are used. Dye stuffs or pigments may be added to the tablets or dragee coatings for example for identification or in order to characterize combinations of active compound doses.

Other pharmaceutical preparations that can be used orally include pushfit capsules made of gelatin as well as soft sealed capsules made of gelatin and a plasticizer such as glycerol or sorbitol. The push fit capsules can contain the active compounds in the form of granules that may be mixed with fillers such as lactose binders such as starches and or lubricants such as talc or magnesium stearate and optionally stabilizers. In soft capsules the active compounds are preferably dissolved or suspended in suitable liquids such as fatty oils or liquid paraffin. In addition stabilizers may be added.

Possible pharmaceutical preparations that can be used rectally include for example suppositories which consist of a combination of one or more of the active compounds with a suppository base. Suitable suppository bases are for example natural or synthetic triglycerides or paraffin hydrocarbons. In addition it is also possible to use gelatin rectal capsules that consist of a combination of the active compounds with a base. Possible base materials include for example liquid triglycerides polyethylene glycols or paraffin hydrocarbons.

Suitable formulations for parenteral administration include aqueous solutions of the active compounds in water soluble form for example water soluble salts. In addition suspensions of the active compounds as appropriate oily injection suspensions may be administered. Suitable lipophilic solvents or vehicles include fatty oils for example sesame oil or synthetic fatty acid esters for example ethyl oleate or triglycerides. Aqueous injection suspensions may contain substances that increase the viscosity of the suspension including for example sodium carboxymethyl cellulose sorbitol and or dextran. Optionally the suspension may also contain stabilizers.

Additional pharmaceutical methods can be employed to control the duration of action. Delivery systems can include time release delayed release or sustained release delivery systems collectively referred to herein as controlled release . Such systems can avoid repeated administrations of the ningalins increasing convenience to the subject and the physician. Many types of release delivery systems are available and known to those of ordinary skill in the art. They include polymer base systems such as poly lactide glycolide copolyoxalates polycaprolactones polyesteramides polyorthoesters polyhydroxybutyric acid and polyanhydrides. Microcapsules of the foregoing polymers containing drugs are described in for example U.S. Pat. No. 5 075 109. Delivery systems also include non polymer systems that are lipids including sterols such as cholesterol cholesterol esters and fatty acids or neutral fats such as mono di and tri glycerides hydrogel release systems sylastic systems peptide based systems wax coatings compressed tablets using conventional binders and excipients partially fused implants and the like. Specific examples include but are not limited to a erosional systems in which the anti inflammatory agent is contained in a form within a matrix such as those described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 452 775 4 667 014 4 748 034 and 5 239 660 and b difusional systems in which an active component permeates at a controlled rate from a polymer such as described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 3 832 253 and 3 854 480.

A preferred delivery system of the invention is a colloidal dispersion system. Colloidal dispersion systems include lipid based systems including oil in water emulsions micelles mixed micelles and liposomes. A preferred colloidal system of the invention is a liposome. Liposomes are artificial membrane vessels which are useful as a delivery vector in vivo or in vitro. It has been shown that large unilamellar vessels LUV which range in size from 0.2 4.0 m can encapsulate large macromolecules. Ningalins can be encapsulated within the aqueous interior and be delivered to cells in an active form Fraley et al. Trends Biochem. Sci. 1981 6 77 . In order for a liposome to be an efficient transfer vector one or more of the following characteristics should be present 1 encapsulation of the ningalin with high efficiency and retention of biological activity 2 preferential and substantial binding to a target cell in comparison to non target cells and 3 delivery of the aqueous contents of the vesicle to the target cell cytoplasm at high efficiency.

Liposomes may be targeted to a particular tissue by coupling the liposome to a specific ligand such as a monoclonal antibody sugar glycolipid or protein. Liposomes are commercially available from Gibco BRL for example as LIPOFECTIN and LIPOFECTACE which are formed of cationic lipids such as N 1 2 3 dioleyloxy propyl N N N trimethylammonium chloride DOTMA and dimethyl dioctadecylammonium bromide DDAB . Methods for making liposomes are well known in the art and have been described in many publications. Liposomes also have been reviewed by Gregoriadis G. in Trends in Biotechnology 1985 3 235 241.

In one important embodiment a preferred vehicle is a biocompatible microparticle or implant that is suitable for implantation into the mammalian recipient. Exemplary bioerodible implants that are useful in accordance with this method are described in PCT International Publication No. WO 95 24929 entitled Polymeric Gene Delivery System PCT International application no. PCT US95 03307 . WO 95 24929 describes a biocompatible preferably biodegradable polymeric matrix for containing an exogenous gene under the control of an appropriate promoter. The polymeric matrix is used to achieve sustained release of the exogenous gene in the patient. In accordance with one embodiment of the invention the ningalins described herein are encapsulated or dispersed within the biocompatible preferably biodegradable polymeric matrix such as that disclosed in WO 95 24929.

The polymeric matrix preferably is in the form of a microparticle such as a microsphere wherein an agent is dispersed throughout a solid polymeric matrix or a microcapsule wherein an agent is stored in the core of a polymeric shell . Other forms of the polymeric matrix for containing an agent include films coatings gels implants and stents. The size and composition of the polymeric matrix device is selected to result in favorable release kinetics in the tissue into which the matrix is introduced. The size of the polymeric matrix further is selected according to the method of delivery which is to be used. Preferably when an aerosol route is used the polymeric matrix and ningalins are encompassed in a surfactant vehicle. The polymeric matrix composition can be selected to have both favorable degradation rates and also to be formed of a material which is bioadhesive to further increase the effectiveness of transfer. The matrix composition also can be selected not to degrade but rather to release by diffusion over an extended period of time.

In another important embodiment the delivery system is a biocompatible microsphere that is suitable for local site specific delivery. Such microspheres are disclosed in Chickering et al. Biotech. And Bioeng. 1996 52 96 101 and Mathiowitz et al. Nature 1997 386 410 414.

Both non biodegradable and biodegradable polymeric matrices can be used to deliver the agents of the invention to the subject. Biodegradable matrices are preferred. Such polymers may be natural or synthetic polymers. Synthetic polymers are preferred. The polymer is selected based on the period of time over which release is desired generally in the order of a few hours to a year or longer. Typically release over a period ranging from between a few hours and three to twelve months is most desirable. The polymer optionally is in the form of a hydrogel that can absorb up to about 90 of its weight in water and further optionally is cross linked with multi valent ions or other polymers.

Ningalins can be delivered using a bioerodible implant by way of diffusion or more preferably by degradation of the polymeric matrix. Exemplary synthetic polymers which can be used to form the biodegradable delivery system include polyamides polycarbonates polyalkylenes polyalkylene glycols polyalkylene oxides polyalkylene terepthalates polyvinyl alcohols polyvinyl ethers polyvinyl esters poly vinyl halides polyvinylpyrrolidone polyglycolides polysiloxanes polyurethanes and co polymers thereof alkyl cellulose hydroxyalkyl celluloses cellulose ethers cellulose esters nitro celluloses polymers of acrylic and methacrylic esters methyl cellulose ethyl cellulose hydroxypropyl cellulose hydroxy propyl methyl cellulose hydroxybutyl methyl cellulose cellulose acetate cellulose propionate cellulose acetate butyrate cellulose acetate phthalate carboxylethyl cellulose cellulose triacetate cellulose sulphate sodium salt poly methyl methacrylate poly ethyl methacrylate poly butylmethacrylate poly isobutyl methacrylate poly hexylmethacrylate poly isodecyl methacrylate poly lauryl methacrylate poly phenyl methacrylate poly methyl acrylate poly isopropyl acrylate poly isobutyl acrylate poly octadecyl acrylate polyethylene polypropylene poly ethylene glycol poly ethylene oxide poly ethylene terephthalate poly vinyl alcohols polyvinyl acetate poly vinyl chloride polystyrene polyvinylpyrrolidone and polymers of lactic acid and glycolic acid polyanhydrides poly ortho esters poly butic acid poly valeric acid and poly lactide cocaprolactone and natural polymers such as alginate and other polysaccharides including dextran and cellulose collagen chemical derivatives thereof substitutions additions of chemical groups for example alkyl alkylene hydroxylations oxidations and other modifications routinely made by those skilled in the art albumin and other hydrophilic proteins zein and other prolamines and hydrophobic proteins copolymers and mixtures thereof. In general these materials degrade either by enzymatic hydrolysis or exposure to water in vivo by surface or bulk erosion. Examples of non biodegradable polymers include ethylene vinyl acetate poly meth acrylic acid polyamides copolymers and mixtures thereof.

Bioadhesive polymers of particular interest include bioerodible hydrogels described by H. S. Sawhney C. P. Pathak and J. A. Hubell in Macromolecules 1993 26 581 587 the teachings of which are incorporated herein polyhyaluronic acids casein gelatin glutin polyanhydrides polyacrylic acid alginate chitosan poly methyl methacrylates poly ethyl methacrylates poly butylmethacrylate poly isobutyl methacrylate poly hexylmethacrylate poly isodecyl methacrylate poly lauryl methacrylate poly phenyl methacrylate poly methyl acrylate poly isopropyl acrylate poly isobutyl acrylate and poly octadecyl acrylate .

In addition important embodiments of the invention include pump based hardware delivery systems some of which are adapted for implantation. Such implantable pumps include controlled release microchips. A preferred controlled release microchip is described in Santini J T Jr. et al. Nature 1999 397 335 338 the contents of which are expressly incorporated herein by reference.

Use of a long term sustained release implant may be particularly suitable for treatment of chronic conditions. Long term release are used herein means that the implant is constructed and arranged to delivery therapeutic levels of the active ingredient for at least 30 days and preferably 60 days. Long term sustained release implants are well known to those of ordinary skill in the art and include some of the release systems described above. In certain embodiments the agents of the invention are delivered directly to the site at which there is inflammation e.g. the joints in the case of a subject with rheumatoid arthritis the blood vessels of an atherosclerotic organ etc. For example this can be accomplished by attaching a ningalin to the surface of a balloon catheter inserting the catheter into the subject until the balloon portion is located at the site of inflammation e.g. an atherosclerotic vessel and inflating the balloon to contact the balloon surface with the vessel wall at the site of the occlusion. In this manner the compositions can be targeted locally to particular inflammatory sites to modulate immune cell migration to these sites. In another example the local administration involves an implantable pump to the site in need of such treatment. Preferred pumps are as described above. In a further example when the treatment of an abscess is involved the ningalins may be delivered topically e.g. in an ointment dermal formulation. Optionally the agents are delivered in combination with other therapeutic agents e.g. anti inflammatory agents immunosuppressant agents etc. . Quantitative determination of synergism or antagonism is carried out with computerized analysis using the classic isobologram and the combination index of Chou and Taklay Advances in Enzyme Regulation 1984 22 27.

The preclinical and clinical therapeutic use of the compositions and methods of the present invention to ameliorate acute and chronic inflammatory disorders will be best accomplished by those of skill employing accepted principles of diagnosis and treatment. Such principles are known in the art and are set forth for example in Petersdorf R. G. 1983 .

Compositions and methods of the present invention are useful for treating a number of disorders associated with adverse immune responses e.g. from exposure to an allergen or pathogen or transplantation of heterologous blood organ or tissue .

Immune rejection is a major problem confronting organ transplantation. The principal approach to mitigate rejection is the pharmacological suppression of the immune system of an organ recipient. Methods of the invention further provide a means whereby the rejection of tissue or organs after transplantation can be prevented or controlled thus prolonging the survival of the tissue or organ. Commonly transplanted organs include but are not limited to kidney pancreas liver heart intestines lung and bone marrow as allograft or autologous compositions. Accordingly immunosuppressive ningalin compositions of the present invention can be used to prevent or treat hyperacute acute and chronic rejection of tissue including blood or organs.

Inflammation can be caused by an immune response against non self antigens including antigens of necrotic self material and the subject in need of treatment according to the invention is a transplant recipient. This is because after tissue or organ transplantation certain antigens from the transplanted material can stimulate the production of immune lymphocytes and or autoantibodies which later participate in inflammation rejection causing inflammation and aggravating the condition Johnson et al. 1989 19 238 Leinonen et al. 1990 9 67 Montalban et al. 1991 22 750 .

Accordingly immunosuppressive ningalins can be used in transplant settings where cells or tissues to be transplanted can be treated prior to transplant into a subject in order to reduce the likelihood of rejection or graft versus host disease GVHD . Similarly ningalins can be used to tolerize the immune system to an antigen that it would otherwise mount an immune response against by administration prior to simultaneously with or post transplantation.

Immunosuppressive agents often exert their effect by inhibiting the action of lymphokines an important example is the capacity of cyclosporine to suppress the synthesis of interleukin 2 by inflammatory cells. In addition to their capacity to suppress the formation of eicosanoids the glucocorticoids and some other compounds produce their anti inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects by inhibiting the synthesis and action of several cytokines produced by inflammatory cells. Compounds such as histamine bradykinin 5 hydroxy tryptamine prostaglandins and platelet activating factor are known to be triggers of the inflammation processes. Without being bound by theory it is believed that ningalins inhibit the activation and or proliferation of inflammatory cells in response to these or other stimuli.

Combinations of drugs and treatment regimens are also contemplated by the invention. The ningalins of the invention can be administered alone or in combination with other therapeutic drugs including those used in connection with organ rejection therapy and particularly including an immunosupressant. Specifically ningalins may be administered with one or more drugs including but not limited to adrenocorticosteroids cyclosporin tacrolimus FK506 sirolimus rapamycin sulfasalazine methoxsalen methotrexate mycophenolic acid mycophenolate mofetil everolimus azathiprine steroids and NOX 100. Administration regimens are described by Immunosuppressive Agents in Goodman Gilman s The pharmacological basis of therapeutics 9th Ed. Hardman et al. eds McGraw Hill pp. 1264 1275 and the Physician s Desk Reference 58Ed. Thompson.

According to another embodiment the invention provides compositions and methods that suppress inflammation arising from a implantation or transplantation of a material surface. Such methods involve ex vivo coating or loading material surfaces with one or more of the immunosuppressive ningalins provided herein. Material surfaces as used herein include but are not limited to dental and orthopedic prosthetic implants artificial valves stents and organic implantable tissue such as an autologous heterologous allogeneic or xenogenic tissue or organ or graft thereof.

Implantable prosthetic devices have been used in the surgical repair or replacement of internal tissue for many years. Orthopedic implants include a wide variety of devices each suited to fulfill particular medical needs. Examples of such devices are hip joint replacement devices knee joint replacement devices shoulder joint replacement devices and pins braces and plates used to set fractured bones. Some contemporary orthopedic and dental implants use high performance metals such as cobalt chrome and titanium alloy to achieve high strength. These materials are readily fabricated into the complex shapes typical of these devices using mature metal working techniques including casting and machining.

The material surface is coated with an amount of ningalin that can vary depending upon the desired therapeutic effect. In important embodiments the material surface is part of an implant. In important embodiments the material surface may also be coated with a cell growth potentiating agent an anti infective agent and or an anti inflammatory agent.

Within the scope of the invention an adverse immune response can comprise an inflammatory response but it is not so limited. The inflammatory response can be attributed to various diseases and conditions that affect one or more organs or organ systems including but not Invited to the peripheral nervous system hematological system bone marrow the central nervous system skin appendix gastrointestinal tract including but not limited to esophagus duodenum and colon respiratory pulmonary system including but not limited to lung nose pharynx larynx eye genito reproductive system gums liver biliary ductal system renal system including but not limited to kidneys urinary tract bladder connective tissue including but not limited to joints cartilage cardiovascular system muscle heart spleen breast lymphatic system ear endocrine exocrine system including but not limited to lacrimal glands salivary glands thyroid gland pancreas and bone skeletal system.

Inflammatory diseases that affect the peripheral nervous system include but are not limited to radiculitis. Inflammatory diseases of the central nervous system include acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis cholesterol granuloma meningoencephalitis optic neuritis and Parsonage Aldren Turner syndrome but are not limited to these diseases. Inflammatory diseases of the skin can include but are not limited to acute infantile hemorrhagic edema contact dermatitis Favre Racouchot syndrome folliculitis panniculitis Riehl s melanosis Stevens Johnson syndrome and trichostasis spinulosa. Inflammatory diseases of the appendix include appendicitis.

Atrophic gastritis Barrett s esophagus Celiac disease colitis colonic diverticulitis Curling s ulcers Cushing s ulcers esophagitis phlegmonous gastritis proctitis toxic megacolon and typhlitis are some inflammatory diseases that affect the gastrointestinal tract. Inflammatory diseases of the respiratory pulmonary system include but are not limited to atrophic rhinitis bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonitis pleural empyema endogenous lipoid pneumonia laryngeal granuloma lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia pharyngitis pleuritis sinusistis and sterile pneumonitis. Inflammatory diseases of the eye can be blepharitis dacryocystitis endophthalmitis Fuch s heterochromic cyclitis giant papillary conjunctivitis optic neuritis phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis scleritis but are not limited to these examples.

The allergic reaction has been extensively studied and the basic immune mechanisms involved are well known.

Diseases characterized by inflammation that affect the genito reproductive system include but are not limited to Bowenoid papulosis cervicitis cystitis epidydymo orchitis peritonitis and prostatitis. Inflammatory diseases that affect the gums include cancrum oris giant cell granuloma gingivitis pericoronitis periodontitis and pulpitis but are not limited to these examples. Diseases states that are characterized by inflammation and that affect the liver biliary ductal system include but are not limited to cholangitis and perihepatitis. Inflammatory diseases of the renal system can include chronic interstitial nephritis Hunner s ulcer post streptococcal glomerulonephritis and xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis. Disease states that affect connective tissue include but are not limited to De Quervain s tenosynovitis pyrophosphate arthropathy reactive arthropathy sacroilitis synovitis tenosynovitis Tietze s costochondritis and urate crystal arthropathy.

Disease states characterized by inflammation of the cardiovascular system include endocarditis pericarditis thrombophlebitis and vasculitis but are not limited to these examples. Inflammatory disease states that affect muscle include but are not limited to myositis and Parsonage Aldren Turner syndrome. Mastitis and Mondor s disease of the breast are some inflammatory conditions that affect the breast. Diseases of the lymphatic system that are characterized by inflammation include mesenteric adenitis and pseudolymphoma but are not limited to these examples. Inflammatory diseases of the ear can include diseases such as myringitis bullosa. Inflammatory diseases of the endocrine exocrine system can include necrotizing sialometaplasia pancreatitis parotitis and thyroiditis while diseases of the bone skeletal system characterized by inflammation include osteitis osteitis fibrosa cystica osteitis pubis and periostitis but are not limited to these examples. It is evident that many inflammatory diseases can be systemic and affect more than one organ system. Some systemic inflammatory diseases can include gangrene Jarisch Herxheimer reaction and Reiter s syndrome.

Methods and compositions of the invention are also suitable for modulation of adverse responses comprising autoimmune responses. Autoimmune disease is a class of diseases in which a subject s own antibodies react with host tissue or in which immune effector T cells are autoreactive to endogenous self peptides and cause destruction of tissue. Autoimmune diseases include but are not limited to acquired factor VIII deficiency acquired generalized lipodystrophy alopecia areata ankylosing spondylitis anticardiolipin syndrome autoimmune adrenalitis autoimmune neutropenia autoimmune oophoritis autoimmune orchitis autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 autoimmune sclerosing pancreatitis Balanatis xerotica obliterans Behcet s disease benign recurrent meningitis Calcinosis Raynaud s sclerodactyly telangiectasia syndrome Caplan s disease Churg Strauss syndrome cicatricial pemphigoid Degos disease dermatitis herpetiformis discoid lupus erythematosus Dressler s syndrome Eaton Lambert syndrome eosinophilic fasciitis eosinophilic pustular folliculitis epidermolysis bullosa acquisita Evans syndrome cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis Henoch Sch nlein purpura Hughes Stovin syndrome hypertrophic pulmonary osteo arthropathy autoimmune hypoparathyroidism inclusion body myosins inflammatory bowel disease insulin antibodies insulin receptor antibodies juvenile chronic arthritis Kawasaki disease linear IgA disease lymphocytic mastisis microscopic polyangiitis Mikulicz s syndrome Miller Fisher syndrome morphoea acquired neuromyotonia oculovestibuloauditory syndrome paraneoplastic pemphigus paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria partial lipodystrophy polyarteritis nodosa polychondritis polymyalgia rheumatica polyradiculoneuropathy postpartum thyroiditis primary biliary cirrhosis primary sclerosing cholangitis pyoderma gangrenosum rhizomelic pseudopolyarthritis sarcoidosis Sicca syndrome Sneddon Wilkinson disease Still s Disease Susac s syndrome sympathetic ophthalmitis systemic sclerosis Takayasu s arteritis temporal arteritis thrombangiitis obliterans ulcerative colitis vitiligo Vogt Koyanagi Harada syndrome Wegener s granulomatosis rheumatoid arthritis Crohn s disease multiple sclerosis systemic lupus erythematosus SLE autoimmune encephalomyelitis myasthenia gravis MG Hashimoto s thyroiditis Goodpasture s syndrome pemphigus e.g. pemphigus vulgaris Graves disease autoimmune hemolytic anemia autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura scleroderma with anti collagen antibodies mixed connective tissue disease polymyositis pernicious anemia idiopathic Addison s disease autoimmune associated infertility glomerulonephritis e.g. crescentic glomerulonephritis proliferative glomerulonephritis bullous pemphigoid Sj gren s syndrome insulin resistance insulin dependent diabetes mellitus graft versus host disease uveitis rheumatic fever Guillain Barre syndrome psoriasis and autoimmune hepatitis.

In other embodiments the adverse immune response results from exposure to allergens. The generic name for molecules that cause an allergic reaction is allergen. There are numerous species of allergens. The allergic reaction occurs when tissue sensitizing immunoglobulin of the IgE type reacts with foreign allergen. The IgE antibody is bound to mast cells and or basophils and these specialized cells release chemical mediators vasoactive amines of the allergic reaction when stimulated to do so by allergens bridging the ends of the antibody molecule. Histamine platelet activating factor arachidonic acid metabolites and serotonin are among the best known mediators of allergic reactions in man. Histamine and the other vasoactive amines are normally stored in mast cells and basophil leukocytes. The mast cells are dispersed throughout animal tissue and the basophils circulate within the vascular system. These cells manufacture and store histamine within the cell unless the specialized sequence of events involving IgE binding occurs to trigger its release.

The symptoms of the allergic reaction vary depending on the location within the body where the IgE reacts with the antigen. If the reaction occurs along the respiratory epithelium the symptoms are sneezing coughing and asthmatic reactions. If the interaction occurs in the digestive tract as in the case of food allergies abdominal pain and diarrhea are common. Systematic reactions for example following a bee sting can be severe and often life threatening.

Delayed type hypersensitivity also known as type IV allergy reaction is an allergic reaction characterized by a delay period of at least 12 hours from invasion of the antigen into the allergic subject until appearance of the inflammatory or immune reaction. The T lymphocytes sensitized T lymphocytes of individuals in an allergic condition react with the antigen triggering the T lymphocytes to release lymphokines macrophage migration inhibitory factor MIF macrophage activating factor MAF mitogenic factor MF skin reactive factor SRF chemotactic factor neovascularization accelerating factor etc. which function as inflammation mediators and the biological activity of these lymphokines together with the direct and indirect effects of locally appearing lymphocytes and other inflammatory immune cells give rise to the type IV allergy reaction. Delayed allergy reactions include tuberculin type reaction homograft rejection reaction cell dependent type protective reaction contact dermatitis hypersensitivity reaction and the like which are known to be most strongly suppressed by steroidal agents. Consequently steroidal agents are effective against diseases which are caused by delayed allergy reactions. Long term use of steroidal agents at concentrations currently being used can however lead to the serious side effect known as steroid dependence. The methods of the invention solve some of these problems by providing for lower and fewer doses to be administered.

Allergic conditions or diseases in humans include but are not limited to eczema allergic rhinitis or coryza hay fever conjunctivitis bronchial or allergic asthma urticaria hives and food allergies atopic dermatitis anaphylaxis drug allergy angioedema and allergic conjunctivitis. Allergic diseases in dogs include but are not limited to seasonal dermatitis perennial dermatitis rhinitis conjunctivitis allergic asthma and drug reactions. Allergic diseases in cats include but are not limited to dermatitis and respiratory disorders and food allergens. Allergic diseases in horses include but are not limited to respiratory disorders such as heaves and dermatitis. Allergic diseases in non human primates include but are not limited to allergic asthma and allergic dermatitis.

Immediate immune hypersensitivity or anaphylactic response is a form of allergic reaction which develops very quickly i.e. within seconds or minutes of exposure of the patient to the causative allergen and it is mediated by IgE antibodies made by B lymphocytes. In nonallergic patients there is no IgE antibody of clinical relevance but in a person suffering with allergic diseases IgE antibody mediates immediate hypersensitivity by sensitizing mast cells which are abundant in the skin lymphoid organs in the membranes of the eye nose and mouth and in the respiratory tract and intestines.

Mast cells have surface receptors for IgE and the IgE antibodies in allergy suffering patients become bound to them. As discussed briefly above when the bound IgE is subsequently contacted by the appropriate allergen the mast cell is caused to degranulate and to release various substances called bioactive mediators such as histamine into the surrounding tissue. It is the biologic activity of these substances which is responsible for the clinical symptoms typical of immediate hypersensitivity namely contraction of smooth muscle in the airways or the intestine the dilation of small blood vessels and the increase in their permeability to water and plasma proteins the secretion of thick sticky mucus and in the skin redness swelling and the stimulation of nerve endings that results in itching or pain.

The types of antibodies associated with a Th1 response are generally more protective because they have high neutralization and opsonization capabilities. Th2 responses involve predominately antibodies and these have less protective effect against infection and some Th2 isotypes e.g. IgE are associated with allergy. Strongly polarized Th1 and Th2 responses not only play different roles in protection they can promote different immunopathological reactions. Th1 type responses are involved organ specific autoimmunity such as experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis Dubey et al 1991 Eur Cytokine Network 2 147 152 experimental autoimmune encephalitis EAE Beraud et al 1991 Cell Immunol 133 379 389 and insulin dependent diabetes mellitus Hahn et al 1987 18 2037 2042 in contact dermatitis Kapsenberg et al Immunol Today 12 392 395 and in some chronic inflammatory disorders. In contrast Th2 type responses are responsible for triggering allergic atopic disorders against common environmental allergens such as allergic asthma Walker et al 1992 Am Rev Resp Dis 148 109 115 and atopic dermatitis van der Heijden et al 1991 J Invest Derm 97 389 394 are thought to exacerbate infection with tissue dwelling protozoa such as helminths Finkelman et al 1991 Immunoparasitol Today 12 A62 66 and Caceres Dittmar et al 1993 Clin Exp Immunol 91 500 505 are preferentially induced in certain primary immunodeficiencies such as hyper IgE syndrome Del Prete et al 1989 J Clin Invest 84 1830 1835 and Omenn s syndrome Schandene et al 1993 Eur J Immunol 23 56 60 and are associated with reduced ability to suppress HIV replication Barker et al 1995 Proc Soc Nat Acad Sci USA 92 11135 11139 .

Thus in general it appears that allergic diseases are mediated by Th2 type immune responses. Th2 cytokines especially IL 4 and IL 5 are elevated in the airways of asthmatic subjects. These cytokines promote important aspects of the asthmatic inflammatory response including IgE isotype switching eosinophil chemotaxis and activation and mast cell growth. Th1 cytokines especially IFN g and IL 12 can suppress the formation of Th2 clones and production of Th2 cytokines.

An allergen as used herein is a molecule capable of provoking an immune response characterized by production of IgE. Thus in the context of this invention the term allergen means a specific type of antigen which can trigger an allergic response which is mediated by IgE antibody. The method and preparations of this invention extend to a broad class of such allergens and fragments of allergens or haptens acting as allergens. Allergens include but are not limited to Environmental Aeroallergens plant pollens such as Ragweed hayfever Weed pollen allergens Grass pollen allergens Johnson grass Tree pollen allergens Ryegrass House dust mite allergens Storage mite allergens Japanese cedar pollen hay fever Mold spore allergens Animal allergens cat dog guinea pig hamster gerbil rat mouse Food Allergens e.g. Crustaceans nuts such as peanuts citrus fruits Insect Allergens Other than mites listed above Venoms Hymenoptera yellow jacket honey bee wasp hornet fire ant Other environmental insect allergens from cockroaches fleas mosquitoes etc. Bacteria such as streptococcal antigens Parasites such as Ascaris antigen Viral Antigens Fungal spores Drug Allergens Antibiotics penicillins and related compounds other antibiotics Whole Proteins such as hormones insulin enzymes Streptokinase all drugs and their metabolites capable of acting as incomplete antigens or haptens Industrial Chemicals and metabolites capable of acting as haptens and stimulating the immune system Examples are the acid anhydrides such as trimellitic anhydride and the isocyanates such as toluene diisocyanate Occupational Allergens such as flour ie. Baker s asthma castor bean coffee bean and industrial chemicals described above flea allergens and human proteins in non human animals.

Allergens include but are not limited to cells cell extracts proteins polypeptides peptides polysaccharides polysaccharide conjugates peptide and non peptide mimics of polysaccharides and other molecules small molecules lipids glycolipids and carbohydrates. Many allergens however are protein or polypeptide in nature as proteins and polypeptides are generally more antigenic than carbohydrates or fats.

Examples of specific natural animal and plant allergens include but are not limited to proteins specific to the following genuses e.g. e.g. or e.g. e.g. or e.g. e.g. e.g. and e.g. and e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. or e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. e.g. and e.g. .

In other embodiments the adverse immune response results from exposure to pathogens. Pathogens include for example viruses bacteria parasites and fungi.

Examples of viruses that have been found in humans include but are not limited to Retroviridae e.g. human immunodeficiency viruses such as HIV 1 also referred to as HDTV III LAVE or HTLV III LAV or HIV III and other isolates such as HIV LP Picornaviridae e.g. polio viruses hepatitis A virus enteroviruses human Coxsackie viruses rhinoviruses echoviruses Calciviridae e.g. strains that cause gastroenteritis Togaviridae e.g. equine encephalitis viruses rubella viruses Flaviridae e.g. dengue viruses encephalitis viruses yellow fever viruses Coronoviridae e.g. coronaviruses Rhabdoviridae e.g. vesicular stomatitis viruses rabies viruses Filoviridae e.g. ebola viruses Paramyxoviridae e.g. parainfluenza viruses mumps virus measles virus respiratory syncytial virus Orthomyxoviridae e.g. influenza viruses Bungaviridae e.g. Hantaan viruses bunga viruses phleboviruses and Nairo viruses Arena viridae hemorrhagic fever viruses Reoviridae e.g. reoviruses orbiviurses and rotaviruses Birnaviridae Hepadnaviridae Hepatitis B virus Parvovirida parvoviruses Papovaviridae papilloma viruses polyoma viruses Adenoviridae most adenoviruses Herpesviridae herpes simplex virus HSV 1 and 2 varicella zoster virus cytomegalovirus CMV herpes virus Poxyiridae variola viruses vaccinia viruses pox viruses and Iridoviridae e.g. African swine fever virus and unclassified viruses e.g. the agent of delta hepatitis thought to be a defective satellite of hepatitis B virus the agents of non A non B hepatitis class 1 internally transmitted class 2 parenterally transmitted i.e. Hepatitis C Norwalk and related viruses and astroviruses .

Both gram negative and gram positive bacteria serve as antigens in vertebrate animals. Such gram positive bacteria include but are not limited to species Staphylococci species and species. Gram negative bacteria include but are not limited to species and species. Specific examples of infectious bacteria include but are not limited to sps e.g. Group A Group B viridans group anaerobic sps. pathogenic sp. sp. sp. sp. and

Other infectious organisms i.e. protists include spp. such as and and . Blood borne and or tissues parasites include spp. spp. and African sleeping sickness Chagas disease and

Other medically relevant microorganisms have been described extensively in the literature e.g. see C. G. A Thomas Bailliere Tindall Great Britain 1983 the entire contents of which is hereby incorporated by reference.

The following examples are provided as a further description of the invention and to illustrate but not limit the invention.

Drug studies using N3 20 mg Kg against P388 DX tumors in B6D2Fmice were performed as follows. B6DFmice three mice per group were implanted intraperitoneal i.p. on day 0 with 10P388 DX leukemic cells resistant to Adriamycin Doxorubicin . Drug exposure started 6 hours later with saline i.p. control N3 20 mg kg i.p. Adriamycin 1.5 mg kg and 3.0 mg kg iv. the combination of N3 20 mg kg i.p. and Adriamycin 1.5 mg kg i.v. or the combination of N3 20 mg kg ip. and Adriamycin 3.0 mg kg i.v. daily for three days. This experiment was originally designed to demonstrate the enhanced chemotherapeutic effect of Adriamycin when used in combination with N3. Surprisingly it was discovered that treatment with N3 alone not only failed to increase the lifespan of tumor bearing B6DFmice but instead decreased the lifespan by 12 as shown in Table 1. This data indicated that N3 had an immunosuppressive effect on the immunocompetent B6DFmice which caused the P388 DX leukemia to progress faster than in the untreated control group.

B6DFmice four mice per group were implanted i.p. on day 0 with 10P388 DX leukemic cells. Treatment started 6 hours later with saline i.p. control N3 20 mg kg i.p. paclitaxel Taxol 5 mg kg and 10 mg kg i.v. and the combination of N3 20 mg kg i.p. and Taxol 5 mg kg i.v. or N3 20 mg kg i.p. and Taxol 10 mg kg iv. daily for three days. This experiment was also originally designed to demonstrate the enhanced chemotherapeutic effect of Taxol when used in combination with N3. Treatment with N3 again decreased the lifespan of tumor bearing mice compared to saline treated controls Table 2 .

To further evaluate the immunosuppressive effect of ningalins inhibition of lymphocyte proliferation by N3 N5 and N6 was investigated. Phytohemagglutinin phytostigma or PHA induces proliferation of human lymphocytes. H Thymidine incorporation into DNA was determined as a measure of lymphocyte proliferation Chou T. C. et al. 37 3561 3570 1977 . The ICs for immunosuppressive effect in M and the ICs for cytotoxicity in M for N3 N5 and N6 were determined as shown in Table 3. It was determined that ningalins suppress phytostigma stimulation of human lymphocyte proliferation.

The dose effect curves of N3 N5 and N6 on the inhibition of PHA stimulated lymphocyte proliferation are shown in . For comparison the results of a known multi drug resistance MDR reversing agent Verapamil and of a known immunosuppressive agent cyclosporin A are also shown. As indicated in Table 3 the immunosuppressive effects of ningalins occurred at much lower concentrations than the cytotoxic concentrations as measured by the cell proliferation inhibition. These results indicate that ningalins have selective immunosuppressive effects at non toxic concentrations.

Organ transplant experiments were carried out at University of Texas Health Center in Houston Department of Surgery Organ Transplant. In all experiments N5 was dissolved in DMSO dimethylsulfoxide .

Heterotopic heart transplantation was performed in rats and mice. In brief heart transplantation was performed by previously described modified method. Hearts harvested from donors were perfused with chilled saline and immediately transplanted to recipients under full anesthesia. Suture 10 0 in rats and 12 0 in mice Ethicon Somerville N.J. was used to perform anastomosis of aorta to aorta and pulmonary artery to vena cava. Heartbeat was evaluated daily and the day of complete cessation was considered rejection. Animals that died within three days after transplantation were excluded from the analysis less than 5 .

Rat ACI RT1 recipients of Lewis LEW RT1 heart allografts were untreated or were treated for 7 days by daily QDx7 i.p. injections with 20 mg kg N5. Untreated recipients rejected heart allografts in a mean survival time MST of 8.40 0.55 n 5 . In contrast recipients treated with N5 showed extended allograft survival to a MST of 18.67 2.52 days which increased life span 122 n 3 p

Mice were also transplanted with heart allografts. In particular untreated Balb c H 2 recipients rejected C57BL 6 H 2 heart allografts at a MST of 7.8 0.84 days n 5 . Treatment with 40 mg kg N5 QDx7 extended heart allograft survival to 13.33 2.52 days which increased life span 71 n 3 p

Orthotopic kidney transplantation was performed in rats. In particular the left kidney of donor was perfused through the aorta with heparinized saline 4 C. and then harvested after the renal artery renal vein and ureter were cut off. End to end anastomosis of donor and recipient renal arteries and veins were performed using 10 0 nylon suture Ethicon Somerville N.J. . The recipients native kidneys were removed on the day of transplantation. Animals that died within three days after transplantation were excluded from the analysis less than 5 .

The effect of N5 administered in DMSO 20 mg kg i.p. QDx7 on kidney allograft survival was examined. Although untreated ACI recipients acutely rejected LEW kidney allografts at 8.8 0.75 days a 7 day i.p. daily treatment extended survivals to 26.50 2.12 days which increased lifespan 200 n 2 p

Mice heart allografts were treated with 20 mg kg of N3 QDx7 i.p. In particular untreated Balb c H 2 recipients rejected C57BL 6 H 2 heart allografts at a MST of 7.80 4.84 days n 5 . Treatment with 20 mg kg of N3 i.e. one half of dose of N5 extended heart allograft survival to 18.75 3.86 days n 4 p

Carrageene 1 30 l was injected i.m. into the pedis of B6D2Fmice 4 mice group to induced edemic inflammation at 0 hours. N3 N5 i.p. injection or oral administration of aspirin 500 mg kg or topical application of hydrocortisone cream 1 or Lidex cream 0.05 to the pedis skins were given at 1 6 12 and 24 hours. The control mice received dimethylsulfoxide the vehicle of ningalins . The pedis areas in mm were measured at 0 3 6 12 24 36 and 48 hours.

As shown in all drugs tested showed significant anti inflammatory effect at 12 48 hours with the maximal anti inflammatory effect observed at 24 and 48 hours. The observed potency of anti inflammatory effect despite of different doses and modes of administration were in the following order Lidex 0.05 local Aspirin at 500 mg kg oral Hydrocortisone cream 1 local N5 50 mg kg i.p. N3 100 mg kg i.p. . As shown in N3 and N5 produced an anti inflammatory effect when given by intraperitonial injections.

