---

title: Ordering internet voice content according to content density and semantic matching
abstract: A method of establishing a bi-directional voice communication link with a network access provider, locating a page responsive to a voice command, identifying one or more highlights on the page, transmitting via the bi-directional voice communication link, a voice response corresponding to a aural recitation of the one or more highlights, receiving a voice selection signal identifying a selected one of the one or more highlights, and locating content associated with the selected one of the one or more highlights.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07873900&OS=07873900&RS=07873900
owner: Inet Spch Property Hldg., Limited Liability Company
number: 07873900
owner_city: Wilmington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050909
---
This is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 104 430 NOW U.S. Pat. No. 7 712 020 B2 filed on Mar. 22 2002 and entitled Transmitting secondary portions of a webpage as a voice response signal in response to a lack of response by a user and claims priority from U.S. provisional patent application 60 609 020 filed on Sep. 10 2004 and entitled Real Microbrowser Using Voice Internet Rendering Technology .

The present invention relates to a method for accessing the Internet and more particularly to accessing and navigating the Internet through the use of an audio interface e.g. via standard POTS plain old telephone service with a small display screen e.g. a PDA personal digital assistant or cellular telephone screen.

The number of Internet access methods has increased with the rapid growth of the Internet. World Wide Web WWW surfing has likewise increased in popularity. Surfing or Internet surfing is a term used by analogy to describe the ease with which a user can use the waves of information flowing around the Internet to find desired or useful information. The term surfing as used in this specification is intended to encompass all of the possible activities a user can participate in using the Internet. Beyond looking up a particular Internet resource or executing a search surfing as used herein is intended to include playing video games chatting with other users composing web pages reading email applying for an online mortgage trading stocks paying taxes to the Internal Revenue Service transferring funds via online banking purchasing concert or airline tickets etc. Various kinds of web browsers have been developed to facilitate Internet access and allow users to more easily surf the Internet. In a conventional web interface a web browser e.g. Netscape Navigator which is part of Netscape Communicator produced by Netscape Communications Corporation of Mountain View Calif. visually displays the contents of web pages and the user interacts with the browser visually via mouse clicking and keyboard commands. Thus web surfing using conventional web browsers requires a computer or some other an Internet access appliance such as a WB 2001 WebTV Plus Receiver produced by Mitsubishi Digital Electronics America Inc. of Irvine Calif.

Recently some web browsers have added a voice based web interface in a desktop environment. In such a system a user can verbally control the visual web browser and thus surf the Internet. The web data is read to the user by the browser. However this method of Internet access is not completely controllable by voice commands alone. Users typically must use a mouse or a keyboard to input commands and the browser only reads the parts of the web page selected using the mouse or the keyboard. In other words existing browsers that do allow some degree of voice control still must rely on the user and visual displays to operate. In addition these browsers require that the web data to be read aloud must be formatted in a specific way e.g. the shareware Talker Plug In written by Matt Pallakoff and produced by MVP Solutions Inc. of Mountain View Calif. can be used with Netscape Commerce Server and uses files formatted in accordance with a file format identified by the extension talk .

Some commercially available products e.g. Dragon Dictate from Dragon Systems Inc. of Newton Mass. can read a web page as displayed on a conventional browser in the standard web data format however the particular portion of the page to be read must be selected by the user either via mouse or voice commands. A critical limitation of these systems is that they require the user to visually examine the web data and make a selection before any web data to speech conversion can be made. This limitation also exists when using these systems to surf the web. The user needs to look at the browser and visually identify the desired Uniform Resource Locator URL or use a predetermined stored list of URLs and then select the desired URL by voice commands.

For reasons of increased mobility it would be more desirable to be able to access and surf the Internet without being required to visually perceive the web data. Furthermore it would be desirable to allow for audio only access to the Internet such that authors of web pages need not provide web data in specialized formats for audio playback. However the Internet is primarily a visual medium with information designed to be accessed visually i.e. by looking at it. Accordingly the information is displayed with visual access in mind resulting in use of columns tables frames color bolded text various font sizes variable positioning of text and images popup windows and so on. During observation the human brain processes such information and selects the content that the user is interested in reading. When such information is accessed by voice normally all of the associated text is extracted after filtering out graphics banners images HTML and XML tags and other unwanted nuances not useful to audio playback. Listening to such content may require much time and thereby lose the interest of the user. Also selecting part of the text or navigating within a large amount of text displayed for visual access in mind is very difficult.

What would be helpful is an appropriate way of rendering the Internet content such that a relatively small amount of text is produced quite suitable for audio playback for facilitating further navigation and selection of content while still accurately representing the source data i.e. the visual web page.

Additionally some further important issues relating to accessing the Internet by voice include inter and intra page navigation finding the correct as well as relevant contents on a linked page and assembling the right contents from a linked page.

The other popular method to access the Internet is to use a personal device like a PDA or a cell phone with small screen. However the page does not fit on the screen. The user needs to scroll the screen to determine what is on the page. This is a cumbersome time consuming process that does not always provide a good picture of what is on the website. When a cell phone with screen is used e.g. in WAP I mode and the like the contents need to be re written with WML CHTML or similar languages. This means that contents from the Internet cannot be displayed directly using current methods and hence does not provide a good solution. Besides when contents are re written with WML or similar languages many small pages need to be created as only small amount of contents can be displayed on a tiny screen. This also results too many choices and options especially when a page has a lot of content.

In accordance with the presently claimed invention viewing of Internet content is facilitated when accessing the Internet using devices with small form factor displays. Visual Internet content is selected and rendered to produce information in formats appropriate for viewing in small form factor displays. It should be noted that the terms Internet and web are intended to be interchangeable in that information accessed via the Internet can include information other than that found on the World Wide Web per se. 

In accordance with one embodiment of the presently claimed invention a method of facilitating access to the Internet involving vocal and aural navigation selection and rendering of Internet content includes the steps of 

In accordance with another embodiment of the presently claimed invention a method of accessing the Internet involving vocal and aural navigation selection and rendering of Internet content includes the steps of 

The present invention is preferably embodied as a computer program developed using an object oriented language that allows the modeling of complex systems with modular objects to create abstractions that are representative of real world physical objects and their interrelationships. However it will be readily understood by one of ordinary skill in the art that the subject invention can be implemented in many different ways using a wide range of programming techniques as well as general purpose hardware systems or dedicated controllers.

The present invention is used in accessing the Internet using only voice and audio instead of conventional visual inputs and displays. A POTS plain old telephone service can be used to access the Internet by calling an audio ISP Internet service provider . An audio ISP includes a conventional data ISP that is buffered by an apparatus capable of performing a selective translation function using artificial intelligence methods. This selective translation function can be performed by an apparatus called an Intelligent Agent IA as described in more detail below. The IA translates Internet data into spoken language as well as translate spoken data and commands into Internet web surfing commands.

An audio ISP uses a standard telephone POTS digital or analog cellular telephone PCS telephone satellite telephone etc. instead of a modem telephone line and a direct connection to a conventional data ISP. An audio ISP uses TAPI telephony application programming interface or a similar protocol to connect a standard telephone to a computer or other Internet appliance. The IA takes information from the caller in the form of voice commands accesses the Internet retrieves the desired information and reads it back to the caller using voice. Using voice input and output signals only the caller can surf the net by interacting with the IA. The IA eliminates the need for a conventional visual web browser.

Turning now to an intelligent agent IA allows a user via a standard telephone to communicate with the Internet through a conventional ISP . The IA receives voice input signals from the user via the telephone . One of ordinary skill in the art would recognize that any number of audio only based bi directional communication systems could be used in place of the standard telephone including digital or analog cellular telephones PCS telephones satellite telephones two way radios etc. The IA initiates an Internet session by providing a signal to a conventional ISP . The IA can connect to the conventional ISP using any number of well known methods including the use of dial up modems cable modems Digital Subscriber Lines Integrated Services Digital Networks T1 T3 lines Asynchronous Transfer Mode lines local area network. high speed bus etc. The conventional ISP generates an output signal to access the Internet as is known in the art. A web page from the Internet is sent to the IA via the conventional ISP . The IA interprets the contents of the web page and determines which parts of the web page that need to be converted from text to speech TTS text table to speech graphics to speech GTS or graphics to text to speech GTTTS using Optical Character Recognition OCR and then TTS . The IA then converts the selected parts of the page to speech and sends a signal containing the speech to the user via the telephone . The user via the telephone can continue to request other URLs. In addition the user can interact with web pages such as search engines to locate a desired URL. The IA repeats the process of getting the new web page and sending back an audio only version to the user via the telephone using for example a standard telephone line.

The IA is configurable to provide a user selectable level of detail in the audio only version of a retrieved web page. Thus for example a web page containing a list of matching URLs generated by a search engine in response to a query could be read to the user in complete detail or in summary form.

Referring now to the IA of is described. The IA provides an intelligent interface between the user on the telephone and the Internet . In one embodiment the IA includes a speech recognition engine SRE a text to speech conversion engine TTS an understanding unit UU that understands both the contents of the web page and the user s spoken voice and a transaction processing unit TPU . While these components of the IA are depicted as individual hardware circuits coupled together via a single bus one of ordinary skill in the art would understand that many different hardware architectures could be used and likewise the entire IA or parts of it could be implemented as software operable to run on a general purpose computer or even is another data processing device.

The TPU communicates with the user via the telephone and the Internet using signals and . The users telephone calls are answered by the answer phone unit APU which is preferably embodied as a telephone card or modem and is part of the TPU . The TPU communicates with the user via the telephone using for example the TAPI standard a protocol developed by Microsoft Corporation of Redmond Wash. that is used in connecting a telephone with a computer over a standard telephone line. In one embodiment the TPU communicates with the Internet via the conventional data ISP using a modem and a telephone line a cable modem and a cable line or an Ethernet connection as is known in the art. Thus the IA integrates an audio ISP with conventional data ISP using a modem or Ethernet connection. This form of Intelligent Agent operates as a true voice browser in that ordinary Internet content can be accessed and rendered into audio form for reading back to the user as opposed to a conventional voice browser that can only read back content which has been originally written or rewritten in some form of voice enabled language such as Voice Extensible Markup Language VXML .

The UU is preferably implemented as a programmed computer processor including the normally associated memory and interface ports as is well known in the art. The UU is operative to determine what part of a web page is graphics what part is a dynamic advertisement what part is an interactive program which text is a link to a URL etc. and makes decisions accordingly. The UU is also equipped with means to understand a user s commands. The UU uses a language processing engine LPE to interpret multiple words received from the user. The UU uses an artificial intelligence AI unit that includes one or more expert systems probabilistic reasoning systems neural networks fuzzy logic systems genetic algorithm systems and combinations of these systems and other systems based on other AI technologies e.g. soft computing systems . In order to understand the users commands the UU uses the SRE to convert users commands to text. Before sending the web page text to the user via the telephone the UU selectively converts text to speech using the TTS unit . The UU allows the user to interact with Internet web pages by creating a complete audio representation of the web pages. Thus if a web page includes a dynamic program such as a Java program to calculate a mortgage payment for example the UU would execute the program within the IA and describe the display that would have been generated by a conventional visual browser. The IA can also use the UU to identify and interpret audio formatted data including audio hypertext mark up language HTML tags.

The UU also includes a client emulation unit CEU that allows the UU to execute web client type programs such as Java and Java script programs that would normally execute on a user s client computer. The CEU can spawn a virtual machine e.g. a Microsoft Windows NT window execute the client program to generate the associated displays and pass the display data to the UU to be translated and relayed to the user as described above. In this way users are able to execute and interact with web pages that include executable programs.

Turning now to a flow chart depicting an example audio only web browsing transaction using the systems illustrated in and is described. In steps S and S a user s telephone call to the IA is answered by the APU within the TPU as depicted in . After checking the user s identification and password in step S the TPU asks the user for a URL to access in step S. A connection to the conventional ISP is then created in step S using the TPU . After accessing the Internet and receiving the web page in step S the web page is interpreted by the UU in step S. In step S the UU speaks out the appropriate text of the web page to the user via the telephone . Processing steps S through S are repeated until the user discontinues selecting links to new URLs in decision step S and stops requesting additional URLs in decision step S. At that point the TPU terminates the connections to both the telephone and the Internet .

In one embodiment the IA is implemented in software and executed on a server computer. It is important to note that a user does not need a conventional visual browser because the IA effectively provides an audio ISP. However the audio ISP can be implemented using a conventional visual web browser in conjunction with the IA . Additionally it should be understood that the IA and ISP can reside on the same computer. Alternatively an audio ISP can use other means of accessing and retrieving web pages such as the Win32 Internet Winlnet Application Programming Interface API as developed by Microsoft Corporation. One of ordinary skill in the art would further understand that the IA can also be used to access manage compose and send email. In other words a user can send or receive email as well as perform other tasks such as searching on the Internet using voice only working through the IA . Thus a user can surf the web and can exploit all of the capabilities of the Internet simply through human voice commands and computer generated voice responses instead of using a visual browser running on a computer or other Internet appliance.

Rendering information that is visual in nature to an audio format is difficult. For information displayed visually it is the brain of the user that quickly selects and correctly processes the information. Visual processing is inherently parallel while audio processing is inherently serial. Thus the content to be provided in audio form needs to be precise and short. It is not sufficient to simply parse the content from HTML or XML to text and then to audio. Determining and filtering unnecessary text is important for audio rendering. Different web sites uses different styles in displaying the visual information. To develop rules that will handle all possible cases of visual display style and still provide good audio content is very challenging.

Referring to rendering relevant information from a linked page is also difficult especially when the link label in the calling page does not match the label in the called page. For example if the calling page has a link label of Clinton visited Vietnam and the called page has a label of Clinton visited Vietnam then the problem is simple inasmuch as a good match exists between the labels in the calling page and called page . However if the called page has a label like US President visited Vietnam then it is more difficult to match the labels and hence the contents of the linked pages . A more difficult case is when the called page has a label of President was in a country which was in war with US since in this case there are no matching words. An even more difficult case would be where the called page has two or more labels with similar meaning.

Providing a voice portal that can convey a reasonable representation of Internet content presents many challenges. Navigation and selection by voice can be attempted in many ways. If a voice menu based approach is used the number of menus and steps to follow will generally be so large as to be impractical. If the content is searched in response to questions by the user the number of possible questions would also be so large as to be impractical. Plus many problems would exist concerning voice recognition due to the large vocabulary needed and a need for an intelligent database that can be reliably accessed for retrieving the correct information.

For purposes of the present invention various algorithms are used by the Intelligent Agent IA to do rendering navigation and selection of the desired content. The subject algorithms use the information already available on the visual web pages including elements such as columns tables frames colors bolded text font sizes positioning and popup windows. As discussed in more detail below page highlights that provide important information or highlights of the accessed page corresponding to the URL are used. A small number of such highlights e.g. three are read at a time with users given the opportunity to select any one of the highlights or topics at a time. Once a highlight has been selected the content associated with that highlight is read to the user. An assumption behind this is that the related content exists and is somewhere in either the current page or a linked page perhaps a level or few down.

One example is where the related content is on the same page as the selected highlight. In that case the Intelligent Agent IA reads the selected content from the current page discussed in more detail below .

Another example is where the selected highlight is a link. In that case the Intelligent Agent IA accesses the linked page to find the relevant content and read it to the user discussed in more detail below .

Still another example is where multiple related content exists on the linked page. In that case the Intelligent Agent IA provides for fine tuning the selection after which the selected content is read to the user discussed in more detail below .

Yet another example is where multiple related content exists on the linked page but none of it can be easily identified and selected. In that case the Intelligent Agent IA either provides such related content as next level highlights or reads them to the user in some logical order based on content density or semantic matching discussed in more detail below .

Page highlights are determined using techniques similar to those that one would use to visually find a highlight on a page by looking at the page contents. Thus it is based on page elements such as without limitation font sizes links colors sizes of the content language understanding and so on. The Intelligent Agent IA examines the HTML and or XML tags and such page elements and determines the highlights. Further techniques are used to determine which highlights are more important and hence should be read to the user first. One example of a basic algorithm to determine highlights is as follows 

It will be understood that variations of these techniques are possible. For example flashing content may be treated with the highest instead of second highest priority. The goal is to use a technique that closely represents how a human user would select highlights when examining a visual web site. Also if desired banner advertisements can be retained as options for selection by the user.

Referring to one more specific example of how highlights can be selected in accordance with the presently claimed invention will be discussed with reference also to which contain the source code for the web page as depicted in . The contents labeled Consumers Businesses and Latest News have the largest font size. But these contents are GIF Graphics Interchange Format images not pure text. Also the contents associated with Consumer are part of a GIF image and are not pure text. Hence this would not generally be selected as a highlight in normal operation. However if the user wished to use it as a highlight it can be made to do so. The link labeled 11 08 01 Internet Speech Signs . . . has the largest number of words and hence is selected as highlight 1. The next highlight highlight 2 is 3 11 02 TATA Consulting Services . . . is a link with the second largest number of words. The third highlight is 11 29 01 Q COMM . . . is a link with nine words. Instead of using the number of words the number of characters might be more appropriate in some cases such as where the content is in Chinese Japanese or Korean.

The next set of highlights can be selected using a technique similar to that as outlined above. Clearly the highlight identification techniques discussed herein provide important information in a logical manner that a user would normally use when observing a web page visually. Also provided are good navigation tools to access the next page for obtaining only relevant contents from the linked page discussed in more detail below . Thus such techniques render information from a visual web page into an audio format that is concise and pleasant for listening by the user.

Apart from using highlights rendering can also be done by providing key words of a page and then using queries. In general queries should include one or more of the key words. Queries can be a simple sentence or just a word or a few words. Using the word matching and content and link density analyses discussed in more detail below with the key words appropriate related content can be selected.

The user may already know a few key words associated with a particular web site and may simply try using such key words without listening to any of the key words read from the page. Alternatively a simple key word may not be found in a page but a user still can say other word s as part of the query and if there is a match the relevant content can then be read out. If some confusion arises e.g. multiple matches the Intelligent Agent IA will ask the user more questions to minimize ambiguity and improve selection of the relevant content. If there is no match for the word s asked semantic analysis and language understanding can be used to find and select relevant contents. For example the user may say U.S President but the page may not contain this phrase or term. Instead the page may have the name of one U.S President e.g. Clinton and so the language understanding unit will match this with the query and will read back the content associated with this. If the page contains Clinton in multiple non associated paragraphs e.g. not next to each other or under separate topics the Intelligent Agent IA will read the first sentence of each topic and ask the user which content he or she would like to hear.

Depending on the level of complexity related contents are selected based on a variety of approaches that include parsing and word matching analysis of content density and analysis of link density. For parsing and word matching attempts are made to match words in the label of the highlight with words in the label of the highlights on the linked page. After a match is found the content associated with the match is selected. Association can be based without limitation on frames tables paragraphs etc. If multiple associations are found then the most important association is selected first. Importance of association can be determined based upon semantic meaning language understanding and processing or simpler elements such as paragraph sizes. To save on the amount of computation needed matching for all words in a sentence is not usually necessary. The relevant contents can often be found after matching a few words since the page may have only one instance of the selected words in the desired sequence. If similar sequences of words are found more than once contents can be read to the user based upon the priority as determined by the size of the paragraphs associated with such matches.

If no word matches are found then the page is tested for content density and link density. If the content density is high as compared to the link density a key body portion of the content is identified and selected. Key body portions can be identified without limitation by length of contents font sizes colors tables frames etc. Conversely if the link density is high as compared to the content density then the highlight of the page is determined and presented so that user can link down to the next level to find the desired content.

Content density is determined by counting the total number of words or letters or characters as appropriate e.g. for Chinese or Japanese language pages without considering links divided by the total number of words or letters or characters while considering both links and non links.

Link density is determined by either counting the total number of words or letters or characters as appropriate e.g. for Chinese or Japanese language pages in the links or counting the total number of links and dividing by the total number of words or letters or characters while considering both links and non links.

If after performing the foregoing good content is still not found more computation intensive approaches e.g. semantic analysis language processing or understanding can be used to find more relevant content. These approaches are based upon semantic analysis language processing and understanding using context information. Learning algorithms can be used to improve the semantic analysis and language understanding. With much improved language understanding it will also be possible to make a summary of long paragraphs or contents. In such cases the key concept or statements in the first and sometimes the second and last paragraphs are noted. Contents with similar meaning either explicit or implicit are gathered and duplications are removed resulting in a summary. This is just an example. Other language understanding techniques based upon summary computations can also be used.

In the event that related content is still not found and the page is not a link rich page i.e. the density of links within the page is low the entire section or page can then simply be read to the user.

Referring to an example of the methodology used to perform the rendering of Internet content as discussed above can be charted as shown and explained as follows.

Following the initial accessing of a web page a determination is made as to whether any highlights exist on that page. As discussed above page elements such as text font sizes links colors amount of text and so on are examined to make this determination . If it is determined that no highlights exist all of the contents of the page are recited .

On the other hand if it is determined that highlights do exist selected highlights are recited . For example if a number of highlights exist the first three or four highlights can be recited to solicit feedback or commands from the user as to which highlight is to be selected for further processing. If no highlight is selected then additional highlights are recited for further selection opportunities for the user. When a highlight is selected then a determination is made as to whether the related content associated with the selected highlight is on the current web page. If not then the linked page identified by the selected highlight is accessed . Following this and also if the related content is on the current web page a determination is then made as to whether there are one or more word matches between the selected highlight and any portion of the related content.

If there is such a word match then a determination is made as to whether or not there are multiple word matches. If not then the selected contents are recited in order . On the other hand if there are multiple word matches then a determination is made as to the size of the contents associated with each word match. Once the respective sizes have been determined the matches are ordered according to the sizes of their associated contents. Following that the selected contents are recited in order .

However if the word match determination determines that there are no word matches then a determination is made as to whether the content density is high. In other words it is determined whether a significant amount of content exists that is related to the originally selected highlight. If the content density is high then a determination is made as to whether there are multiple related contents. If not then the selected contents are recited in order . However if it is determined that there are multiple related contents then a determination is made as to whether the contents are divisible into groups. If they are not divisible then the selected contents are recited in order . However if the contents are divisible into groups then a determination is made about the semantic matching with weighted scores assigned according to the amount and degree of such matching. Following that the contents are ordered according to the weighted scores following which the selected contents are recited in order .

If however the determination as to the content density finds that the content density is not high then a determination is made as to the link density. If the number of links is significant on the accessed web page then highlights from such web page are recited for soliciting a highlight selection from the user. Following that the foregoing steps are repeated as appropriate.

If however it is determined that the link density is not high then a determination is made as to whether the contents are divisible into groups. If the contents are not divisible into groups then a determination is made as to whether paragraphs exist in the content. If no paragraphs do exist then the selected contents are recited in order .

However if paragraphs do exist then summaries of the paragraphs are generated following which a semantic matching is performed upon the summaries. Then according to the semantic meaning of the contents such contents are placed into an appropriate order following which the selected contents are then recited in order .

If however the original determination finds that the contents are divisible into groups then a determination is made as to the semantic meaning with appropriate weighted scores assigned. Following that a determination is made as to whether such weighted scores are close in their respective values. If the values are not close then the contents are ordered according to their weighted scores and the selected contents are recited in order .

If however the weighted scores are close in values then a determination is made as to the density of the text for each group. Following that the contents are ordered according to their respective text densities. Finally those selected contents are then recited in order .

Based upon the foregoing discussion it will be recognized that all of the approaches and techniques discussed above are also applicable for languages other than English. Further the selected contents can be converted into other languages in real time. For example a web site written in English can be accessed by saying the name of the web site in Japanese and then listening to the selected content in Japanese by converting the English content into Japanese in real time.

A MicroBrowser is a browser that can access the Internet and either display any website content on a small screen or play it in audio or both at the same time. When displayed on a small screen the content fits the screen and can be scrolled automatically. The user does not need to scroll the screen to figure out what is on the website.

This new MicroBrowser would be a very good practical simple device to provide Internet in a most convenient way thus beneficially allowing any cell phone PDA Micro Reader or similar devices to more easily access the Internet.

The MicroBrowser technology is based on the subject invention of the aforementioned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 104 430 the rendering patent that renders contents from any existing website into precise short easily navigable and meaningful content when displayed on a tiny screen or is listened to in audio. This is achieved by utilizing an Intelligent Software Agent IA that can dynamically translate render existing web pages that are written in HTML XML WML or similar languages. The IA renders visual web information into meaningful text or audio. Rendering is achieved by using Page Highlights using a method to find and speak the key contents on a page finding right as well as relevant contents on a linked page assembling the right contents from a linked page and providing easy navigation. These key steps are done using the information available in the visual web page itself and proper algorithms to use all such information including text contents color font size links paragraph and amount of text. Artificial Intelligence techniques are used in this automated rendering process. This is similar to how a human brain renders from a visual page by selecting the information of interest and then reading it.

It is very important that the user can very easily interact with the IA and access to the desired web contents. The IA ensures this by properly manipulating the information extracted from the web page. Key features for seamless navigation include Page Highlights Traversing Links Repeat Page Back Page Next Paragraph and Skip Paragraph etc. Contents are usually rendered into columns. This means that a column is chosen displayed and scrolled. A column can easily fit on a small screen as its width is short enough to easily view on the screen. If a column is too wide its width can automatically be adjusted to fit on the screen and scroll automatically. It is to be noted that a column of text may also include links. Besides instead of a column a set of highlights might be displayed if it is the home page or a link rich page to help rendering and navigation more convenient.

As mentioned above finding only relevant contents from the desired page significantly ease the navigation. For example the Opera browser which is a visual small browser and similar to a MicroBrowser to some extent displays a whole page linearly like a column at a time but starting from the top of the page and ending at the bottom of the page. Thus a user needs to go through the whole page. But the presently claimed invention avoids the need for linear display of all contents by automatically selecting the right and relevant contents from the page and then displaying that as a column at a time. This is depicted in .

Referring to the rendered text needs some additional steps for display on any display device. This is basically needed to easily fit to various standards e.g. WAP WML I Mode CHTML PDA HTML etc. including simply basic wrapping of pure text. Such wrapping is simple and can be automatically done reliably. These operations are preferably done at the server side so that any device can display the rendered text. These rendered contents which are usually done a column at a time are made to fit the whole screen and hence can be viewed very comfortably. The contents are scrolled automatically with a speed that user can choose so that it can be viewed or heard at ease. If a rendered content is not a column but a whole page it is still wrapped in a manner to display on the full screen like a column and scrolled automatically so that user can still view or hear at ease.

For ease of rendering the forms and image video are rendered separately e.g. a user can press a key to choose available forms on a page. If so only the forms will be provided as Highlights and user would be able to choose and fill a particular form. The same applies for images on the same page. The user can choose either to view the rendered text or view just the image video. While text and images can be combined at the same time this would be similar to displaying the whole page on a tiny screen. Forms images and video can be rendered easily using the corresponding uniquely identifiable tags.

It is important to note that to really provide all Internet contents Language Translation is essential as 80 of the Internet content today is in English. So people from many non English speaking countries are left out from major parts of the Internet. Here again automation plays an important role. The IA may include a language translation engine that dynamically translates web contents from one language into another in real time. Thus when a Chinese speaking person asks to surf an English website in Chinese the Intelligent Agent would access the English website extract the content of the website and translate it on the fly in Chinese and read or display it back to the user in Chinese.

While the method and apparatus of the present invention has been described in terms of its presently preferred and alternate embodiments those skilled in the art will recognize that the present invention may be practiced with modification and alteration within the spirit and scope of the appended claims. The specifications and drawings are accordingly to be regarded in an illustrative rather than a restrictive sense. Further even though only certain embodiments have been described in detail those having ordinary skill in the art will certainly understand that many modifications are possible without departing from the teachings thereof. All such modifications are intended to be encompassed within the following claims.

