---

title: System and method for accessing ferrous surfaces normally accessible only with special effort
abstract: A system incorporating a robot to inspect ferrous surfaces. Preferably, the robot is an articulated device having a tractor module for motive power and steering, a power module for electrical power and communications and additional motive power, and a third module for cleaning and inspection. The robot uses sensors and generates and transmits signals to a computer through a tether and receives direction from an operator via the computer and tether. The computer continuously monitors the location of the robot and supports the robot during deployment. In a specific application, the robot travels the interior of a tank on a set of magnetized wheels. Prior to inspection, the tank surface is cleaned of deposits by rotary cutters and rotary brushes on the third module. The robot obtains thickness measurements via onboard ultrasonic transducers that contact the cleaned surface. A method for implementing inspection of ferrous surfaces is also described.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07296488&OS=07296488&RS=07296488
owner: United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07296488
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050405
---
Under paragraph 1 a of Executive Order 10096 the conditions under which this invention was made entitle the Government of the United States as represented by the Secretary of the Army to an undivided interest in any patent granted thereon by the United States. This invention was made in part under United States Army Construction Engineering Research Laboratory Contracts numbered DACA88 93 C 0008 and DACA88 94 C 0024. This and related patents are available for licensing. Please contact Bea Shahin at 217 373 7234 or Phillip Stewart at 601 634 4113.

Under 35 U.S.C 121 this application claims the benefit of prior co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 553 613 now abandoned Apparatus That Accesses a Ferrous Surface That Is Inconvenient to Access in Order to Measure and Assess the Condition Thereof by Hock et al. filed Apr. 20 2000 and is incorporated herein by reference.

In recent years many tanks used for the underground storage of liquids have been made of fiber reinforced synthetic resins and so will not rust or otherwise degrade over time. Traditionally storage tanks were made of steel thus these tanks can corrode to the point of perforation. Once corrosion has caused perforation tank contents leak into the ground and gradually leach into nearby underground aquifers. Replacement or repair of these tanks to correct the damage involves extensive effort and attendant expense. In the United States approximately 700 000 underground storage tanks are estimated to be in service. Most store petrochemicals. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency US EPA enforces regulations that protect against dangers inherent in defective underground storage tanks.

40 CFR 280 et seq. requires that new underground storage tanks USTs meet stringent standards and that all existing USTs be certified to be within specified tolerances for leak resistance integrity. Certification of existing tanks requires that the tanks in current service be inspected to determine whether they meet the applicable federal standard. Traditional methods for inspection of USTs require access into the tank by a worker to visually assess the surface. For a person to enter a UST sometimes a portion of the earth covering a tank must be excavated and the stored liquid removed. Excavation is laborious and even after the liquid removal potentially toxic residual fumes remain in the tank especially in tanks storing petrochemicals.

After an UST has been inspected and certified under 40 CFR 280 et seq. a cathodic protection system may be required to reduce subsequent tank corrosion extend tank life and comply with updated Federal standards.

One example of a remotely controllable self propelled vehicle for inspecting the interior of USTs is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 435 405 to Schempf et al. The 405 patent describes a mobile vehicle having endless drive tracks that are selectively magnetically actuated during travel on the inner surfaces of a UST. As its endless drive tracks are driven in one direction a clutch is intermittently engaged to cause a hollow shaft to rotate to intermittently activate a magnetic circuit. The vehicle is capable of climbing a vertical wall and traveling in an inverted orientation in a ferrous structure by utilization of its magnetic tracks. It is able to enter and operate in a tank that is filled with liquid and carries a camera and an ultrasonic tester. The vehicle has its basic components enclosed in a hermetically sealed and pressurized compartments to prevent explosion of the stored liquid and to keep the liquid from seeping into the electrical and mechanical parts. It is able to communicate signals indicative of its findings to an external computer.

The 405 vehicle is equipped with acoustic means facilitating navigation within an enclosed structure containing a liquid. Calibration of the navigational system is necessary when operating in multiple fluid types since sound travels at different speeds in materials of different densities. While ultrasonic transducers used by the 405 vehicle facilitate measurement of wall thickness without determining a fixed point of reference deployment of ultrasonic sensors alone to measure thickness to assess corrosive condition may be unreliable in an underground storage tank environment. Particular frequency readings may be affected by causes unrelated to wall thickness. For example readings may be compromised by equipment operator produced sounds or vehicles traveling nearby. Another source of error may be unknown amounts of corrosive buildup on the tank surface. The 405 vehicle incorporates no means to remove accumulated rust or sediment before measuring wall thickness. Thus a need exists for a mobile device to travel within a liquid filled tank to measure and report actual tank wall thickness by performing the necessary tasks for making reliable measurements to include removing any corrosive buildup prior to measurement.

Further a need exists for the remote inspection of ferrous structures other than underground storage tanks. These other structures include bridges building frames utility towers and the like. Select embodiments of the present invention address such applications.

In select embodiments of the present invention a system facilitates access to ferrous surfaces of a structure for purposes such as inspection thereof. In select embodiments of the present invention the system comprises one or more three section conveyances having a long axis about which the sections of the conveyance move the three sections connected in line along the long axis. In select embodiments of the present invention the conveyance is of a size suitable for deployment upon ferrous surfaces without either modifying the structure or expanding access to the structure. The front section steers the conveyance by turning in only a first plane with respect to the middle section. The rear section is able to turn in only a second plane the second plane being as much as fully perpendicular to the first plane in which the conveyance was being steered by the first section.

In select embodiments of the present invention the front section incorporates a first part of a first connection assembly for connection to the middle section one or more magnetic wheeled axle assemblies comprising polar member wheels and annular permanent magnets and one or more pivotable lever arms. The front section steers and transfers part of the power to propel the conveyance.

In select embodiments of the present invention the middle section incorporates one or more magnetic wheeled axle assemblies comprising polar member wheels and annular permanent magnets. In select embodiments of the present invention the middle section incorporates a second part of the first connection assembly for connection to the front section a first part of a second connection assembly for connection to the rear section and one or more motors incorporating interoperable connections to one or more devices in each of the front middle and rear sections and one or more push rods.

In select embodiments of the present invention the rear section incorporates a second part of the second connection assembly for connection to the middle section and one or more abrading devices. In select embodiments of the present invention the rear section may articulate to permit changing the plane of operation of the conveyance only if each of the front middle and rear sections are approximately aligned along the centerline of the long axis of the conveyance.

In select embodiments of the present invention the conveyance may move to a surface of operation in a plane different from the plane of the surface of current operation only in a forward direction such that the front section is moved to a new surface of operation prior to the middle and rear sections.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more tethers provide communication with the conveyance from external sources. In select embodiments of the present invention a tether incorporates means for distributing power means for distributing control signals and means for distributing fluids to the conveyance.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more control systems communicate with the means for distributing control signals part of which control system is remote from the conveyance and communicating with the conveyance via the means for distributing control signals. The control system communicates with one or more power sources external to the conveyance the power sources energizing the motors used in the conveyance and one or more sensors incorporated in the conveyance to facilitate at least navigation and inspection functions.

In select embodiments of the present invention the conveyance may move onto a surface in a different plane only when the front section is moving in a forward direction.

In select embodiments of the present invention the conveyance responds to input from one or more first contact switches communicating with a first pair of sensors located on the front of the front section the sensors mounted on a first telescoping mount that is parallel to the front side of the front section the mount compressing equally along its length upon contact with a surface that is approximately perpendicular to the direction of operation of the conveyance the compression activating one or more first contact switches.

In select embodiments of the present invention a second pair of sensors is mounted on a second telescoping mount that is parallel to the back of the rear section the mount compressing upon contact in a manner similar to the front mount the compression activating one or more second contact switches such that activating a second contact switch alerts the conveyance to the need to alter course.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more of the motors is a reversible servomotor and one or more of the reversible servomotors incorporates one or more odometric encoders.

In select embodiments of the present invention the abrading device is selected from the group consisting of rotatable brushes rotatable cutting wheels scrapers and combinations thereof such that the rotatable brushes and rotatable cutting wheels are powered by one or more motors. In select embodiments of the present invention scrapers are employed in pairs mounted adjacent the outer circumference of each of the polar member wheels such that the pairs of scrapers serve to remove debris that accumulates on the polar member wheels. In select embodiments of the present invention a first scraper in the pair is mounted to remove debris when the conveyance is moving in a first direction and a second scraper in the pair is mounted to remove debris when the conveyance is moving in a direction opposite to the first direction.

In select embodiments of the present invention the abrading device comprises one or more first rotatable cylindrical brush coaxially mounted on the rear section to be approximately parallel to and approximately the same width as the wheeled axle assemblies. In select embodiments of the present invention the abrading device comprise one or more first rotatable cylindrical cutting wheels coaxially mounted on the rear section to be approximately parallel to and approximately the same width as the wheeled axle assemblies such that the first cutting wheel rotates in the direction of movement of the conveyance and is protected by a unidirectional clutch. In select embodiments of the present invention the abrading device comprises one or more cooperating pairs of abrading devices each pair comprising a cylindrical rotatable brush and a cylindrical rotatable cutting wheel the pair coaxially mounted across the width of the rear section so as to be parallel to the plane of operation of the conveyance and approximately the same width as the wheeled axle assemblies.

In select embodiments of the present invention the abrading device comprises a first and second cooperating pair the first brush and first cutting wheel of the first pair rotating upon the conveyance moving in a first direction such that the first rotating brush rotates counter to the rotation of the first cutting wheel. The second rotating brush and second cutting wheel of the second pair are rotated upon the conveyance moving in a second direction opposite to the first direction the second rotating brush rotating counter to the second cutting wheel.

In select embodiments of the present invention each magnetic wheeled axle assemblies comprises three or more polar member wheels of a first diameter coaxially mounted parallel one to the other on each of the wheeled axle assemblies and two or more annular permanent magnets of a second diameter smaller than the first diameter such that each magnet is mounted coaxially so as to separate each of the polar member wheels from another of the polar member wheels and the magnets closest to each other are oriented with opposing polarities. In select embodiments of the present invention one or more polar member wheels incorporate grooves across the width of the outer circumference of the polar member wheel the grooves enhancing traction of the polar member wheels.

In select embodiments of the present invention the conveyance is portable and configurable to insert into a riser of an underground tank. In select embodiments of the present invention the conveyance weighs less than about 18 Kg 40 lbs and is configurable to have a diameter perpendicular to the long axis thereof of less than about 10 cm 4.0 inches to permit insertion into the riser.

In select embodiments of the present invention the front section comprises one or more magnetic wheeled axle assemblies incorporating three or more polar member wheels and two or more magnets a first steering mechanism for orienting the front section in a single plane such that orienting the front section in a single plane also orients the conveyance one or more pivotally mounted first lever arms the first lever arm operating to lift the front section from a first surface upon which the first wheeled axle assembly is resting and to lower the first wheeled axle assembly to rest upon a surface that may be different from the first surface and first communicating assemblies that facilitate operation of the first wheeled axle assembly the first lever arm and the steering mechanism.

In select embodiments of the present invention the middle section comprises one or more second wheeled axle assemblies each having three or more polar member wheels and two or more magnets one or more motors one or more first push rods a first part of a maneuvering assembly second communicating assemblies communicating with some of the first communicating assemblies third communicating assemblies communicating with the second wheeled axle assembly and fourth communicating assemblies communicating with some parts of the middle and rear sections.

In select embodiments of the present invention the rear section comprises one or more abrading devices a second part of the maneuvering assembly the maneuvering assembly permitting the rear section to follow the middle section onto a surface in a plane of operation different from a plane of operation in which the rear section is operating one or more biasing mechanisms such that the biasing mechanisms permit the rear section to maintain firm contact with the surfaces regardless of orientation of the conveyance and fifth communicating assemblies communicating with some of the fourth communicating assemblies to facilitate operation of the abrading device.

In select embodiments of the present invention the tether comprises a flexible hollow conduit environmentally sealed at the juncture with the conveyance and suitable for holding material selected from the group consisting of cables tubes tubular nylon core tubular nylon filler coaxial cable extruded jackets braided jackets insulated copper wire wire hose pressurized hose and combinations thereof.

In select embodiments of the present invention the sensors are selected from the group consisting essentially of acoustic sensors ultrasonic transducers electrical sensors piezoresistive sensors attitude sensors contact sensors thickness sensors inclinometers mutually orthogonal inclinometers and combinations thereof. In select embodiments of the present invention one or more of the sensors is encapsulated in a block of dense tough and resilient material suitable for continuously contacting the surfaces while the conveyance is moving.

In select embodiments of the present invention the control system comprises one or more personal computers the computers interfaced to the conveyance via a tether such that the computers facilitate control of the conveyance positioning of the conveyance mapping of the surfaces assessment of the surfaces and defect identification and location.

In select embodiments of the present invention a supply of pressurized inert gas is interfaced to the conveyance via the tether.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more power sources supplies electrical power preferably DC power to the conveyance via the interface to the means for supplying power within the tether.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more transceivers are incorporated in one or more of the sections to enable communication between the conveyance and the computer.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more retrieval bars are affixed to the rear section of the conveyance to facilitate recovery of the conveyance from a confined location.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more sections are sealed at least partly and pressurized with an inert gas.

In select embodiments of the present invention a wheeled conveyance employs modules coupled end to end the wheeled conveyance facilitating inspection of ferrous surfaces indisposed to ready access. In select embodiments of the present invention the wheeled conveyance comprises one or more central modules for powering it one or more front modules for steering it in its current plane of operation the front module communicating with the central module and one or more rear modules that abrade the surface to permit onboard sensors to take measurements of the surface the rear module also adapted to facilitate maneuvering the wheeled conveyance onto a plane of operation different from a current plane of operation the rear module communicating with the central module.

In select embodiments of the present invention the front module comprises one or more first wheeled axle assemblies having a first two or more polar member wheels of a first diameter the first polar member wheels comprising a magnetically transmissive material and one or more permanent magnets of a second diameter smaller than the first diameter each magnet coaxially mounted between a pair of the first polar member wheels such that if more than one magnet is employed each magnet is mounted on the first wheeled axle assembly so as to be oriented with polarity opposing that of a nearest mounted one of the magnets a first steering mechanism to orient the front module in the current plane of operation only such that orienting the front module orients the wheeled conveyance one or more pivotally mounted first lever arms such that the first lever arm operates on the front module to lift and lower the front module and first communicating assemblies communicating with a portion of the central module to facilitate operation of the first wheeled axle assembly the first lever arm and the steering mechanism.

In select embodiments of the present invention the central module comprises one or more second wheeled axle assemblies having a second two or more polar member wheels of a first diameter the second polar member wheels comprising a magnetically transmissive material and one or more permanent magnets each magnet coaxially mounted between a pair of the second polar member wheels such that if more than one magnet is employed each magnet is mounted on the wheeled axle assembly so as to be oriented with polarity opposing that of a nearest mounted one of the magnets one or more motors preferably reversing servomotors one or more first push rods second communicating assemblies communicating with the first communicating assemblies to facilitate operation of the first wheeled axle assembly the first lever arm and the steering mechanism third communicating assemblies communicating with the second wheeled axle assembly to facilitate operation thereof and fourth communicating assemblies communicating with the rear module.

In select embodiments of the present invention the rear module comprises one or more abrading devices one or more maneuvering assemblies such that the maneuvering assembly permits the rear module to follow the central module onto a surface in a plane of operation different from the current plane of operation of the rear module such that the rear module may move onto a surface in a different plane only when the wheeled conveyance is moving in a forward direction one or more biasing mechanisms such that the biasing mechanisms permit the rear module to maintain firm contact with the surface regardless of orientation of the wheeled conveyance and fifth communicating assemblies communicating with the fourth communicating assemblies to facilitate operation of the abrading devices and the maneuvering mechanisms.

In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention one or more of the motors is a reversible servomotor preferably DC powered and one or more servomotor incorporates one or more odometric encoders.

In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention the abrading device is selected from the group consisting of rotatable brushes rotatable cutting wheels scrapers and combinations thereof. In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention the scrapers is employed in pairs mounted adjacent the outer circumference of each of the polar member wheels such that the pairs of scrapers serve to remove debris that accumulates on the polar member wheels and such that a first scraper in each pair is mounted to remove debris when the wheeled conveyance is moving in a first direction and a second scraper in each pair is mounted to remove debris when the wheeled conveyance is moving in a direction opposite to the first direction.

In select embodiments of the present invention the wheeled conveyance is provided with first and second magnetic wheeled axle assemblies each assembly comprising three polar member wheels of a first diameter coaxially mounted parallel one to the other on each of the first and second wheeled axle assemblies respectively and two annular magnets each of the two magnets coaxially mounted between a pair of polar member wheels on each of the first and second wheeled axle assemblies the magnets having a smaller diameter than the polar member wheels as mounted on the respective wheeled axle assemblies.

In select embodiments of the present invention the wheeled conveyance incorporates one or more polar member wheels that have grooves cut across the width of the outer circumference of the polar member wheel such that the grooves enhance traction of the polar member wheel.

In select embodiments of the present invention the wheeled conveyance is portable and configurable to insert into a riser of an underground tank. In select embodiments of the present invention the wheeled conveyance weighs less than about 18 Kg 40 lbs and is configurable to have a diameter perpendicular to its long axis of less than about 10 cm 4.0 inches to permit insertion into the riser.

In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention the abrading device comprises one or more rotatable cylindrical brushes coaxially mounted on the rear module to be approximately parallel to and approximately the same width as the wheeled axle assembly of the rear module. In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention the abrading device comprises one or more rotatable cylindrical cutting wheels coaxially mounted on the rear module to be approximately parallel to and approximately the same width as the wheeled axle assembly of the rear module such that the cutting wheel rotates in the direction of movement of the wheeled conveyance and is protected by a unidirectional clutch. In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention the abrading device comprises one or more cylindrical rotatable brushes and one or more cylindrical rotatable cutting wheels such that the brushes and cutting wheels are coaxially mounted across the width of the rear module perpendicular to the long axis and parallel to the plane of operation of the wheeled conveyance such that each brush and cutting wheel is approximately the same width as the wheeled axle assembly of the rear module.

In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention the abrading device comprises a first and second rotating brush and a first and second cutting wheel such that the first rotating brush and the first cutting wheel are rotated upon the wheeled conveyance moving in a first direction the first rotating brush rotated counter to the rotation direction of the first cutting wheel and the second rotating brush and the second cutting wheel are rotated upon the wheeled conveyance moving in a second direction opposite to the first direction the second rotating brush rotated counter to the rotation direction of the second cutting wheel.

In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention the sensors are selected from the group consisting essentially of acoustic sensors ultrasonic transducers electrical sensors piezoresistive sensors attitude sensors contact sensors thickness sensors inclinometers mutually orthogonal inclinometers and combinations thereof such that one or more of the sensors is encapsulated in a block of dense tough and resilient material suitable for continuously contacting the surface upon which the wheeled conveyance is moving.

In select embodiments of the wheeled conveyance of the present invention parts of one or more of the modules are sealed and pressurized with an inert gas.

In select embodiments of the present invention a method is provided for inspecting an interior surface of a ferrous tank. The method comprises deploying into the tank a remotely controllable robotic vehicle employing magnetic wheeled assemblies controlling the robotic vehicle to navigate along a selected linear path to establish the orientation and position of the robotic vehicle providing a graphical representation of the interior surface determining the orientation and position of the robotic vehicle controlling the robotic vehicle to navigate a pattern that covers a major portion of the interior surface preferably all of the surface directing the robotic vehicle to employ one or more first sensors to measure the thickness of the tank at select intervals in the pattern receiving signals indicative of the thickness measurements from the robotic vehicle identifying one or more instantaneous locations of the robotic vehicle such that the locations may be displayed on the graphical representation comparing the signals with a predetermined thickness standard and recording the position of the signals that indicate regions of the surface to be out of standard thickness such that the regions may be displayed on the graphical representation.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method of controlling the robotic vehicle to navigate the pattern comprises first directing the robotic vehicle to navigate along a line on a cylindrical surface of the tank the cylindrical surface being parallel to the long axis of the tank until the robotic vehicle first contacts a surface not parallel to the cylindrical surface determining whether the first contacted surface is a first end plate of the tank if the first contacted surface is not a first end plate directing the robotic vehicle to circumvent the first contacted surface and further like contacted surfaces that are not a first end plate and if a subsequent contacted surface or the first contacted surface is the first end plate directing the robotic vehicle to reverse direction by implementing a small angular difference from the prior line of travel of the robotic vehicle repeating the above navigation process until the entire cylindrical surface has been navigated causing the robotic vehicle to transfer to a first end plate directing the robotic vehicle to navigate along a line through the center of the first end plate until the robotic vehicle first contacts a first surface not parallel to the first end plate determining whether the first contacted surface not parallel to the first end plate is the cylindrical surface if the first contacted surface is not the cylindrical surface directing the robotic vehicle to circumvent the first contacted surface not parallel to the first end plate and further like contacted surfaces that are not the cylindrical surface if a subsequent contacted surface or a first contacted surface not parallel to the first end plate is the cylindrical surface directing the robotic vehicle to reverse direction by implementing a small angular difference from the prior line of travel of the robotic vehicle repeating the navigation process until the entire first end plate surface has been navigated causing the robotic vehicle to transfer to the cylindrical surface directing the robotic vehicle to navigate the cylindrical surface now known as to configuration until the robotic vehicle contacts the second end plate causing the robotic vehicle to transfer to the second end plate directing the robotic vehicle to navigate along a line through the center of the second end plate until the robotic vehicle first contacts a first surface not parallel to the second end plate determining whether the first contacted surface not parallel to the second end plate is the cylindrical surface if the first contacted surface is not the cylindrical surface directing the robotic vehicle to circumvent the first contacted surface not parallel to the second end plate and further like contacted surfaces that are not the cylindrical surface if a subsequent contacted surface or the first contacted surface not parallel to the second end plate is the cylindrical surface directing the robotic vehicle to reverse direction by implementing a small angular difference from the prior line of travel of the robotic vehicle and repeating the navigation process employed for the first end plate until the entire second end plate surface has been navigated.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method also permits dispensing a liquid the liquid serving as a couplant between sensors and the tank.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides one or more second sensors fixedly mounted to the front of the robotic vehicle the second sensor facilitating determination of the location of contacted surfaces in a plane different from that plane of the surface on which the robotic vehicle is traveling.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method of provides for a transition lever arm mounted to the robotic vehicle the lever arm operative for lifting the first magnetic wheeled axle assembly when the robotic vehicle is transitioning from a first surface to another surface angular thereto.

In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides for one or more scrapers mounted on the rear module and positioned so as to contact the surface to clean it.

In select embodiments of the present invention a method is provided for inspecting ferrous surfaces of a structure the surfaces otherwise inaccessible without employing procedures that are expensive time consuming dangerous or any combination thereof. The method comprises providing one or more inspection systems each comprising one or more articulated conveyances of a size suitable for accessing the surfaces without either modifying the structure or expanding access to the structure each conveyance incorporating three or more sections such that a front section turns in only a first plane with respect to a middle section and a rear section turns to only a second plane different from the first plane with respect to the middle section one or more tethers for providing power and other capacity to the conveyance such that the tether may also provide one or more sources of fluid one or more control systems part of the control system being remote from the conveyance and connected to the conveyance via connection means within the tether such that the control system communicates with one or more power sources external to the conveyance such that the power source may be used to power the conveyance and one or more sensors incorporated in each conveyance to facilitate semi autonomous operation. In select embodiments of the present invention the method provides for operating the above inspection system for a time period necessary to collect one or more parameters suitable to describe the condition of the surface being inspected.

Refer to . In select embodiments of the present invention to accommodate the need to traverse and inspect the interior surface of the UST the robotic vehicle is constructed in three pivotally connected and articulated modules each adapted for a specialized function. The lead or forward module hereafter identified as tractor is attached to and followed by a power module . The power module is connected to and followed by a cleaning and inspection module . In the robotic vehicle is shown in transition from the interior surface of a cylindrical wall upwards onto the interior surface of an end plate A. Travel of the robotic vehicle within the UST is enabled by use of motor driven magnetic wheeled axle assemblies as shown in .

Refer to showing the robotic vehicle in side elevation and top plan views respectively. As illustrated in the robotic vehicle may be deployed both vertically and horizontally. For example the cleaning and inspection module is designed to pivot in either an upward or downward direction only. The tractor module is designed to pivot only laterally to the left or right. Since the robotic vehicle is operative in various orientations e.g. horizontal mode with wheels facing down inverted horizontal mode with wheels facing up and vertical mode as occurs on the end plates A B relative movement of the robotic vehicle will be described from the perspective of the horizontal mode with wheels facing down unless otherwise noted. In the horizontal mode the horizontal plane is referred to as the X Z plane and its two mutually orthogonal vertical planes are the X Y and Z Y planes. Sealing of the housing of the robotic vehicle against leakage is accomplished by use of an RTV silicone compound between stationary parts and with O rings for sealing shafts that move through housing walls. Once the housing of the robotic vehicle is sealed a pressurized gas such as air or nitrogen is introduced to the interior of the housing to prevent seepage of liquid into the housing. The tractor module is flexibly assembled and connected to the power module by a vertical front pivot joint including a pin . This arrangement facilitates angular flexure between the tractor module and the power module only in the X Z plane. The cleaning and inspection module is assembled and connected to the power module by a horizontal rear pivot joint . The rear pivot joint enables angular flexure between the power module and the cleaning and inspection module only in the vertical planes X Y and Z Y.

Refer to illustrating the power module as constructed with a forward segment a middle segment and a rear segment . In select embodiments of the present invention electrically energized reversible motors and drive various functions in the robotic vehicle . shows the connections of these motors to tractor and cleaning and inspecting module . The middle segment contains the motor that generates and transmits drive power to the front magnetized wheeled axle assembly . Power is transmitted from the motor to the magnetized wheeled axle assembly by means of a drive shaft . In select embodiments of the present invention the drive shaft includes a telescoping universal joint not shown separately at its transition to a drive mechanism housed in the tractor module . The forward end of the shaft connects to a gear reducer see located in the tractor module . In select embodiments of the present invention the gear reducer drives the front magnetized wheeled axle assembly through the chain and the sprocket depicted in . In select embodiments of the present invention the motor see and other electric apparatus in the body of the robotic vehicle are powered at 24 volts DC. Use of DC power permits reversing the direction of drive without the added circuitry typically required with use of AC motors. In select embodiments of the present invention small reversible high speed electric motors are used in conjunction with worm and wheel type gear reducers not shown separately to conserve space. Typically in select embodiments of the present invention the worm and wheel type gear reducers are each immersed in an oil bath. In select embodiments of the present invention the electric motors that drive the robotic vehicle meet the design specification requirement of 30 lbf. of power per wheel based on a system force balance analysis.

Refer to . In select embodiments of the present invention a shaft is actuated to pivot the tractor module laterally about pin relative to the power module to accomplish steering. In select embodiments of the present invention the shaft is moved linearly by a linear actuator not shown separately formed by the lead screw motor . In select embodiments of the present invention the shaft is configured to pass to the front end of the power module and connect to the coupling on the tractor module thereby causing the tractor module to change its direction of travel.

The middle segment of the power module houses a reversible electric motor that supplies power through a worm and wheel gear reducer in the rear segment to the rear magnetized wheeled axle assembly . Via the reducer the rear magnetized wheeled axle assembly is caused to rotate at the same speed and in the same direction as the forward magnetized wheel axle assembly . An incremental encoder not shown separately having a digital output communicates with the rear wheel drive motor to obtain odometric data. In some applications of select embodiments of the present invention a degree of slippage between the magnetized wheel asemblies and the surface of operation may occur thus affecting the odometer reading. Thus position verification may be accomplished by an operator not shown separately or by a computer when the robotic vehicle contacts a known fixed object e.g. within the UST this may be an end wall A B. Thus the occurrence of slippage does not preclude maintaining reasonably accurate real time information regarding the position of the robotic vehicle . Another encoder not shown separately operable in a manner similar to that of the first encoder may communicate with the drive for the front magnetized wheeled axle assembly thereby improving reported positional accuracy.

Refer to . The motor drives a shaft that communicates with a gear reducer that drives a sprocket through a worm wheel not shown separately mounted on the pivot shaft . A chain connects the drive sprocket to drive the sprocket .

Refer to B C and . The sprocket is mounted to provide power to the rotary cutters A B and brushes A B of the cleaning and inspection module . The motor is housed in the forward segment for supplying linear power to the lead screw . The lead screw operates linearly to contact and move the push rod in turn causing the transition lever arm to pivot so as to lift the front end of the tractor module as depicted in . The lead screw is aligned with the push rod when the tractor module is aligned with the power module .

In summary the drive motors are the motor to drive the front magnetized wheeled axle assembly the motor to drive the rear magnetized wheeled axle assembly and the cutters A B and brushes A B of cleaning and inspection module the motor to drive the steering function of the tractor module and the motor to activate the lifting function of the transition lever arm and the rear push rod .

Refer to B C. The tractor module includes the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly that is driven by a two stage reduction drive. The front drive wheeled axle assembly is mounted to the tractor module far forward so as to protrude from the body of the tractor module in a forward direction of travel. The front drive wheeled axle assembly is also tucked within the substantially round body of the robotic vehicle to limit the cross sectional size thereof to enable entry through a riser as shown in . Typical risers have a diameter of four inches. As the front magnetized wheeled axle assembly moves along the surface of the UST loose particles of oxidized iron rust adhere to the contacting surfaces of the front magnetized wheeled axle assembly . Thus in select embodiments of the present invention a pair of scrapers A B preferably of a corrosion resistant material such as stainless steel are mounted on the body of the tractor module so that an edge of each presses against the cylindrical surface of the drive wheels A B of the front magnetic wheeled axle assembly dislodging particles that accumulate thereon. The scrapers A B are mounted to permit dislodging when the robotic vehicle is operating in either direction. As shown in the directional rod that connects to the coupling through the clevis operates to turn the tractor module in the plane of travel only. A shaft communicates linearly with the power module in a direction parallel to the long axis of the power module to cause the tractor module to pivot about the pivot joint . A coupling preferably formed with a slot that is substantially perpendicular to the long axis of the tractor module permits the shaft to move without restriction.

Refer to B C depicting a pair of contact sensors A B mounted on the front left and right front corners of the tractor module . Each contact sensor A B communicates with a contact switch not shown separately preferably digital that generates a signal in response to the leading outer surface of either contact sensor A B contacting something. The contact sensors A B are mounted on the telescoping supports configured to collapse into the tractor module upon a corresponding sensor A B contacting something. The degree of telescoping allows the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly to touch and magnetically grip a surface perpendicular to the surface on which the robotic vehicle is traveling prior to contact. Contact by both sensors A B simultaneously is interpreted by the computer as a contact with a perpendicular surface. Contact by only one of the sensors A B indicates a less than perpendicular relationship between robotic vehicle and the contacted surface. In select embodiments of the present invention maximum adhesive force for the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly is achieved by contact with the surface along a tangent across the face and parallel to the axis of the drive wheeled axle assembly . Thus it is preferred that the tractor module contacts the surface for transition e.g. transition from a cylindrical wall to and end plate A perpendicularly. With the initial data from the contact sensors A B as to the relative angle of contact of the tractor module correction is made through program control by the computer to achieve perpendicular approach. Attaining perpendicularity is accomplished by moving the robotic vehicle backwards from the contacted surface and making additional approaches to achieve approximately simultaneous contact by sensors A B.

Refer C. For the robotic vehicle to perform a transition from one surface to another approximately perpendicularly disposed it is necessary to first separate the drive wheeled axle assembly from the current surface of travel. Separation is accomplished by actuation of the transition lever arm pivotally mounted at the pivot . Alternate mechanisms such as a linearly actuated push rod also accomplish this function. The transition lever arm is L shaped with its upper end positioned adjacent the forward end of the push rod . As the lead screw pushes against the push rod the push rod moves left . The actuation of the push rod from its retracted position to its extended position forces the transition lever arm to pivot about the pin P counterclockwise as shown by the arrow K. The downward force of the transition lever arm lifts the front of the tractor module so as to separate the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly from the surface of the UST . When the push rod retracts the cam pivots back to its initial position with the aid of a biasing means such as a spring or the like. The push rod is slidingly mounted in bearings not shown separately in the wall of the tractor module and not physically connected to the lead screw . When the tractor module is at an angle to the power module as in the push rod is at a similar angle and not aligned with the lead screw . Thus it is necessary to put the tractor module and the power module in substantial alignment prior to actuating the transition lever arm . As seen in a solenoid actuated push rod is positioned to lift the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly in a manner similar to the way that the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly is lifted.

Refer to illustrating the axial configuration of the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly . The front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly is an assembly of five disk like members A B interspersed axially along a shaft . The outer polar members A B are located toward the ends of the shaft respectively and the inner polar member is centrally located along the shaft . The polar members A B are made of magnetically transmissive material not adapted to permanently retain significant magnetic properties such as a low carbon steel. Between each of the outer polar members A B and the inner polar member is an axially polar magnetic member each formed of a permanently magnetic material. In select embodiments of the present invention the axial magnetic members are formed of rare earth materials e.g. neodymium iron and oriented such that their poles are opposite to one another as illustrated in . In this arrangement magnetic flux M is radiated between magnetic members through polar members A B to establish a strong magnetic bond between the robotic vehicle and the ferrous surface upon which it operates. The shaft passes through the five members A B and mounts the sprocket to receive drive power from the chain . The rear drive wheeled axle assembly is constructed similarly.

Refer to . Due to the irregular interior surface of a typical UST and the frequent occurrence of lumps select embodiments of the present invention employ a tread pattern to improve traction of the magnetized drive wheeled axle assemblies . Multiple grooves are formed on the outer periphery of each polar member A B in a direction approximately parallel to the shaft . In one embodiment of the present invention there are six grooves uniformly dispersed around each polar member A B . In select embodiments of the present invention the grooves may be aligned one to another across the face of the three polar members A B although a non aligned pattern is also suitable.

Refer to B. Each polar member A B is formed with a relatively large diameter Dand each magnetic member with a relatively small diameter D. The pattern of magnetic flux M is shown schematically as dashed lines from each magnetic member through respective polar members A B to a ferrous surface such as the tank wall . This configuration enhances the flux pattern by causing it to intensify through the polar members A B . In addition the large diameter polar members A B protect the smaller diameter magnetic members from damage due to wear or impact.

Refer to B. With diameter Dof outer polar members A B and the inner polar member being substantially equal all polar members A B are in contact with the interior surfaces A B of the cylindrical UST in only two relative orientations of the robotic vehicle . One orientation occurs when operating on planar tank end plates A B and the other when operating circumferentially on the cylindrical wall . When the robotic vehicle operates along a path parallel to the long axis of the UST or on a path at an angle between a parallel axial path and a circumferential path the inner polar member does not contact the surface. The maximum air gap G is typically small between the inner polar member and the surface. Magnetic flux M travels across the gap to attract to a ferrous surface. For example in the case of the UST having a diameter of 2.4 meters 8 feet and the front drive polar members wheels A B having a diameter of 5 cm 2 inches and the length of the shaft 5.6 cm 2.2 inches the maximum air gap G between the periphery of the inner polar member and the tank wall is approximately 0.33 mm 0.013 inches . Larger diameter tanks have a proportionally smaller gap G. In select embodiments of the present invention the magnetized drive wheeled axle assemblies produce a combined attractive force of 207 lbf. This is sufficient to support a robotic vehicle of about 18 Kg 40 lbs .

Refer to B illustrating a robotic vehicle in assembled condition including three main modules and . The power module comprises a forward segment a middle segment and a rear segment . In select embodiments of the present invention each segment is built separately and assembled to the other segments so as to form the integrated power module .

Refer to illustrating the forward segment . In select embodiments of the present invention the forward segment contains an orientation sensor that comprises three mutually orthogonal piezoresistive inclinometers not shown separately . This type of inclinometer has a flexible beam typically silicon material supporting a mass at one end of each inclinometer. Each inclinometer is sensitive along one axis only. As the orientation of the robotic vehicle changes the mass shifts in relation to the fixed end of the beam causing the beam to bend. The silicon material changes in electrical resistance in proportion to strain providing a property that can be readily measured and converted to an orientation reading. By feedback and analysis of signals received from each of the X Y and Z inclinometers the computer determines the yaw pitch and roll orientation of the robotic vehicle . Similarly n select embodiments of the present invention the computer is able to detect a change in direction of the robotic vehicle as it travels the interior of the UST .

The transformation mathematics used to relate the inclinometer readings to angular orientation of the robotic vehicle simplify to the following 

In select embodiments of the present invention the computer uses the calculated information together with data from the odometric encoder in the motor to continuously track the position of the robotic vehicle .

The forward segment pivotally connects to the tractor module at a pivot frame with a pin . The pin is positioned by any conventional means such as snap rings not shown separately fitted in grooves A B at each end thereof.

Refer to illustrating the middle segment of the power module . The middle segment communicates with the computer via the tether and contains the motor for generating drive power to the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly . In addition the middle segment houses the motor for steering the robotic vehicle and the motor for actuating the transition lever arm . On assembly the middle segment is fastened to the forward segment and the rear segment by appropriate fastening means not shown separately to become the power module .

Refer to depicting the rear segment of the power module . The rear segment comprises the shaft that is connected at its driven end to the motor . The shaft mounts the worm gear reducer that in turn drives the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly through a set of sprockets and and chain . This permits the power module to operate in the same direction and at the same speed as the tractor module . Although the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly is driven by a first motor and the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly by a second motor the motors are controlled by the computer to operate at the same speed. In select embodiments of the present invention the motors are servomotors that enable maximum control of speed and direction. The scrapers A B are each mounted with an edge pressed in contact with the rear magnetized drive wheels not shown separately but of similar configuration to the polar members wheels A B of the front wheeled axle assembly to continuously remove rust particles from the peripheral surfaces thereof. The scrapers A B are oriented in opposite directions so as to accommodate forward and reverse rotation of the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly . A pivot shaft extends outwardly from each side of the segment for pivotally connecting the cleaning and inspection module .

The shaft mounts a first sprocket that drives a second sprocket via a first chain not numbered . The second sprocket is mounted coaxially with the worm gear that delivers power to a third sprocket via an intermediate co axial worm gear not shown separately behind the third sprocket . A second chain engages the third sprocket and drives a fourth sprocket to provide power to the power and cleaning module .

In select embodiments of the present invention the robotic vehicle includes a solenoid actuated push rod oriented horizontally and positioned above the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly in rear section . The push rod is operative to break the magnetic grip of the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly on the surface of the ferrous structure it is contacting.

Refer to and illustrating the tether connected to the robotic vehicle at the middle segment . The tether is formed as an assembly of cables and tubes adapted to perform several functions in communication with the robotic vehicle . A cross sectional view of the tether is shown in and a description and function for each of the components of the tether is listed in the following chart. The tubular core is used to provide a foundation about which to assemble the other components of the tether in a generally cylindrical shape.

In select embodiments of the present invention the cables and structural components of the tether are as listed in the table below 

In select embodiments of the present invention the tether is involved in the physical deployment into and retrieval of the robotic vehicle from the UST in supplying electric power to perform the motor drive operations the ultrasonic inspection operation and transmitting the orientation travel and communication signals and in transmitting signals from the robotic vehicle to the computer . In select embodiments of the present invention the robotic vehicle must drag a length of the tether through the UST at times involving support of its catenary weight as the robotic vehicle traverses the roof or end walls of the UST . The tether is typically 45 m. 150 ft. in length. Thus it is important to keep the weight of the tether at a minimum.

In select embodiments of the present invention the combination of the tractor module and the power module described above is operative for moving and controlling the movement of the robotic vehicle within the UST by implementation of signals from the computer .

Refer to . In select embodiments of the present invention the identification of defects in the walls of a UST is facilitated by the cleaning and inspection module . As described above the cleaning and inspection module is pivotally connected to the power module at the horizontal pivot pin with a first bar pivotally mounted on either side thereof. The rear portion of each bar is pivotally connected to module at a rear pivot shaft positioned toward the rear portion of cleaning and inspection module . The rear pivot shaft mounts the fourth sprocket and the third sprocket involved in the transmission of power for the cleaning and inspection module . A pair of telescoping pressurized struts mounted to the shaft at the back ends of the struts and to the power module at the front ends of the struts prevents the cleaning and inspection module from moving horizontally while limiting the degree to which the cleaning and inspection module can pivot vertically in relation to the power module . In select embodiments of the present invention the struts are of the telescoping cylinder type and are filled with nitrogen or other substantially inert gas. In select embodiments of the present invention a supply of pressurized gas not shown separately may be connected to the struts .

In select embodiments of the present invention as designed above the cleaning and inspection module is held in contact with the surface on which the robotic vehicle is traveling regardless of the orientation of the robotic vehicle . The stop mounted rigidly to the side of the cleaning and inspection module allows the forward end of the cleaning and inspection module to pivot down to a limited degree with respect to the first bars . The tension springs are assembled between the shaft and a selected anchor point on the housing of the cleaning and inspection module to bias the module in the counterclockwise direction in relation to an anchor point . This bias pressure in combination with the operation of the struts assures that the cleaning and inspection module stays in intimate contact with the surface regardless of the orientation of the robotic vehicle .

In select embodiments of the present invention the cleaning and inspection module includes devices for scraping residue off the surface to be inspected. Power is transmitted to the cleaning and inspection module from the third sprocket on the power module via the second chain that is connected at its rear end to the fourth sprocket . For the second chain to connect between the pivotally connected power and inspection and cleaning modules the chain engaging sprockets must be coaxial with the front and rear pivot points for the first bars . As illustrated in the left or front end of the first bars are assembled to the front pivot shaft that is positioned in the rear segment of the power module . In select embodiments of the present invention the fourth sprocket is commonly mounted with the fifth driving sprocket that is connected to the duplicate cutting wheels A B. The forward cutting wheel A and the rear cutting wheel B and duplicate rotary brushes A B are connected to the fifth sprocket through a third drive chain . The cutting wheels A B are formed with a series of substantially sharp edges E spaced around the diameter thereof and extending across their widths. The cutting wheels A B especially the sharp edges thereof are formed preferably of hardened steel or the like. The rotary brushes A B are formed with a series of flexible bristles spaced around the diameter thereof and extending across their widths. In select embodiments of the present invention the bristles of the brushes A B are of polymeric material. In select embodiments of the present invention the cutting wheels A B are mounted at the forward and rearmost ends of the cleaning and inspection module and the two rotary brushes A B are mounted therebetween. As illustrated in the cutting edges E of the forward cutting wheel A are angled to cut when the forward cutting wheel A rotates in the counterclockwise direction and the cutting edges E of the rear cutting wheel B are angled to cut in the clockwise direction. The fifth sprocket drives the cutting wheels A B and the rotary brushes A B via the third drive chain .

An idler sprocket is positioned substantially in the center of the third drive chain and is adapted for adjustment to provide chain tension as needed. The third drive chain is entrained in serpentine fashion around a series of sprockets not shown separately to cause the forward cutting wheel A to rotate in a first direction and the rotary brush A to rotate in an opposite direction. The same counter rotation occurs with the rear cutting wheel B and the rotary brush B. In select embodiments of the present invention the cutting wheels A B are rotated at a speed about three times faster than the speed of the drive wheeled axle assemblies to effectively remove deposits. In select embodiments of the present invention to assist the movement of the robotic vehicle the cutting wheels A B operate in the same rotational direction as the drive wheeled axle assemblies albeit faster.

If a cutting wheel rotating in a direction opposite to the direction of travel were to encounter an obstacle such as a weld seam a jam could occur. To avoid this type of jamming in select embodiments of the present invention each cutting wheel A B is driven by use of a unidirectional clutch not shown separately to enable rotation in the selected drive direction only. In select embodiments of the present invention a first unidirectional clutch mounted to the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly permits rotation thereof only in the counterclockwise direction and a second unidirectional clutch mounted to the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly permits rotation thereof only in the clockwise direction. When the robotic vehicle drives forward with the tractor module going first the forward cutting wheel A and both rotary brushes A B operate. When the robotic vehicle reverses i.e. with the tractor module trailing the motor for driving the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly and the motor for driving the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly and the cutting wheels A B are reversed and the rear cutting wheel B and both rotary brushes A B operate. By rotating the rotary brushes A B in the direction opposite to their adjacent respective cutting wheels A B the particles loosened by the cutting wheels A B are removed from the path of travel of the ultrasonic sensor unit.

In select embodiments of the present invention one or more ultrasonic transducers not shown separately are encapsulated in a block preferably formed of a dense tough and resilient material such as an ultra high molecular weight polyethylene resin. This block is positioned between forward rotary brush A and rear rotary brush B. The block is biased downwardly to maintain firm contact with the operating surface for transmitting its sonic signal directly to the surface without having to broach an intervening gap. When the UST is at least partially liquid filled a lubricant layer exists between the block and at least some of the tank s surface. In select embodiments of the present invention when the tank is empty ultrasonic transducer performance is enhanced and the wear on block is minimized via use of a lubricating couplant liquid transmitted through the tube in the tether . In select embodiments of the present invention the ultrasonic transducers are 2 10 MHz pulse echo transducers adapted for determining wall thickness when coupled with appropriate analytic computer programming therefor. In select embodiments of the present invention several 10 Mhz ultrasonic transducers are arrayed in a scan path width of about 2.5 cm. 1 inch . In select embodiments of the present invention ultrasonic data from the transducers are processed with a commercially available program such as that available from INFORMATRICS TESTPRO or the like. In select embodiments of the present invention the cutting wheels A B and rotary brushes A B operate either in forward or reverse travel of the robotic vehicle and engage the surface ahead of the transducers in the block . This ensures a reasonably clean surface for reliable measurements. In select embodiments of the present invention the ultrasonic transducers may make between approximately 30 and 100 measurements per second. At a speed of approximately 77 mm 3 inches per second measurements may be collected about every 0.77 2.6 mm 0.03 0.10 inches .

Refer to depicting a robotic vehicle as it progresses in sequential steps from a first surface of the cylindrical wall of an UST to a second surface of a wall or end plate A orthogonal thereto.

Assume the robotic vehicle is oriented substantially perpendicular to the surface to which it is transferring. Refer to . Contact sensor B and A not shown in contacts the end plate A of the UST . illustrates a second step in the transition of the robotic vehicle from the cylindrical wall to the end plate A in which the robotic vehicle continues to travel and press a leading outer surface of the contact sensors A B against end plate A whereby contact sensors A B are telescoped to contact the body of the tractor module . A signal generated by a contact switch not shown separately communicating with the contact sensors A B is transmitted to cause the transition lever arm to pivot downwardly as shown in . The transition lever arm is pivoted downwardly by movement of the linear actuator as described above. The transition lever arm lifts the forward end of the tractor module off the surface . The transition lever arm being connected at the location of the pin P C moves the robotic vehicle closer to the end plate A during its pivoting action so that the front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly efficiently makes magnetic contact with the end plate A. During this transition period the tractor module is precluded from moving laterally with respect to the other two modules . The connection between the cleaning and inspection module and the power module allows relative movement of these two modules in the vertical direction only as depicted in .

Refer to . The front magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly powers the front end of the robotic vehicle along the end plate A as the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly continues to drive on the cylindrical wall further assisting the robotic vehicle to climb up the end plate A. In changing its orientation from horizontal to upwardly angled the contact sensors A B disengage from the end plate A and the transition lever arm retracts within the housing of tractor module . The mid point in the transition of the robotic vehicle from the horizontal surface to the vertical surface A is illustrated in with the robotic vehicle forming a right angle between the power module and the cleaning and inspection module . To accommodate the transition between the horizontal surface and the vertical surface A the drive wheeled axle assemblies and are mounted on the robotic vehicle so that a respective forward and rearward portion of the peripheral surface of each wheeled axle assembly extends radially outward from the end of the respective modules . The rear push rod is positioned perpendicular to the horizontal surface . When the solenoid not shown separately of the push rod is energized the rear push rod extends to move the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly away from the horizontal surface facilitating the rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly to climb the end plate A.

Refer to depicting the robotic vehicle after the transition is completed from the horizontal surface to the end plate A. In select embodiments of the present invention the path for inspection of the end plates A B is preferred to follow a series of diametral lines each being angularly displaced from the previous one. Employing this pattern the entire surface of each of the end plates A B is inspected.

Refer to . Obstacles encountered within a storage tank include raised seams wave suppression plates and internal ribs. A D depict the robotic vehicle navigating an obstacle. In select embodiments of the present invention identification of an obstacle is based on a computer comparison of the known dimensions of an UST with the distance the robotic vehicle has traveled in a straight line since last contacting a perpendicular surface such as a wall. In the contact sensor B contacts the rib . As described above for transitioning to another plane of operation the transition lever is pivoted downwardly and lifts the front of the tractor module up as shown in . As the tractor proceeds forward the front magnetized wheeled axle assembly rolls up onto the rib and the transition lever arm retracts as shown in . As depicted in when the rear magnetized wheeled axle assembly pushes the robotic vehicle the front magnetized wheeled axel assembly is rolled completely over the rib and is able to roll on the horizontal surface again. The rear magnetized drive wheeled axle assembly continues to drive and to push the robotic vehicle until it hits the rib at which time the front drive wheeled axle assembly is able to assist in pulling the rear drive wheeled axle assembly over the rib . Normal driving resumes when both magnetized wheeled axle assemblies are again in contact with the horizontal surface as shown in even though the inspection and cleaning module is still being pulled over the rib .

Upon initial insertion of the robotic vehicle through the riser into an UST neither the position nor orientation of the robotic vehicle is known to the computer . Thus in select embodiments of the present invention the robotic vehicle is directed to maneuver through a series of preliminary runs for the purpose of initial orientation and position determination. The robotic vehicle travels first in an arbitrary straight line. Signals generated by its three mutually orthogonal on board inclinometers are monitored by the computer to determine the shape and slope of the path being traversed. The robotic vehicle is next directed to operate along a horizontal line. At one point a contact sensor A B on the tractor module contacts a surface approximately perpendicular to the surface on which the robotic vehicle is operating. The computer combines the contact data with stored data on the direction of travel of the robotic vehicle to establish position. Basic position and orientation information is now available for the robotic vehicle to begin inspecting the interior of the UST to evaluate its surface condition and transmit data for the computer to create a record of defects. In select embodiments of the present invention a preferred path is for the robotic vehicle to travel forward along a first straight line on the cylindrical surface of the wall until it contacts an end plate A B then reverse direction to travel backward to the opposite end plate A B along a line that is substantially parallel to and slightly offset from the previous path. When the entire process of tank inspection has been completed the robotic vehicle is lifted from the UST by the tether to a position near the riser through which it entered. In select embodiments of the present invention the tether is connected to the robotic vehicle causing the back of the robotic vehicle to tip up. The back of the robotic vehicle is fitted with a retrieval bar not shown separately adapted for engaging by a retrieval hook not shown separately for removing the robotic vehicle from the UST .

Refer to depicting a flat projected map of the interior surface of the UST . The map includes the unfurled surface of the cylindrical wall and the end plates A B each divided by reference grid lines. In select embodiments of the present invention the surface of the cylindrical wall is marked by square grid lines and the surface of the end plates A B by radial grid lines. The generation of these grids and plotting of the position of the robotic vehicle thereon are accomplished through a mapping program loaded on the computer . For illustration points locating defects of an UST are marked with an X on the map of whereas the present location of the robotic vehicle is marked by a small circle.

Refer to a flow chart on the operation of the mapping function of select embodiments of the present invention. The location of the robotic vehicle within a UST is determined by combining a start position with data obtained from the on board inclinometers and the encoder odometer . These data provide a new position that is marked with a temporary designation such as the X shown on the map of . Measurements of the wall thickness are generated constantly by the ultrasonic transducers in the block . The ultrasonic transducer wall measurement is taken to derive a measured thickness as an input to a determination that compares the measurement with a minimum thickness . If the measured thickness is below the minimum the temporary position X is made permanent as a defect for establishing in a record of defect locations. Whether the measured thickness is below or within tolerance it is added to the accumulating total record of measurements taken. This enable a determination of percentage defects . A final test is a comparison of the calculated percent defects with an established maximum percentage allowed the results of which if positive invokes a request for repair and if negative a pass with no required remediation.

In select embodiments of the present invention the robotic vehicle may be manipulated autonomously by a computer or by an operator controlling the robotic vehicle or both. Operator control is preferable if the environment being traversed is unknown and potential risk indicates need for an informed immediate decision. In known environments an automated program involving initial orientation of the robotic vehicle followed by a prescribed pattern of navigating is warranted. Programmed control of the robotic vehicle is most practical in cases of repeat inspections of known devices.

Accordingly all such modifications are intended to be included within the scope of this invention as defined in the following claims. In the claims means plus function clauses are intended to cover the structures described herein as performing the recited function and not only structural equivalents but also equivalent structures. Thus although a nail and a screw may not be structural equivalents in that a nail employs a cylindrical surface to secure wooden parts together whereas a screw employs a helical surface in the environment of fastening wooden parts a nail and a screw may be equivalent structures.

The abstract of the disclosure is provided to comply with the rules requiring an abstract that will allow a searcher to quickly ascertain the subject matter of the technical disclosure of any patent issued from this disclosure. It is submitted with the understanding that it will not be used to interpret or limit the scope or meaning of the claims. 37 CFR 1.72 b . Any advantages and benefits described may not apply to all embodiments of the invention.

