---

title: Silicon carbide bipolar junction transistors having epitaxial base regions and multilayer emitters and methods of fabricating the same
abstract: Bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) are provided including silicon carbide (SiC) substrates. An epitaxial SiC base region is provided on the SiC substrate. The epitaxial SiC base region has a first conductivity type. An epitaxial SiC emitter region is also provided on the SiC substrate. The epitaxial SiC emitter region has a second conductivity type, different from the first conductivity type. The epitaxial SiC emitter region has first and second portions. The first portion is provided on the SiC substrate and the second portion is provided on the first portion. The second portion has a higher carrier concentration than the first portion. Related methods of fabricating BJTs are also provided herein.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07304334&OS=07304334&RS=07304334
owner: Cree, Inc.
number: 07304334
owner_city: Durham
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050916
---
This invention was made with Government support under contract number W911NF 04 2 0022 awarded by the Department of the Army. The Government has certain rights in this invention.

This invention relates to power semiconductor devices and related methods of fabricating power semiconductor devices and more particularly to high voltage silicon carbide devices and related methods of fabricating high voltage silicon carbide devices.

Power devices are widely used to carry large currents and support high voltages. Conventional power devices are generally fabricated from monocrystalline silicon semiconductor material. One type of power device is the bipolar junction transistor BJT . The BJT is a well known and frequently used power device. A BJT typically includes a semiconductor material having two opposing p n junctions in close proximity to one another thus BJTs may be referred to as n p n or p n p transistors.

In operation current carriers enter a region of the semiconductor material of a first conductivity type adjacent one of the p n junctions which is called the emitter. Most of the charge carriers exit the device from a region of the semiconductor material of the first conductivity type adjacent the other p n junction which is called the collector. A small portion of semiconductor material known as the base having a second conductivity type opposite the first conductivity type of the collector and the emitter is positioned between the collector and the emitter. The two p n junctions of the BJT are formed where the collector meets the base and where the base meets the emitter.

When current is injected into or extracted from the base depending upon whether the BJT is n p n or p n p the flow of charge carriers i.e. electrons or holes which can move from the emitter to the collector may be affected. Typically small currents applied to the base can control proportionally larger currents passing through the BJT giving it usefulness as a component of electronic circuits. Structural and operational details of BJT s are discussed in Solid State Electronic Devices by B. Streetman 2nd edition 1980 chapter 7 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in its entirety.

The material that makes up a device contributes to the operability and usefulness of the device. For example conventional BJTs are typically formed of silicon Si but can also include gallium arsenide GaAs and indium phosphide InP . Recently silicon carbide SiC has been used as a material for BJTs. SiC has advantageous semiconductor characteristics for example a wide bandgap high electric field breakdown strength high electron mobility high thermal conductivity high melting point and high saturated electron drift velocity. Thus relative to devices formed in other semiconductor materials for example Si electronic devices formed in SiC may have the capability of operating at higher temperatures at high power densities at higher speeds at higher power levels and even under high radiation densities.

Due to their ability to function at high frequencies high temperatures and high power levels SiC transistors are highly desirable for use in applications such as high frequency transmitters for radar and communications for high power switching applications and for high temperature operations such as jet engine control. Accordingly methods of producing device quality SiC and devices formed from SiC have been of interest to scientists and engineers for several decades.

SiC crystallizes in over 150 different polytypes or crystal structures of which the most common are designated 3C 4H and 6H where C stands for cubic and H for hexagonal. SiC is a difficult material to use in semiconductor devices. In particular the high melting point of SiC may render techniques such as alloying and diffusion of dopants more difficult usually because a number of the other materials necessary to perform such operations tend to break down at the high temperatures used to affect SiC. SiC is also an extremely hard material and indeed its most common use is as an abrasive. Attempts have been made with some success in manufacturing junctions diodes transistors and other devices from SiC.

SiC BJTs are discussed in for example U.S. Pat. No. 4 945 394 to Palmour et al. the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in its entirety. As discussed therein SiC BJTs are formed having a base and an emitter formed as wells using high temperature ion implantation. Furthermore SiC BJTs are also discussed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 218 254 to Singh et al. the content of which is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in its entirety. As discussed therein SiC BJTs having a base and an emitter are formed using epitaxial growth and high temperature ion implantation. Singh further discusses the use of removable dielectric spacers to improve the alignment of base and emitter regions.

SiC BJTs typically include at least one highly doped implant region for the base or the emitter. The formation of the implant region may cause damage to the SiC crystal. For example the current gain of the device may be reduced due to surface recombination current due to implant induced defects. The current gain of the device may be reduced as a function of time due to stacking faults in the base region which may result from the defects created by the implantation process. Furthermore the highly doped emitter regions present in these devices may have a poor lifetime which may further reduce the current gain of the device.

Referring now to a cross section of a conventional SiC BJT will be discussed. As illustrated in an N SiC layer is provided on a highly doped N SiC substrate . A p type P SiC layer is provided on the N SiC layer . As further illustrated in n type emitter regions N and highly doped p type base regions P are provided on the p type layer . The emitter regions may be formed by epitaxial growth and subsequent etching and base regions may be formed by implantation techniques. In particular the implantation of the P base regions may be carried out at from about 650 C. to about 1100 C. using aluminum ions Al having energy ranging from about 20 keV to about 360 keV. As discussed above this implant may cause damage to the SiC crystal which may not be entirely removed by a high temperature 1600 1700 C. activation anneal.

In particular the defects introduced by the implant may result in surface recombination current and stacking fault formation in the base region of the device. This relationship is represented by the equation where represents current gain irepresents collector current and irepresents base current. Base current imay be further represented by where iis recombination current irepresents majority carriers injected across the emitter junction and irepresents surface recombination current. Current gain may be represented by the equation . Accordingly any increase in surface recombination current iin the base region yields a lower current gain for the device.

Referring again to a passivation layer is provided on the surface of the device. The BJT further includes an ohmic metal and an overlayer metal that provide contacts to the base B regions the emitter E regions and the collector C regions . The highly doped regions designated as N 20 10 and P 25 may be provided to improve the quality of the ohmic contacts.

Some embodiments of the present invention provide bipolar junction transistors BJTs including silicon carbide SiC substrates. An epitaxial SiC base region is provided on the SiC substrate. The eptiaxial SiC base region has a first conductivity type. An epitaxial SiC emitter region is also provided on the SiC substrate. The epitaxial SiC emitter region has a second conductivity type different from the first conductivity type. The epitaxial SiC emitter region has first and second portions. The first portion is provided on the SiC substrate and the second portion is provided on the first portion remote from the SiC substrate. The second portion has a higher carrier concentration than the first portion.

In some embodiments of the present invention the epitaxial SiC base region includes a first p type epitaxial SiC layer on the SiC substrate. A first p type epitaxial SiC region may be provided on the first p type epitaxial SiC layer. The first p type epitaxial SiC region may have a higher carrier concentration than the first p type epitaxial SiC layer. A second p type epitaxial SiC region may be provided on the first p type epitaxial SiC region remote from the first p type epitaxial SiC layer. The second p type epitaxial SiC region may have a higher carrier concentration than the first p type epitaxial SiC region.

In further embodiments of the present invention the first p type epitaxial SiC layer may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 10 m. The first p type epitaxial SiC region may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 10 m. The second p type epitaxial SiC region may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 3.0 m.

In still further embodiments of the present invention the epitaxial SiC base region may include a first p type epitaxial SiC layer on the SiC substrate and a p type epitaxial SiC region on the first p type epitaxial SiC layer remote from the SiC substrate. The p type epitaxial SiC region may have a higher carrier concentration than the first p type epitaxial SiC layer. The first p type epitaxial SiC layer may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 10 m. The p type epitaxial SiC region may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 10 m.

In some embodiments of the present invention the first portion of the epitaxial SiC emitter region may include n type SiC having a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5 10cmand may have a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 5 m. The second portion of the epitaxial SiC emitter region may include n type SiC having a carrier concentration of from about 5 10cmto about 5 10cmand may have a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 3.0 m.

In further embodiments of the present invention a first layer of SiC having the second conductivity type may be provided on the SiC substrate between the SiC substrate and the epitaxial SiC base region. A second layer of SiC having the first conductivity type may be provided on the first layer of SiC. The epitaxial SiC base region and the epitaxial SiC emitter region may be on the second layer of SiC remote from the first layer of SiC. The first conductivity type may be p type conductivity SiC and the second conductivity type may be n type conductivity SiC. The first layer of SiC may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cmand a thickness of from about 1.0 m to about 250 m.

Still further embodiments of the present invention provide BJTs having a silicon carbide SiC substrate and an epitaxial SiC emitter region on the SiC substrate. The epitaxial SiC emitter region has a first conductivity type. The epitaxial SiC emitter region has first and second portions. The first portion is provided on the SiC substrate and the second portion is provided on the first portion remote from the SiC substrate. The second portion has a higher carrier concentration than the first portion.

While the present invention is described above primarily with reference to BJTs methods of fabricating BJTs are also provided.

The present invention now will be described more fully hereinafter with reference to the accompanying drawings in which embodiments of the invention are shown. This invention may however be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein. Rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art. In the drawings the size and relative sizes of layers and regions may be exaggerated for clarity. It will be understood that when an element or layer is referred to as being on connected to or coupled to another element or layer it can be directly on connected or coupled to the other element or layer or intervening elements or layers may be present. In contrast when an element is referred to as being directly on directly connected to or directly coupled to another element or layer there are no intervening elements or layers present. Like numbers refer to like elements throughout. As used herein the term and or includes any and all combinations of one or more of the associated listed items.

It will be understood that although the terms first second etc. may be used herein to describe various elements components regions layers and or sections these elements components regions layers and or sections should not be limited by these terms. These terms are only used to distinguish one element component region layer or section from another element component region layer or section. Thus a first element component region layer or section discussed below could be termed a second element component region layer or section without departing from the teachings of the present invention.

Furthermore relative terms such as lower or bottom and upper or top may be used herein to describe one element s relationship to another elements as illustrated in the Figures. It will be understood that relative terms are intended to encompass different orientations of the device in addition to the orientation depicted in the Figures. For example if the device in the Figures is turned over elements described as being on the lower side of other elements would then be oriented on upper sides of the other elements. The exemplary term lower can therefore encompass both an orientation of lower and upper depending on the particular orientation of the figure. Similarly if the device in one of the Figures is turned over elements described as below or beneath other elements would then be oriented above the other elements. The exemplary terms below or beneath can therefore encompass both an orientation of above and below.

Embodiments of the present invention are described herein with reference to cross section illustrations that are schematic illustrations of idealized embodiments of the present invention. As such variations from the shapes of the illustrations as a result for example of manufacturing techniques and or tolerances are to be expected. Thus embodiments of the present invention should not be construed as limited to the particular shapes of regions illustrated herein but are to include deviations in shapes that result for example from manufacturing. For example an implanted region illustrated as a rectangle will typically have rounded or curved features and or a gradient of implant concentration at its edges rather than a binary change from implanted to non implanted region. Likewise a buried region formed by implantation may result in some implantation in the region between the buried region and the surface through which the implantation takes place. Thus the regions illustrated in the figures are schematic in nature and their shapes are not intended to illustrate the precise shape of a region of a device and are not intended to limit the scope of the present invention.

Unless otherwise defined all terms including technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. It will be further understood that terms such as those defined in commonly used dictionaries should be interpreted as having a meaning that is consistent with their meaning in the context of the relevant art and will not be interpreted in an idealized or overly formal sense unless expressly so defined herein.

Embodiments of the present invention are described with reference to a particular polarity conductivity type for various layers regions. However as will be appreciated by those of skill in the art the polarity of the regions layers may be inverted to provide an opposite polarity device. For example the terms first conductivity type and second conductivity type refer to opposite conductivity types such as n or p type however each embodiment described and illustrated herein includes its complementary embodiment as well.

In particular BJTs are active three terminal semiconductor devices including two back to back p n junctions in close proximity. BJT s are broadly characterized as n p n or p n p depending on the conductivity types of their respective bases collectors and emitters. It will be understood that although only n p n BJTs will be discussed herein embodiments of the present invention are not limited to this configuration. For example p n p transistors may also be provided by reversing the described conductivity types without departing from the scope of the present invention.

As is known to those of skill in the art doped regions of silicon carbide may be formed through epitaxial growth and or through implantation. For example a p type region of silicon carbide may be formed through epitaxial growth in the presence of a p type dopant or through implantation of p type dopants in an undoped p type or n type epitaxial layer. The structure that results from epitaxial growth differs from that that results from implantation. Thus the terms epitaxial region and implanted region structurally distinguish differing regions of silicon carbide and may be used herein as a recitation of structural characteristics of the regions of silicon carbide and or as recitations of methods of forming such regions of silicon carbide. The fabrication of epitaxial layers of SiC is discussed in for example U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 011 549 and 4 912 064 to Kong et al. the disclosures of which are hereby incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in their entirety.

Some embodiments of the present invention provide bipolar junction transistors BJTs having epitaxial silicon carbide SiC base regions and multilayer epitaxial emitter regions. The use of an epitaxial SiC base region in BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention may eliminate the need for implantation and a subsequent high temperature anneal which may cause damage to the SiC crystal and thereby cause a reduction in the current gain of the device. Accordingly BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention may have improved current gains relative to conventional devices. Furthermore the use of a multilayer epitaxial SiC emitter region may allow the current gain of the device to be further increased as discussed further herein with respect to .

SiC BJTs may offer the potential of operating reliably at much higher junction temperatures as compared to for example SiC MOSFETs. In addition the overall losses switching and conduction of the SiC BJT operating at for example 250 C. are approximately from about 50 to about 60 percent lower than the comparable Si Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor IGBT operating at 25 C. In many applications the combination of higher junction temperature and reduced losses may result in a sufficient reduction of cooling requirements to warrant a more complicated gate drive circuit used to operate BJTs. In hybrid vehicles Si IGBTs operate with junction temperatures in the range of from about 115 to about 125 C. dangerously close to the maximum allowable junction temperature for Si IGBTs. Any perturbation in the environment such as loss of coolant difficult terrain and the like could easily cause the Si IGBTs to malfuction. SiC BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention may be capable of operating at higher junction temperatures and therefore may not malfunction as discussed above as will be discussed further herein.

Referring now to a cross section of BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention will be discussed. As illustrated in a silicon carbide SiC substrate may be provided. The polarity of the substrate may be n type or p type SiC having a polytype of for example 3C 2H 4H 6H or 15R. For exemplary purposes only devices discussed according to embodiments of the present invention illustrated in include n type SiC substrates . As illustrated in the substrate is a highly doped n type SiC N . As used herein P or N refer to regions that are defined by higher carrier concentrations than are present in adjacent or other regions of the same or another layer or substrate. Similarly P or N refer to regions that are defined by lower carrier concentrations than are present in adjacent or other regions of the same or another layer. The substrate may be doped with n type dopants such as nitrogen. The substrate may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5.0 10cmand a thickness of from about 200 m to about 500 m.

As further illustrated in a first epitaxial layer is provided on a first side A of the SiC substrate . The first epitaxial layer may be doped with n type dopants such as nitrogen. The first epitaxial layer may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 10 10cmand a thickness of from about 1.0 m to about 250 m. The substrate and the first epitaxial layer define the collector C region of the BJT. A second epitaxial layer is provided on the first epitaxial layer and may be doped with p type dopants such as aluminum or boron. The second epitaxial layer may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 10 m.

An epitaxial SiC base contact region is provided on the second epitaxial layer . As illustrated in the epitaxial SiC base contact region includes a first p type epitaxial SiC region on the second epitaxial layer and a second p type epitaxial SiC region on the first p type epitaxial SiC region . The first p type epitaxial SiC region has a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 10 m. The second p type epitaxial SiC region has a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5.0 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 3.0 m. The second epitaxial base layer and the epitaxial SiC base contact region first and second p type epitaxial SiC regions and form the base B region of the BJT according to some embodiments of the present invention. Although the epitaxial SiC base region is illustrated as having first and second p type epitaxial SiC regions and embodiments of the present invention are not limited to this configuration. For example as illustrated in the epitaxial SiC base region can be a single p type region which will be discussed further below with respect to .

Thus according to some embodiments of the present invention the SiC base contact region is epitaxially grown which may eliminate the need for implantation and high temperature anneals that may damage the SiC crystal. Accordingly devices according to some embodiments of the present invention may have higher current gains as discussed further herein.

As further illustrated in an epitaxial SiC emitter region is provided on the second epitaxial layer . As illustrated the epitaxial SiC emitter region has an n type conductivity. The epitaxial SiC emitter region has first N and second N portions and respectively. The first portion of the epitaxial SiC emitter region is provided on the second epitaxial layer and is doped with n type dopants such as nitrogen. The first portion of the epitaxial SiC emitter region has a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 5.0 m. The second portion of the epitaxial SiC emitter region is doped with n type dopants such as nitrogen and has a higher carrier concentration relative to the first portion . In particular the second portion of the epitaxial SiC emitter region has a carrier concentration of from about 5 10cmto about 5 10cmand a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 3.0 m. Thus according to some embodiments of the present invention the epitaxial SiC emitter region includes a low doped n type layer that may provide improved injection efficiency and a highly doped n type layer that may provide an improved contact surface.

It will be understood that although embodiments of the present invention illustrated in include both the epitaxial SiC base region and the epitaxial SiC emitter region embodiments of the present invention are not limited to this configuration. For example as illustrated in the epitaxial SiC emitter region having first N and second N portions and respectively may be provided without the epitaxial SiC base region according to some embodiments of the present invention.

A passivation layer is provided on the second epitaxial layer the epitaxial SiC base region and the epitaxial SiC emitter region . The passivation layer may include for example thermally grown silicon dioxide SiO chemical vapor deposited SiOand or chemical vapor deposited silicon nitride SiN . Ohmic metal suitable for n type silicon carbide is provided on the second portion of the epitaxial SiC emitter region for emitter fabrication. The ohmic metals are annealed to provided ohmic contacts as discussed further below. Some embodiments of the present invention include conductive substrates . In these embodiments of the present invention ohmic metal is also provided on a second side B of substrate for collector fabrication. It will be understood by those skilled in the art that the present invention could be implemented using a non conducting substrate such as semi insulating silicon carbide or sapphire in which case the ohmic metal for collector formation would be provided on a surface of the first SiC layer .

Ohmic metal suitable for p type silicon carbide is provided on the second SiC p type region for base fabrication. Metals and or metal composites may be appropriate for the ohmic contacts and . For example nickel or nickel titanium combinations are appropriate ohmic contacts to n type silicon carbide while aluminum or aluminum titanium combinations are appropriate ohmic contacts to p type silicon carbide. Furthermore cobalt silicide CoSi may also be used as an ohmic contact material to p type silicon carbide. Ohmic contacts are discussed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 323 022 and 5 409 859 the disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in their entirety. An overlayer metal such as gold may be deposited on the ohmic contacts and as illustrated in .

As used herein the term ohmic contact refers to contacts where an impedance associated therewith is substantially given by the relationship of Impedance V I where V is a voltage across the contact and I is the current at substantially all expected operating frequencies i.e. the impedance associated with the ohmic contact is substantially the same at all operating frequencies and currents.

Processing steps in the fabrication of BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention will now be discussed with respect to the cross sections of . Referring now to a highly doped SiC substrate having a first conductivity type for example n type SiC N is formed. In some embodiments of the present invention the substrate may have a polytype of for example 3C 2H 4H 6H or 15R. In some embodiments of the present invention the substrate may be doped during the growth phase with a donor dopant such as nitrogen at a concentration from about 1.0 10cmto about 5 10cm. The substrate may also have a thickness of from about 200 m to about 500 m.

A first epitaxial layer having n type conductivity N is formed on the substrate . The first epitaxial layer is doped with a donor dopant such as nitrogen at a concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cm. The first epitaxial layer has a thickness of from about 1.0 m to about 250 m. The substrate and the first epitaxial layer define the collector region of the BJT according to some embodiments of the present invention. A second epitaxial layer having p type P conductivity is formed on first epitaxial layer . The second epitaxial layer is doped with an acceptor dopant such as aluminum or boron at a concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cm. The second epitaxial layer has a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 1 0 cm. A third epitaxial layer having p type conductivity is formed on the second epitaxial layer . The third epitaxial layer is more highly doped than the second epitaxial layer . In particular the third epitaxial layer is doped with an acceptor dopant such as aluminum or boron at a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cm. The third epitaxial layer has a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 10 m. A fourth epitaxial layer is formed on the third epitaxial layer and is more highly doped than the third epitaxial layer. The fourth epitaxial layer is doped with an acceptor dopant such as aluminum or boron at a concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5 10cm. The fourth epitaxial layer has a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 3.0 m.

Referring now to regions of the third and fourth epitaxial layers and are isolated as mesas on the surface of the second epitaxial layer using for example photolithographic techniques such as a patterned photoresist and subsequent etching to provide first and second p type epitaxial SiC regions and of an epitaxial SiC base region . According to some embodiments of the present invention reactive ion etching of epitaxial layers may be implemented to define mesas for base and emitter contacts. For example the epitaxial layers may be etched using reactive ion etching with nitrogen trifluoride NF . NFhas demonstrated a number of advantages in silicon carbide etching processes. Reactive ion etching using NFis discussed et al. Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. Vol. 76 1987 p. 185 the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in its entirety. Techniques for etching silicon carbide are also discussed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 865 685 and 4 981 551 to Palmour the disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in their entirety.

The third and fourth epitaxial layers and may be etched until at least a portion the surface of the second epitaxial layer is exposed. For example some embodiments of the present invention provide a 0.4 m mesa of third and fourth epitaxial layers and . In these embodiments of the present invention an electrical check from front to back may determine when the etching process should be terminated. This step may then be followed by an overetch for example a 15 percent overetch. The second epitaxial layer and the epitaxial SiC base region including the first p type epitaxial SiC region and the second p type epitaxial SiC region may define the base region of the BJT according to some embodiments of the present invention.

Referring now to a fifth epitaxial layer of n type conductivity may be re grown on the surface of the second epitaxial layer and the first and second p type epitaxial SiC regions and . The fifth epitaxial layer is doped with a donor dopant such as nitrogen at a concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5 10cm. The fifth epitaxial layer has a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 5 m. A sixth epitaxial layer having a higher carrier concentration relative to the fifth epitaxial layer is grown on the fifth epitaxial layer . The sixth epitaxial layer is doped with a donor dopant such as nitrogen at a concentration of from about 5 10cmto about 5 10cm. The sixth epitaxial layer has a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 3 m.

Referring now to regions of the fifth and sixth epitaxial layers and are isolated as mesas on the surface of the second epitaxial layer using for example a patterned photoresist and subsequent etching as discussed with respect to to provide first and second portions and of an epitaxial SiC emitter region . Again the fifth and sixth epitaxial layers and are etched until at least a portion of the surface of the second epitaxial layer is exposed. The first and second portions and define the emitter region of the BJT according to some embodiments of the present invention.

Referring now to a passivation layer is formed on the surface of the second epitaxial layer the first and second p type epitaxial SiC regions and and the first and second portions and of the emitter region. The passivation layer may include for example thermally grown SiO chemical vapor deposited SiOand or chemical vapor deposited SiN. As illustrated in windows may be opened in the passivation layer by for example selectively etching the passivation layer . The passivation is etched until at least a portion of the surface of the second portion of the emitter region is exposed.

Referring now to ohmic metal suitable for n type silicon carbide is deposited on the exposed surfaces of the second portion of the emitter region for emitter fabrication. The ohmic metals may be deposited using for example e beam evaporation and the ohmic metals may be annealed at high temperatures for example temperatures from about 625 C. to about 1000 C. to provide ohmic contacts. A wet etch may be performed to remove unreacted metal. In some embodiments of the present invention the substrate is a conductive substrate. In these embodiments of the present invention an ohmic metal is also deposited on the backside of substrate for collector fabrication. It will be understood by those skilled in the art that embodiments of the present invention are not limited to conductive substrates. For example in some embodiments of the present invention the substrate may be a non conducting substrate such as semi insulating silicon carbide or sapphire in which case ohmic metal for collector formation may be provided on a surface of the first epitaxial n type layer .

Referring now to windows may be opened in the passivation layer by for example selectively etching the passivation layer . The passivation layer may be etched until at least a portion of the surface of the second p type epitaxial SiC region is exposed. As illustrated in ohmic metal suitable for p type silicon carbide is deposited on exposed surfaces of the second p type epitaxial SiC region for base fabrication. BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention are illustrated in for example . As illustrated therein an overlayer metal such as gold may be formed on the ohmic contacts and .

It will be understood that although embodiments of the present invention discussed above with respect to through J include a multilevel base region embodiments of the present invention are not limited to this configuration. For example as illustrated in the base region in these embodiments is a single layer of p type silicon carbide. The single P layer is doped with an acceptor dopant such as aluminum or boron at a concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 5 10cmand has a thickness of from about 0.1 m to about 10 m. The single P layer may be uniformly doped or may have a graded doping concentration such that the doping concentration increases the farther it is away from the second epitaxial layer .

Processing steps in the fabrication of BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention will now be discussed with respect to the cross sections illustrated in . Referring first to processing steps in the fabrication of the substrate first epitaxial layer and second epitaxial layer are similar to the processing steps of like numbered elements discussed with respect to and therefore details with respect to the processing steps of these elements will not be repeated herein. A third epitaxial layer having an n type conductivity is grown on the second epitaxial layer . A fourth epitaxial layer having higher n type conductivity relative to the third epitaxial layer is grown on the third epitaxial layer . The third and fourth epitaxial layers and define an emitter region of the BJT.

Referring now to regions of the third and fourth epitaxial layers and are isolated on the surface of the second epitaxial layer using for example photolithographic techniques as a patterned photoresist and subsequent etching. The third and fourth epitaxial layers and are etched until at least a portion of the second epitaxial layer is exposed.

Referring now to fifth and sixth epitaxial layers and of p type conductivity are re grown on the surface of the second epitaxial layer and the first and second portions and of the emitter region. The sixth epitaxial layer is more highly doped relative to the fifth epitaxial layer . Furthermore the fifth epitaxial layer is more highly doped than the second epitaxial layer . The device illustrated in is etched to isolate regions of epitaxial layers and . The fifth and sixth epitaxial layers and are etched until at least a portion of the surface of second epitaxial layer is exposed. The second epitaxial layer and isolated layers and define the base region of the BJT . Thus embodiments of the present invention illustrated in illustrate that the emitter portions and may be formed before the first and second layers and of the base region without departing from the scope of the present invention. Processing steps in the fabrication of the remaining portions of the BJT according to some embodiments of the present invention are similar to those discussed above with respect to and therefore will not be repeated herein.

Processing steps in the fabrication of BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention will now be discussed with respect to . Referring first to the processing steps in the fabrication of the substrate first epitaxial layer the second epitaxial layer the first SiC region and the second SiC region are similar to processing steps of the like numbered elements discussed with respect to and therefore details with respect to the processing steps of these elements will not be repeated herein. As illustrated in a masking layer is deposited on the surface of the second epitaxial layer and the first and second regions of SiC and . The masking layer may include for example SiO SiN tantalum carbide TaC or any other similar material capable of withstanding an epitaxial growth temperature of about 1600 C. for about 30 minutes and can subsequently be removed.

Referring now to window are formed in masking layer by for example selective etching. As illustrated in a first epitaxial layer having n type conductivity and a second epitaxial layer having a higher n type conductivity relative to the first epitaxial layer are formed in the windows to form the emitter region of the BJT. The remaining masking layer is removed to provide an intermediate device similar to the device illustrated in . Processing steps in the fabrication of the remaining portions of the BJT according to some embodiments of the present invention are similar to those discussed above with respect to and therefore will not be repeated herein.

Processing steps in the fabrication of BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention will now be discussed with respect to . As illustrated in the processing steps in the fabrication of the substrate first epitaxial layer the second epitaxial layer and the first and second portions and of the emitter region are similar to processing steps of the like numbered elements discussed with respect to and therefore details with respect to the processing steps of these elements will not be repeated herein. As further illustrated in a masking layer is provided on the surface of the second epitaxial layer and the first and second portions and . The masking layer may include for example silicon dioxide SiO TaC and the like.

As illustrated in windows may be opened in masking layer by for example selective etching. As illustrated in epitaxial layers and having p type conductivities are formed in the windows and together with layer form the base region of the BJT. The remaining masking layer is removed to provide an intermediate device similar to the device illustrated in . Thus are provided to illustrate that either the emitter region or the base region of the BJT may be formed using the processes discussed in and A through C. Processing steps in the fabrication of the remaining portions of the BJT according to some embodiments of the present invention are similar to those discussed above with respect to and therefore will not be repeated herein.

Various experimental output characteristics of conventional SiC BJTs and SIC BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention will now be discussed with respect to . It will be understood that these performance characteristics are based on experimental data and therefore embodiments of the present invention are not limited by the examples discussed herein.

1200 V 10 A BJTs were tested for stability. NPN BJTs were fabricated in H SiC with a 14 m thick n type collector layer doped at 4.8 10cm a 1.0 m thick p type base layer doped at 2 10cmand 2.0 m thick n type emitter layer doped at 3.0 10cm. A simplified BJT structure is illustrated a cross section of the 4H SiC BJT of . The device of has a pitch of 25.0 m. The chip size is 1.88 mm 1.88 mm with a total emitter width of 62 mm and an active area of 0.0225 cm as illustrated in the plan view of the SiC BJT of . The details with respect to the fabrication of such devices are discussed in for example 2005 p. 271 by Agarwal et al. and IEEE Electron Device Letters Vol. 26 No. 3 2005 p. 175 by Krishnaswami et al. the disclosures of which are hereby incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in their entirety.

The DC output characteristics of one of the devices in common emitter mode are illustrated in before and after many hours of stress at a collector current of 10 A. In particular a SiC BJT having the conventional structure shown in was operated at 10.0 A over various time intervals i.e. 0 minutes 15 minutes 30 minutes and 16 hours . The device was packaged in a metal package. After the initial measurement the device was stressed at 10 A for a given amounts of time. The device was powered down allowed to cool and then the output characteristics were recorded. As illustrated in both the current gain and the on resistance may be reduced over time. Accordingly conventional SiC BJTs show instability in the I V characteristics after as little as 15 minutes of operation. The dislocations created by the p implant of the conventional BJT of may be responsible for the deterioration of the device characteristics.

The current gain reduces the on resistance in saturation increases and the slope of the output characteristics in the active region increases. This degradation in the I V characteristics may continue with many hours of operation. This phenomenon which may be caused by the Basal Plane Dislocations which may arise during the epitaxial growth of various layers has been discussed in U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 554 123 filed Mar. 18 2004 to Hallin et al. corresponding to PCT Application No. PCT US2005 004473 filed on Feb. 14 2005 entitled LITHOGRAPHIC METHODS TO REDUCE STACKING FAULT NUCLEATION SITES AND STRUCTURES HAVING REDUCED STACKING FAULT NUCLEATION SITES assigned to the assignee of the present invention the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in its entirety. Stacking fault growth within the base layer may be observed by light emission imaging. The energy for this expansion of the stacking fault may come from the electron hole recombination in the forward biased base emitter junction. This may result in reduction of the effective minority carrier lifetime increasing the electron hole recombination in the base in the immediate vicinity of the stacking fault which may lead to a reduction in the current gain.

The following additional observations can be made from data shown in . First the initial DC current gain was approximately 30 which was reduced to about 15 after 16 hrs of stress. Thus about a 50 percent reduction in DC current gain was shown . Second the on resistance in saturation increased substantially and third the slope of the curves in the active region increased as a result of the electrical stress. Similar behavior was observed on a large number of devices. Since the active area was covered with metal it was difficult to see what was happening in the active area. Accordingly a simple BJT structure was designed with windows in the active area which allowed the electroluminescence at the edge of the emitter where most of the current is confined as well as under the emitter to be imaged. The layout structure of a gridded BJT used for stacking fault detection and growth is illustrated in .

Successive images 10 seconds apart were taken while the device was under stress I 50 mA I 3 mA . Three such frames 50 seconds apart are illustrated in t B t 50s and C t 100s . The arrows point to the partial dislocations that bound the stacking faults. Three stacking faults are present. The fault labeled is at the high current region near the edge of the emitter and its expansion is evident. Stacking faults and lie under the emitter in a much lower current region and it does not noticeably grow during the 100 sec interval.

Based on these observations the reduction in the current gain of SiC BJTs may be explained based on what has been previously observed in SiC pn junction diodes. Details with respect to SiC junction diodes are discussed in for example Material Science. Forum Vol. 353 356 2001 p. 727 by Lendenmann et al. Applied Physics. Letters 81 2002 p. 883 by Galeckas et al. and Material Science Forum Vol. 457 460 2004 p. 1113 by Sumakeris et al. the disclosures of which are hereby incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in their entirety.

In particular an increase in the forward voltage V of SiC pn diodes was reported. This Vincrease was explained by the growth of stacking faults from certain basal plane dislocations within the drift layer of the PiN diode. The energy for this expansion of the stacking fault comes from the electron hole recombination in the conductivity modulated drift layer. This may result in reduction of the minority carrier lifetime reducing the conductivity modulation in the immediate vicinity of the stacking fault leading to an increase in V. Accordingly a similar phenomenon may be taking place in the SiC BJT device. The base of the transistor is flooded with electron hole pairs during operation as illustrated in for example . The recombination of electron hole pairs in the base may give rise to stacking faults as pictorially illustrate in . These stacking faults may reduce the lifetime of the minority carriers locally in the base which in turn may result in reduced current gain. The reduction in current gain may also explain the increase in the on resistance of the BJT in the saturation region since not many carriers make it across the base into the collector. The increase in the slope of the I V curves in the linear region indicates that the base doping has been effectively reduced resulting in an enhanced Early Effect. This could also be the consequence of the generated stacking faults in the base.

Referring now to output characteristics of SiC BJTs according to some embodiments of the present invention illustrated in will now be discussed. illustrates exemplary I V characteristics obtained with the structure shown in according to some embodiments of the present invention. Four traces of the output characteristics of a SiC BJT according to some embodiments of the present invention with increasing stress exhibits relatively small drift in current gain. Accordingly the current gain drift and the reduction in the on resistance may be suppressed according to some embodiments of the present invention.

In the drawings and specification there have been disclosed typical preferred embodiments of the invention and although specific terms are employed they are used in a generic and descriptive sense only and not for purposes of limitation the scope of the invention being set forth in the following claims.

