---

title: Correlating business workflows with transaction tracking
abstract: Methods, systems, and products are disclosed for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking, the method including identifying an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process and associating, at the instrumentation point, the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process. Correlating business workflows with transaction tracking may also include gathering correlation data about the IT resource, selecting one of the plurality of service specific correlator passing methods, and passing a correlator in accordance with the selected service specific correlator passing methods.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09632817&OS=09632817&RS=09632817
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 09632817
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050729
---
The field of the invention is data processing or more specifically methods systems and products for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking.

Service Oriented Architecture SOA is a business integration application architecture for running business processes that invoke information technology IT resources in a distributed processing environment. Such business processes are typically written in a business processing language such as the Business Process Execution Language BPEL . Such business processing languages are typically used to abstract the execution of the business process from actual IT resources called by the process. IT resources are downstream computer resources available to a business process. Examples of such IT resources are web services Enterprise Java Beans EJBs running on an EJB server databases Java services and other computer resources that will occur to those of skill in the art.

In typical SOA implementations all information technology IT functions or services are defined using a business process description language. SOAs also have invocable interfaces that are called to perform business processes. SOA enables building a web services based layer of abstraction over legacy systems and outside services and subsequently leveraging the legacy systems and outside services to assemble business processes. The legacy systems and outside services leveraged by SOA applications often heterogeneous applications and technologies. A typical SOA application may contain a business process and downstream IT transactions invoked by the business process.

Transaction tracking tools are widely used to track transactions typically occurring in a distributed computing environment. Transaction tracking is carried out by passing a correlator at an instrumentation point and gathering data about the transaction with the passing of the correlator. An instrumentation point is a call to a transaction tracking tool to begin gathering information about the transaction. Management software is typically then used to display information gathered at the instrumentation points about the transactions.

One specific transaction monitoring application programming interface API is the Application Response Measurement ARM API. ARM is an industry standard for tracking the performance of programs. ARM commands include commands in Java or C to initiate an application to create a transaction ID to start and stop monitoring transactions and to end all monitoring. ARM provides for correlating the information of transactions by passing a data structure called a correlator from a parent transaction to a child transaction. ARM uses the data to create a data structure that represents the relationships of the transactions being monitored. The data produced by the ARM API can be collected by management software for use in displaying information about the transactions monitored.

Traditional tracking tools such as for example ARM are not however fully utilized in correlating the business processes with the IT transactions that carry out the business process because there is little or no correlation between the downstream IT resources that carry out business processes and the business processes themselves. IT transactions are instead tracked separately as transactions unrelated to the business process they support. This provides no linking in the transaction tracking of the IT resources and the transaction tracking of the business process they support.

Two methods for attempting to extend the IT tracking to business processes currently exist. One method of extending IT tracking to business processes includes inserting artificial business process artifacts into business processes. These artificial artifacts carry on the tasks of the instrumentation and correlation of transactions typically carried out by ARM or other transaction tracking tools. In order to gather performance data with this method business process modelers insert business method specific monitoring calls as business artifacts immediately before and after each actual business activity. This insertion of artificial artifacts in the business processes works only for uninterruptible workflows with synchronized request response activities executed locally on a single machine. In other words this conventional method cannot handle long running processes such as asynchronous activities in distributed environment. The method fails because implementation specific object instances are not accessible at the business process level. Therefore data structures to be used to convey correlations between transactions cannot be carried to different execution threads or to remote machines. That is the underlying IT transactions carrying out the business methods cannot be tracked using this method. Further this method requires business process modelers to add artificial business process artifacts around every business process in every business process script for which transaction tracking is desired. In many cases this insertion of artificial processes is cumbersome.

A second method for attempting to extend transaction tracking to business processes provides for automating audit event callbacks that are accessible through an engine that implements business processes business process engine . Business process activities are then correlated with the event data produced by the callbacks. This method however does not enable end to end business transaction correlation because audit event callbacks are designed to provide aggregate information about activities of business processes not IT resources. In order to activate the audit events a business process modeler must modify every existing business process workflow to add a flag in each activity of every business process. In many cases adding the flag at each activity is cumbersome.

Methods systems and products are disclosed for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking in a distributed computing environment the method including providing a means to identify an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process and associating at the instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process. Correlating business workflows with transaction tracking may also include gathering correlation data about the IT resource selecting one of the plurality of service specific correlator passing methods and passing a correlator in accordance with the selected service specific correlator passing methods.

Providing a means to identify an instrumentation point may be carried out by providing a means to select a new instrumentation point in a business process. Associating the business process and the IT resource may be carried out by naming a transaction with a transaction name having business semantics. Providing a means to identify an instrumentation point may be carried out by providing a means to select an existing instrumentation point in a business process. Associating the business process and the IT resource may be carried out by renaming a transaction with a transaction name having business semantics.

The instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process may be an instrumentation point in a Web Service Invocation Framework WSIF client associated with an invocation interface.

Correlating business workflows with transaction tracking may also include providing to a user through a user interface correlation data for the IT resource in association with a name having business semantics and providing to a user through a user interface correlation data for the IT resource in association with a name having semantics for the IT resource.

The foregoing and other objects features and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the following more particular descriptions of exemplary embodiments of the invention as illustrated in the accompanying drawings wherein like reference numbers generally represent like parts of exemplary embodiments of the invention.

Exemplary methods systems and products for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention are described with reference to the accompanying drawings beginning with . Transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention is typically implemented in a distributed computing environment in which IT resources carry out one or more portions of a business process.

As just discussed the business subprocesses and of are carried out by executing IT artifacts. In the example of the reserve airline subprocess reserves an airline flight for a user through a request in the Simple Object Access Protocol SOAP the standard protocol for web service requests and responses. The SOAP request is received by an Enterprise JavaBeans EJB component. An EJB is a business component of a J2EE application that runs on the J2EE server. In the example of the EJB continues to carry out the reserve airline subprocess by calling a Java Database Connectivity JDBC application programming interface to retrieve data from a data base . JDBC provides a standard interface between Java platforms and databases.

In the example of the reserve hotel subprocess reserves a hotel for a user by calling a method in an EJB component which in turn calls on Customer Information Control System Information Management System CICS IMS to make a hotel reservation for the user. CICS is an IBM transaction processing system which controls the interaction between applications and users. IMS is a hierarchical database management system. CICS and IMS are often used together as the front end and back end of a database application.

In the example of the reserve vehicle subprocess reserves a vehicle for the user by sending a SOAP request to an EJB running on an EJB server who in turn submits a message through Message Queuing MQ queue to a Microsoft Data Base MDB to make a reservation for the user. MDB databases are files produced a variety of Microsoft products. In particular MDB is the format for Microsoft Access databases.

In the example of the payment subprocess accepts payment for the itinerary reservation at least in part by sending a SOAP request which is then placed in an MQ queue and received by a payment accept service .

The example of illustrates an overall integrated business application with heterogeneous IT artifacts applications and technologies. The overall integrated business application of operates generally to correlate business workflows with transaction tracking by identifying an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process and associating at the instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process.

In the example of the reserve airline subprocess is correlated with the IT artifacts and for transaction tracking by identifying the invoking of the EJB by sending the SOAP message as invoking an IT resource selecting the invoking of the IT resource as a new instrumentation point in the business process and naming the transaction of invoking the resource with a transaction name having business semantics such as for example bpel iternaryReservation reserveAirline callReserveArilineEJB nextNumber. In this example transactions resulting from calls to the EJB are given the transaction name bpel iternaryReservation reserveAirline callReserveArilineEJB nextNumber. In this example the phrase nextNumber reserves a unique transaction identifier for the transaction and bpel iternaryReservation reserveAirline callReserveArilineEJB identifies the transaction as having defined business semantics.

In the example of the reserve airline subprocess is correlated with the IT artifacts and for transaction tracking by identifying the invoking of the EJB by sending the SOAP message as invoking an IT resource selecting an existing instrumentation point in the EJB renaming a transaction created by invoking the EJB with a transaction name having business semantics such as for example bpel iternaryReservation reserveAirline executeReserveArilineEJB nextNumber. In this example transactions resulting from executing the EJB are given the transaction name bpel iternaryReservation reserveAirline execute ReserveArilineEJB nextNumber. In this example the phrase nextNumber reserves a unique transaction identifier for the transaction and bpel iternaryReservation reserveAirline executelReserveArilineEJB identifies the transaction as having defined business semantics.

In the example of the reserve hotel subprocess is correlated with the IT artifacts and for transaction tracking by identifying the invoking of the EJB as invoking an IT resource selecting the invoking of the IT resource as a new instrumentation point in the business process and naming the transaction of invoking the resource with a transaction name having business semantics such as for example bpel iternaryReservation reserveHotel callReserveHotelEJB nextNumber. In this example transactions resulting from calls to the EJB are given the transaction name bpel iternaryReservation reserveHotel callReserveHotelEJB nextNumber. In this example the phrase nextNumber reserves a unique transaction identifier for the transaction and bpel iternaryReservation reserveHotel callReserveHotelEJB identifies the transaction as having defined business semantics.

In the example of the reserve hotel subprocess is correlated with the IT artifacts and for transaction tracking by identifying the invoking of the EJB as invoking an IT resource selecting an existing instrumentation point in the EJB renaming a transaction created by invoking the EJB with a transaction name having business semantics such as for example bpel iternaryReservation reserveHotel executeReserveHotelEJB nextNumber. In this example transactions resulting from executing the EJB are given the transaction name bpel iternaryReservation reserveHotel execute ReserveHotelEJB nextNumber. In this example the phrase nextNumber reserves a unique transaction identifier for the transaction and bpel iternaryReservation reserveHotel executelReserveHotelEJB identifies the transaction as having defined business semantics.

In the example of the reserve vehicle subprocess is correlated with the IT artifacts and for transaction tracking by identifying the invoking of the EJB through a SOAP request as invoking an IT resource selecting the invoking of the IT resource as a new instrumentation point in the business process and naming the transaction of invoking the resource with a transaction name having business semantics such as for example bpel iternaryReservation reserveVehicle callReserveVehicleEJB nextNumber. In this example transactions resulting from calls to the EJB are given the transaction name bpel iternaryReservation reserveVehicle callReserveVehicleEJB nextNumber. In this example the phrase nextNumber reserves a unique transaction identifier for the transaction and bpel iternaryReservation reserveVehicle callReserveVehicleEJB identifies the transaction as having defined business semantics.

In the example of the reserve vehicle subprocess is correlated with the IT artifacts for transaction tracking by identifying the invoking of the EJB as invoking an IT resource selecting an existing instrumentation point in the EJB renaming a transaction created by invoking the EJB with a transaction name having business semantics such as for example bpel iternaryReservation reserveVehicle executeReserveVehicleEJB nextNumber. In this example transactions resulting from executing the EJB are given the transaction name bpel iternaryReservation reserveVehicle executeReserveVehicleEJB nextNumber. In this example the phrase nextNumber reserves a unique transaction identifier for the transaction and bpel iternaryReservation reserveVehicle executelReserveVehicleEJB identifies the transaction as having defined business semantics.

In the example of the payment subprocess is correlated with the IT artifacts and for transaction tracking by identifying the invoking of the payment accept service through a SOAP request queued in an MQ queue as invoking an IT resource selecting the invoking of the IT resource as a new instrumentation point in the business process and naming the transaction of invoking the resource with a transaction name having business semantics such as for example bpel iternaryReservation payment callPaymentAcceptService nextNumber. In this example transactions resulting from calls to the payment accept service are given the transaction name

bpel iternaryReservation payment callPaymentAcceptService nextNumber. In this example the phrase nextNumber reserves a unique transaction identifier for the transaction and bpel iternaryReservation payment callpaymentAcceptService identifies the transaction as having defined business semantics.

In the example of the payment subprocess is correlated with the IT artifacts and for transaction tracking by identifying the invoking of the payment accept service as invoking an IT resource selecting an existing instrumentation point in the payment accept service renaming a transaction created by invoking the payment accept service with a transaction name having business semantics such as for example bpel iternaryReservation payment executePayment AcceptService nextNumber. In this example transactions resulting from executing the payment accept service are given the transaction name bpel iternaryReservation payment executePaymentAcceptService nextNumber. In this example the phrase nextNumber reserves a unique transaction identifier for the transaction and bpel iternaryReservation payment executePaymentAcceptService identifies the transaction as having defined business semantics.

The system of is useful in gathering correlation data about the IT resource that is linked with the business process. By associating the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics the system of advantageously provides for transaction tracking linking the business processes with the IT resources that carries out the business process. As mentioned above transaction tracking is typically carried out by passing a correlator at an instrumentation point and gathering data about the transaction with the passing of the correlator. Management software is typically then used to display information gathered at the instrumentation points about the transactions. Management software displaying information gathered at the instrumentation points of the system of may advantageously display correlation data regarding transactions at the IT resources and that are linked to the business subprocesses and that the IT resources support because those IT transactions and business transactions are now associated through a transaction name that has business semantics.

The arrangement of business processes and IT resources making up the exemplary system illustrated in are for explanation not for limitation. Typical business processes and IT resources may invoke a variety of communications protocols a variety of database implementations and a variety of methods for accessing databases as will occur to those of skill in the art. The arrangement of processes and IT resources making up the exemplary integrated business application illustrated in is for explanation not for limitation.

Data processing systems useful in correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to various embodiments of the present invention may include networked computers servers routers other devices client server architectures peer to peer architectures and many others as will occur to those of skill in the art. Networks in such data processing systems may support many data communications protocols including for example TCP Transmission Control Protocol IP Internet Protocol HTTP HyperText Transfer Protocol WAP Wireless Access Protocol HDTP Handheld Device Transport Protocol MQ RMI IIOP and others as will occur to those of skill in the art. Such data processing systems may use a single network or a plurality of networks including local area networks wide area networks the Internet and other networks as will occur to those of skill in the art.

Correlating business workflows with transaction tracking in accordance with the present invention is generally implemented with computers that is with automated computing machinery. In the system of for example all the nodes servers and communications devices are implemented to some extent at least as computers. For further explanation therefore sets forth a block diagram of automated computing machinery comprising an exemplary computer useful in correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention. The computer of includes at least one computer processor or CPU as well as random access memory RAM which is connected through a system bus to processor and to other components of the computer.

Stored in RAM is a business process engine computer program instructions for converting business process descriptions into calls to IT resources to carry out the business processes. Running within the business process engine is a business process improved according to embodiments of the present invention to correlate business workflows with transaction tracking. The business process of is improved by identifying an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process and associating at the instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process.

Also stored in RAM is a Java virtual machine computer program instructions for executing Java executable programs. Also stored in RAM is an operating system . Operating systems useful in computers according to embodiments of the present invention include UNIX Linux Microsoft Windows NT AIX IBM s i5 OS and others as will occur to those of skill in the art. Operating system business process engine and Java virtual machine in the example of are shown in RAM but many components of such software typically are stored in non volatile memory also.

Computer of includes non volatile computer memory coupled through a system bus to processor and to other components of the computer . Non volatile computer memory may be implemented as a hard disk drive optical disk drive electrically erasable programmable read only memory space so called EEPROM or Flash memory RAM drives not shown or as any other kind of computer memory as will occur to those of skill in the art.

The example computer of includes one or more input output interface adapters . Input output interface adapters in computers implement user oriented input output through for example software drivers and computer hardware for controlling output to display devices such as computer display screens as well as user input from user input devices such as keyboards and mice.

The exemplary computer of includes a communications adapter for implementing data communications with other computers . Such data communications may be carried out serially through RS 232 connections through external buses such as USB through data communications networks such as IP networks and in other ways as will occur to those of skill in the art. Communications adapters implement the hardware level of data communications through which one computer sends data communications to another computer directly or through a network. Examples of communications adapters useful for determining availability of a destination according to embodiments of the present invention include modems for wired dial up communications Ethernet IEEE 802.3 adapters for wired network communications and 802.11b adapters for wireless network communications.

For further explanation sets forth a flow chart illustrating an exemplary method for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention that includes providing a means to identify an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process . Means to identify an instrumentation point in a business process are typically implemented as software tools designed to aid a user in identifying an instrumentation point in a business process as discussed in more detail below. In some cases such software tools are implemented as part of a business process engine.

The method of also includes identifying an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of a business process . As discussed above IT resources carry out one or more of the processes that implement a business method such as for example calls to databases requests for web services the execution of web services server side processes and so on as will occur to those of skill in the art. One way of identifying an IT resource according to the method of therefore includes identifying in business process calls to IT resources. Often IT resources such as for example EJBs are machine generated and are given names according to formatting parameters. Identifying in business process calls to IT resources therefore may be carried out by identifying calls to the resources having names of a particular form known to be given to IT resources.

The method of also includes identifying an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process . An instrumentation point is a place in the code of either the business process of the IT resource that includes a call to a routine for gathering information about the performance of the code such as for example a call to the ARM API. Such calls may include a call to create a data structure to represent an application a call to create a data structure to represent a transaction a call to start timing the transaction and a call to stop timing the transaction. As discussed in more detail below with reference to identifying an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process may be carried out by selecting a new instrumentation point in a business process or by selecting an existing instrumentation point in a business process.

In the method of the code for the instrumentation point adheres to the Application Response Measurement ARM application programming interface API . ARM is an industry standard for tracking the performance of programs. ARM commands include commands in Java or C initiate an application to create a transaction ID to start and stop monitoring transactions and to end all monitoring. ARM provides for the correlating the information of transactions by passing a data structure called a correlator from a parent transaction to a child transaction. ARM uses the data to create a data structure that represents the relationships of the transactions being monitored. The data produced by the ARM API can be collected by management software for use in displaying information about the transactions monitored.

The method of also includes associating at the instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process . Associating at the instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process may be carried out by naming a transaction with a transaction name having business semantics or renaming a transaction with a transaction name having business semantics as discussed in more detail below with reference to . A transaction name having business semantics typically includes one or more aspects of the name that identifies the business process implemented by the execution of the IT resource.

The correlation data gathered about an IT resource is data describing aspects of the execution of the IT resource. Correlation data may show the time expired during the execution of IT resource and the business process that it carried out at least a portion of. In the example of correlation data is represented as correlation record . The correlation record of includes the name of a business process and the names of the IT resources and that carried out at least a portion of the business process .

As discussed above identifying instrumentation points in business processes that invoke an IT resource may include selecting a new instrumentation point in a business process. For further explanation therefore sets forth a flow chart illustrating a further exemplary method for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention. In the method of identifying an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process includes selecting a new instrumentation point in a business process . As discussed above many embodiments of the present invention include providing means to identify an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process. Such means to identify an instrumentation point in a business process may include means to selecting a new instrumentation point in a business process which are typically implemented as software tools designed to aid a user in selecting a new instrumentation point in a business process as discussed in more detail below. In some cases such software tools are implemented as part of a business process engine.

Selecting a new instrumentation point in a business process may be carried out by identifying a call to invocation interfaces in a Web Services Invocation Framework WSIF client. WSIF is a toolkit that provides an API for linking IT resources with abstracted business processes such as those written for example in Business Process Execution Language BPEL . BPEL is a standard portable language for assembling legacy systems into end to end business processes under the Service Oriented Architecture SOA framework. While BPEL typically invokes IT resources exposed as Web services BPEL can be used with other IT resources. In such cases the IT resources exposed to the BPEL process are described using the Web Services Description Language WSDL .

WSIF makes use of WSIF providers to support the specific protocol to access the resource. For further explanation sets forth a process flow chart illustrating a WSIF client that uses WSIF providers and to access IT resources . The example of includes a WebSphere Process Choreographer . WebSphere Process Choreographer is a program for converting business process descriptions into calls to IT resources to carry out the business processes business process engine . In the example of the WebSphere Process Choreographer generates an input message to WSIF client to call an IT resource through an appropriate WSIF provider .

The WSIF client delivers the WSIF Input Message to an appropriate WSIF service provider. The delivery of the WSIF input Message to the service provider invokes an IT resource managed by the service provider capable of invoking the IT resource according to the appropriate protocol. In the example of the SOAP provider can invoke a SOAP Service through a SOAP message.

The JMS provider of invokes a JMS service through a JMS message. The EJB provider of invokes an EJB service through an EJB method. The Java Provider of invokes a Java service through a Java method.

Each of the IT resources and invoked in the example of through the appropriate WSIF provider and may be called in the business method by calling one or more invocation interfaces. An invocation interface is the interface in the WSIF API for calling a resource. Examples of invocation interfaces supported by typical WSIF clients include 

Each time one or more of these invocation interface methods are called an IT resource is invoked through one or more WSIF providers. Therefore these invocation interface methods provide an ideal place for selecting instrumentation points.

Again with reference to As just discussed invocation interface methods provide an ideal place for selecting instrumentation points for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention. Selecting a new instrumentation point in a business process may be carried out by identifying a call to invocation interfaces in a Web Services Invocation Framework WSIF client and inserting a new instrumentation point. The instrumentation point may be implemented as Java method calls to the ARM API.

After selecting a new instrumentation point in the business process the method of continues by associating at new instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process . In the example of associating at new instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process includes naming a transaction with a transaction name having business semantics. Naming a transaction with a transaction name having business semantics may be carried out by providing a name to transactions that call IT resources that describes one or more aspects of the business processes or subprocesses it supports. Components of the name for example may describe the type of business process the name of the process a unique identifier for the transaction and so on as will occur to those of skill in the art.

Identifying a new instrumentation point and naming transactions at the new instrumentation point with a transaction name having business semantics advantageously provides a vehicle to correlate business workflows with transaction tracking such that correlation data gathered about IT resources invoked by the business process may be linked with the IT resources associated business processes. As such business users are provided with increased information about the run time performance of those users business processes.

In addition to identifying new instrumentation points in business processes that invoke an IT resource and naming transactions at the new instrumentation points with transaction names having business semantics as just discussed with reference to correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention may also include identifying existing instrumentation points in a business process and renaming transactions at those existing instrumentation points with transaction names that also have business semantics. For further explanation therefore sets forth a flow chart illustrating a further exemplary method for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention. The method of includes identifying an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process . In the method of however identifying an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process includes selecting an existing instrumentation point in a business process . As discussed above many embodiments of the present invention include providing means to identify an instrumentation point in a business process of a business workflow that invokes an IT resource that carries out at least a portion of the business process. Such means to identify an instrumentation point in a business process may include means to selecting an existing instrumentation point in a business process which are typically implemented as software tools designed to aid a user in selecting an existing instrumentation point in a business process as discussed in more detail below. In some cases such software tools are implemented as part of a business process engine.

Selecting an existing instrumentation point in a business process may be carried out by tracing transactions from the business processes to the IT resources that carry out the business processes to determine the actual IT resources that carry out the business processes. Selecting an existing instrumentation point in a business process therefore may include identifying an existing instrumentation point in an already instrumented IT resource determined to actually carry out a business process.

Having selected an existing instrumentation point the method of continues by associating at the existing instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process . In the method of associating at the instrumentation point the business process and the IT resource with a transaction name having business semantics such that correlation data gathered about the IT resource may be linked with the business process includes renaming a transaction with a transaction name having business semantics. Renaming a transaction with a transaction name having business semantics may be carried out by providing a name to transactions that execute the IT resources that describes one or more aspects of the business processes or subprocesses it supports. Components of the name for example may describe the type of business process the name of the process a unique identifier for the transaction and so on as will occur to those of skill in the art.

Identifying an existing instrumentation point and renaming transactions at the new instrumentation point with a transaction name having business semantics advantageously provides a vehicle to correlate business workflows with transaction tracking such that correlation data gathered about IT resources invoked by the business process may be linked with the IT resources associated business processes. As such business users are provided with increased information about the run time performance of those users business processes.

Correlating business workflows with transaction tracking as described above provide a vehicle for transaction tracking such that correlation data gathered about IT resources invoked by the business process may be linked with the IT resources associated business processes through appropriately named transactions. IT resources are linked with associated business process at runtime. Transaction monitoring is carried out by passing a correlator at each instrumentation point and gathering data about the transaction with the passing of the correlator. Management software may then be used to display information about the transactions. One specific transaction monitoring API is the ARM API. ARM is an industry standard for tracking the performance of programs. ARM commands include commands in Java or C initiate an application to create a transaction ID to start and stop monitoring transactions and to end all monitoring. ARM provides for the correlating the information of transactions by passing a data structure called a correlator from a parent transaction to a child transaction. ARM uses the data to create a data structure that represents the relationships of the transactions being monitored. The data produced by the ARM API can be collected by management software for use in displaying information about the transactions monitored.

Passing correlators from business processes to the IT resources carrying out the business processes often invoke the use of many different protocols. Correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to the present invention therefore provides a vehicle for correlator passing that may be used across various protocols of IT resources invoked by business processes. For further explanation therefore sets forth a flow chart illustrating run time aspects of correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention.

The method of includes providing for plural protocol correlator passing. Providing for plural protocol correlator passing typically includes providing for the ability to pass a correlator by a plurality of protocols in dependence upon one or more of the entities receiving a correlator while transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention. As discussed above a correlator is a data structure used to pass information from a one transaction to another for use in tracking and monitoring performance of transactions. Various transactions may pass correlators using various protocols. For example a correlator may be passed in a transaction invoked through a SOAP message using a different correlator passing protocol than a transaction invoked through an EJB. The method of therefore provides for plural protocol correlator passing by making available at the interface between business processes and IT resources invoked by those business processes a plurality of service specific correlator passing methods specifically designed to pass a correlator according to the specific resource invoked by the transaction and the specific protocol required to pass the correlator. As discussed above with reference to WSIF provides a WSIF client to call an IT resource through an appropriate WSIF provider. Calling an IT resource through an appropriate WSIF provider may require the use of a specific protocol for passing a correlator from the WSIF client to the appropriate WSIF provider. Such a WSIF client is therefore equipped with a plurality of service specific correlator passing methods enabling the WSIF client to pass a correlator to the appropriate WSIF provider using the proper protocol.

The method of includes gathering correlation data about the IT resource including calling at instrumentation point in a WSIF client an invocation interface method. The method of also includes selecting one of the plurality of service specific correlator passing methods . Selecting a correlator passing method may be carried out by calling an invocation method that has inserted after the invocation method a dummy instrumentation point. The return from the invocation method call indicates the protocol used to communicate with the resource selected by the invocation method. That protocol information can be used to select the appropriate service specific correlator passing method.

The method of also includes passing a correlator in accordance with the selected service specific correlator passing method . Passing a correlator in accordance with the selected service specific correlator passing method advantageously provides for passing the correlator to each several specific service providers in a format understandable by the specific service provider.

One example of passing a correlator in accordance with the selected service specific correlator passing method is carried out by the following exemplary command 

Another example of passing a correlator in accordance with the selected service specific correlator passing method is carried out by the following exemplary command 

Using this command a WSIF client may pass the correlator ID as part of the JMS message payload to a JMS provider.

Still another way of passing a correlator in accordance with the selected service specific correlator passing method is carried out by passing the correlator ID via the Java Thread Local Storage to an EJB or Java provider.

The examples of service specific correlator passing methods are provided for explanation and not for limitation. In fact many service specific correlator passing methods may be useful in correlating business workflows with transaction tracking and all such methods are well within the scope of the present invention.

In the method of the correlation data gathered at the instrumentation point about the IT resource further comprises correlation data gathered by calling the invocation interfaces. Calling the invocation interfaces may be carried out by making a call from a business process engine to WSIF to invoke an IT resource or web service.

Having linked through a transaction name having business semantics the business processes and the IT resources carrying out those business processes it is advantageous to provide correlation data generated by transaction tracking to the user. For further explanation sets forth a flow chart illustrating a further exemplary method for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking according to embodiments of the present invention that includes providing to a user through a user interface correlation data for the IT resource in association with a name having business semantics. Providing to a user through a user interface correlation data for the IT resource in association with a name having business semantics advantageously provides to business users transaction tracking that is tightly coupled to the business processes that those business users are typically most interested in.

The method of also includes providing to a user through a user interface correlation data for the IT resource in association with a name having semantics for the IT resource. Providing to a user through a user interface correlation data for the IT resource in association with a name having semantics for the IT resource advantageously provides to IT users transaction tracking tightly coupled to the IT processes carrying out business functions that IT users are typically most interested in.

Users may be empowered to alternate between correlation data for the IT resource presented in association with a name having business semantics and correlation data for the IT resource presented in association with a name having semantics for the IT resource through the use of switching mechanism in a user interface. Users may also be empowered to view both correlation data for the IT resource presented in association with a name having business semantics and correlation data for the IT resource presented in association with a name having semantics for the IT resource through the use of another display mechanism in a user interface. Such plural views advantageously provide for the display of correlation data to a wide range of users.

Exemplary embodiments of the present invention are described largely in the context of a fully functional computer system for correlating business workflows with transaction tracking. Readers of skill in the art will recognize however that the present invention also may be embodied in a computer program product disposed on signal bearing media for use with any suitable data processing system. Such signal bearing media may be transmission media or recordable media for machine readable information including magnetic media optical media or other suitable media. Examples of recordable media include magnetic disks in hard drives or diskettes compact disks for optical drives magnetic tape and others as will occur to those of skill in the art. Examples of transmission media include telephone networks for voice communications and digital data communications networks such as for example Ethernets and networks that communicate with the Internet Protocol and the World Wide Web. Persons skilled in the art will immediately recognize that any computer system having suitable programming means will be capable of executing the steps of the method of the invention as embodied in a program product. Persons skilled in the art will recognize immediately that although some of the exemplary embodiments described in this specification are oriented to software installed and executing on computer hardware nevertheless alternative embodiments implemented as firmware or as hardware are well within the scope of the present invention.

It will be understood from the foregoing description that modifications and changes may be made in various embodiments of the present invention without departing from its true spirit. The descriptions in this specification are for purposes of illustration only and are not to be construed in a limiting sense. The scope of the present invention is limited only by the language of the following claims.

