---

title: Back-lit stenciled post cover
abstract: A post assembly with illuminated information includes a hollow tube extending upwardly from a ground surface, the tube having a sidewall with textual or graphical information cut therethrough. A lighting assembly is disposed within the hollow tube, and a transparent or translucent sleeve positioned over the tube such that when the lighting assembly is activated, the textual or graphical information is visible through the transparent or translucent sleeve. The lighting assembly may include a flashing light. In the preferred embodiment the hollow tube is metal, and the transparent or translucent sleeve is constructed of plastic. The lighting assembly preferably comprises one or more fluorescent tubes. The textual or graphical information may be traffic-related, or it may concern other directives. The post preferably has a circular cross-section in the range of 2 to 10 inches, and an optional base may be provided for mounting to a ground surface.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07150117&OS=07150117&RS=07150117
owner: 
number: 07150117
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050225
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 829 033 filed Apr. 9 2001 the entire content of which is incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention generally relates to protective covers for stanchions and more particularly to a protective cover with an integrated lighting assembly for the purpose of providing illuminated information.

Stanchions are primarily used as protective barriers for guarding stationary structures against damage that would result from being struck by a vehicle. They are commonly found in industrial facilities parking garages and lots and around drive thru lanes at restaurants. Generally stanchions consist of an outer sleeve of elongated tubular steel and a concrete core. In construction one end and a portion of the elongated tubular steel body is supported perpendicularly in a fixed surface while the opposite end extends above the fixed surface at a distance approximately equal to the embedded portion. The interior cavity of the elongated tubular steel member is commonly filled with concrete as a reinforcing complement. While stanchions can adequately protect stationary structures against damage from vehicle accidents it is not uncommon for people to receive minor injuries or their vehicles to receive minor damage when contact is made with a stanchion.

Protective covers as described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 323 583 aid in reducing injury to people and damage to cars that make contact with unprotected stanchions. The smooth surface of protective covers minimizes the scratching or cutting that occurs when a grazing contact is made with an unprotected stanchion that typically has a rough surface. Additionally by covering a stanchion with a resilient protective cover repetitive maintenance that stems from long term exposure is minimized and its esthetic appearance is enhanced.

For various applications protective covers are made in several different sizes and colors. Such covers may also be customized to display a customer logo or advertisement. The lightweight structure and design of such covers allows for quick and easy installation. Once fitted to a stanchion the protective cover enhances its esthetic features while providing a durable and smooth surface that reduces repetitive maintenance and injury that may occur from minor accidents. Colored covers have good visibility but in dimly light to dark conditions the cover s visibility is substantially decreased.

Lighting bollards such as the one described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 438 484 are low level ground mounted lighting structures primarily in use in urban environments for lighting pedestrian walkways and building entrances at night. Lighting bollards typically feature a base a steel housing fashioned with one or more windows and a source of illumination. The source of illumination and its supporting electrical components are generally mounted within the interior of the housing and receives its power from an external source. Other types of low level outdoor lighting elements are used in residential landscaping applications to provide illumination around patios walkways or plant beds. These lighting elements commonly feature electrical conductors and a lamp receptacle disposed within an esthetic plastic housing. To provide power to these elements they are generally connected to a track lighting type of network below the earth s surface.

While both these lighting structures are intended to provide illumination neither is intended for use as a protective cover for a stanchion while providing light. A protective cover is useful for reducing repetitive maintenance and enhancing the esthetic character of stanchions but a lighted protective cover would provide the additional feature of high visibility in a dark environment. Lighting bollards can provide the necessary light to maintain high visibility in poorly illuminated areas but they cannot provide the protective function of a stanchion.

This invention is directed to a post assembly with illuminated information. The preferred embodiment includes a hollow tube extending upwardly from a ground surface the tube having a sidewall with textual or graphical information cut therethrough. A lighting assembly is disposed within the hollow tube and a transparent or translucent sleeve positioned over the tube such that when the lighting assembly is activated the textual or graphical information is visible through the transparent or translucent sleeve. The lighting assembly may include a flashing light.

In the preferred embodiment the hollow tube is metal and the transparent or translucent sleeve is constructed of plastic. The lighting assembly preferably comprises one or more fluorescent tubes. The textual or graphical information may be traffic related or it may concern other directives. The post preferably has a circular cross section in the range of 2 to 10 inches and an optional base may be provided for mounting to a ground surface.

This invention broadly provides an illuminated message through a transparent or translucent plastic sleeve the message being formed through the wall of an inner post. Referring now to the drawings shows a lighting assembly being installed into a post having stencilized letters formed therethrough. An electrical cord for the lighting assembly is shown at and an optional base with bolt holes may be provided.

In the preferred embodiment the post is constructed of steel and the letters are cut through the wall of the post using a cutting torch or other suitable approach such as laser cutting water jets and the like. The wall of the post may be of any suitable thickness generally in the range of one eighth of an inch to three eighths of an inch though pipes having a one quarter inch wall more or less are perhaps most typical.

Although the word STOP is shown for illustrative purposes other messages may certainly be provided including graphical images without letters alphanumerical messages and horizontal as well as vertical orientations. Examples of other suitable traffic related messages may include SLOW NO PARKING HANDICAP ZONE RAILROAD CHILDREN CROSSING TAXICAB STAND BUS STOP ENTRANCE EXIT FLOOR NUMBER OFFICIAL MILITARY AUTHORIZED VEHICLES ONLY RESTRICTED AREA STREET NAME ADDRESS SPEED LIMIT FIRE ZONE ONE WAY THIS WAY NO EXIT DEAD END KEEP OUT RESERVED PARKING FOOD BEER and so forth.

In the preferred embodiment the lighting assembly comprises a plurality of fluorescent tubes though in alternative embodiments other light sources may be used including incandescent neon light emitting diodes or other technologies.

