---

title: Webcast metadata extraction system and method
abstract: A metadata extraction and display system and method are provided in which the system extracts metadata from a presentation and then, based on a configuration, displays the extracted metadata synchronized with the display elements of the presentation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07711722&OS=07711722&RS=07711722
owner: ON24, Inc.
number: 07711722
owner_city: San Francisco
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051007
---
This invention relates generally to online multimedia communications and in particular to a system for using information stored in a Microsoft PowerPoint file to provide extended functionality within the context of a user interface viewed by audience of a webcast or a web conference.

Various types of online multimedia presentations are known including webcasts and web conferences. A webcast is an online presentation that includes and audio or video component that is delivered over the internet. A web conference is an online presentation that may include a telephone based audio video component but also includes a standard internet based audio or video stream such as delivered by Quicktime Real or Windows Media Servers.

One of the primary problems associated with online presentations is the desire to add metadata into the online presentation. The addition of the metadata makes the experience feature rich and compelling and adds interactivity to what would otherwise be accomplished in a more static manner by just reading a text file or listening to a recording. To be more specific one of the primary functions of online webcasts and web conferences is the ability to present a sequence of slides extracted from a Microsoft PowerPoint document and to be able to add interactive elements to it. The technique most commonly used to address this problem is to require manual entry of the metadata into a data repository typically a database using client software that may web based or may require installing a software package. It is desirable to have a system that automatically extracts the metadata from a file such as a Microsoft PowerPoint presentation. Thus it is desirable to provide a webcast metadata extraction system and method and it is to this end that the present invention is directed.

A metadata extraction system and method are provided in which metadata from a presentation is extracted and then displayed based on configuration settings with an online presentation wherein the metadata is synchronized with the presentation materials. In one embodiment the presentation is a Microsoft PowerPoint file although the metadata extraction system may be used with other types of files. When used with a PowerPoint file since a PowerPoint is the typical medium for generating graphical slides the system bypasses the need for additional software or external user accounts for the purpose of adding agenda transcript and chapter type functionality to an webcast or web conference. The system is fully self contained and does not require downloads of proprietary software for configuring the functionality under discussion beyond the ubiquitous MS PowerPoint software originally used to create the slide presentation. The system also does not require data entry in an external software system or database to store meta data associated with a presentation.

Thus in accordance with the invention a metadata extraction and presentation tool for an online presentation is provided. The tool has a database containing a presentation file having one or more display elements and a metadata extraction tool coupled to the database that automatically extracts one or more pieces of metadata from the presentation file contained in the database wherein the one or more pieces of metadata being associated the one or more display elements of the presentation file. The tool also has an event console having a display element portion and a metadata display portion wherein the display element portion displays a particular display element of the presentation and the metadata display portion displays a configurable portion of the extracted metadata associated with the particular display element.

The invention is particularly applicable to a PowerPoint metadata extraction system and method and it is in this context that the invention will be described. It will be appreciated however that the system and method in accordance with the invention has greater utility since the metadata extraction system and method may be used a variety of different files and formats and can extract metadata for the various different file formats. In more detail the system is described in the context of an online multimedia presentation in which a list of slide titles from a PowerPoint presentation that appear as Agenda Transcript or Chapter elements are synchronized with the audio video as well as graphics and other interactive elements on the screen. However the invention may be used with other online presentations that can be viewed by an attendee wherein the online presentations may include slides like Powerpoint graphics URL s pushed by a Presenter to the Audience member polls and surveys comments and questions answered by the Presenter via text or audio video and or a view of the shared desktop or of a particular application on the Presenter s computer.

In the description below a transcript is a long textual description of what the presenter is planning to say. A PowerPoint presentation provides a Notes area to help a presenter prepare for the presentation. The invention uses the contents of the notes field to provide a static transcript type text description of the slide being presented. The transcript is not a literal transcription of what the presenter actually said rather it is meant to list the gist of the slide and what the presenter plans to say or provide as a takeaway with the slide. An agenda is functionality that lists the main topics to be covered during a presentation. The headings for the agenda are extracted from the Title field of each slide creating an automated indexing of the presentation one per slide. An agenda is typically presented as a panel with several selections. The agenda can also contain a brief description associated with the agenda item extracted from the Notes field for the slide as discussed above for the transcript. A chapter is similar to the agenda in that it provides a mechanism to index the slide deck or the presentation. However the chapter is typically represented as a drop down listbox and by default the chapter may also use the slide Title for metadata.

In the online presentation that may use the extracted metadata an event console is a user interface that is presented to an audience member and contains the online multimedia presentation. In the event console whenever the Presenter pushes a particular slide to the audience the transcript agenda or chapter displayed on the user interface changes to the newly active slide so that the information is context sensitive. Each of these elements the transcript agenda and chapter can provide the ability for the end user to use a hyperlink to navigate to a different part of the presentation a different slide and in the case of an on demand streaming audio video presentation to the related point in the stream . The hyperlink provides significant interactivity and control to the audience member. If it is not desirable for the purposes of a particular presentation to have each of the individual slides indexed this system allows for a special Agenda Slide Deck to be uploaded. If uploaded the agenda slide deck becomes the only source of the Transcript Agenda and Chapter functionality and any other slides used in the presentation are not used for these interactive features. Now an on line presentation system that may use the metadata extraction system will be described.

In more detail the asset acquisition and event management portion may further comprise an asset acquisition portion and an event management portion wherein the asset acquisition portion performs one or more of the following functions recording of the piece of media content editing of the piece of media content encoding of the piece of media content and asset tagging. The event manager module further comprises an asset manager module an event manager module a presentation manager module and an encoder controller . The asset manager module prior to an event imports exports content pieces of media into from a library of media as needed and manages the assets for each event presentation. The event manager module may perform actions function prior to and after an event. Prior to a particular event the event manager module may reserve the event in the system both resources and access points set up an event console which a user interacts with to manage the event and then send messages to each recipient of the upcoming event with the details of how to access operate the event. After a particular event the event manager module may permit a user to import an old event presentation into the system in order to re use one or more pieces of the old event presentation. The presentation manager module during a particular event presentation generates an event file with the slides of the event presentation URLs and polls to an encoder controller to distribute the particular event presentation to the users. The encoder controller encodes the event presentation stream to one or more distribution server that distributes the event presentation to the users.

As shown in the database may include data about each event including the clients to which the event is being provided and the media associated with the event one or more event users the display of the particular event the assets associated with the event the metrics for the event and other event data. In combination with this data in the database for a particular event operations and commands from the event manager module are downloaded to the distribution servers that distribute each event to each client for the particular event over a distribution network . As shown the event presentation may be distributed to one or more different clients that use one or more different methods to access the event. The clients may include a client that downloads the presentation and then views the presentation offline.

The application server portion may preferably be implemented using an Enterprise JavaBeans EJBs container implemented using a BEA Weblogic product that is commercially sold. The application server management portion may be known as middleware and may include a media metric manager a chat manager a media URL manager an event manager a presentation manager and an event administration manager which may each be software applications performed the specified management operations. The application server portion communicates with the database using a protocol such as the well known Java Database Connectivity JDBC protocol in a preferred embodiment of the invention. The database may preferably be implemented using an Oracle 8 9 database product that is commercially available. As shown the database may include media data including URL data slide data poll data and document data. The database may further include metric data event data and chat data wherein the event data may further preferably include administration data configuration data and profile data.

A third setup option user interface portion is relevant to the All slides option only. This option lets the presenter determine what the audience members see in the event console for inactive slides. The option permits the presenter to select Slide Title Only that displays only the title of the slide Notes Only that displays only the associated notes to the slides and Slide Title and Notes that displays the slide title as well as notes. A fourth setup option user interface portion permits the presenter to configure what information end users see for the active slides which can include Slide Title Only Notes Only and Slide Title and Notes which are the same options described above. A fifth setup option user interface portion allows the presenter to select when they want to display the Notes information in an event console where the presenter can select from a Live Presentation an Ondemand Presentation or both.

A sixth setup option user interface portion allows the presenter to configure the vertical spacing between adjacent entries of the slide information. A seventh setup option user interface portion allows the presenter to control the display style of the actual information displayed in Event Console. One or more known cascading style sheets CSS can be used to control the fonts sizes and lot of other display aspects. Now a number of examples of the event console that incorporates the extracted metadata in accordance with the invention is described.

In the examples of the event console set forth below a very simple event console with different kinds of configurations possible for above mentioned functionality are shown. In accordance with the invention the invention can be used with any event console and is not limited to the simple event consoles shown in . In these examples the selected values for the selected slide deck option the Live or OnDemand availability option option the vertical spacing option option and the CSS option option are unchanged. illustrates an example of an event console user interface using a first configuration of the metadata in accordance with the invention. In these examples of the event console the event console has a display element portion that in these examples displays each slide and a metadata display portion that displays the extracted metadata associated with the particular display element. In this example the event console displays all slides slide title and notes for inactive slides and slide title and notes for the active slides. Thus as shown in a slide transcript portion of the user interface a title for each slide as well as the notes for each slide is displayed. In addition the active slide Slide in this example is highlighted.

The metadata extraction system is self contained and does not require the download of any proprietary software to generate the metadata other than the program already being used by the presenter PowerPoint in the example described to generate the presentation. The system also does not require data entry in an external software system or database to store meta data associated with a presentation. The system can be used with live or on demand versions of the presentations. Advantageously since the end user does not have to master a new application to enter the metadata into the application the chances of user error are reduced the amount of time required for training the user is minimal and the security concerns associated with using yet another application are also reduced. Furthermore as information in the PowerPoint slide changes it is easy for the creator of the PowerPoint file to add in the metadata into the slide deck leading to better maintainability of the presentation. As a result there is a consistent and higher quality user experience for all viewers and a more streamlined setup process.

While the foregoing has been with reference to a particular embodiment of the invention it will be appreciated by those skilled in the art that changes in this embodiment may be made without departing from the principles and spirit of the invention the scope of which is defined by the appended claims.

