---

title: Isometric system, method and apparatus for isometric exercise
abstract: System, method and apparatus for carrying out isometric exercises for therapeutic purposes. As employed in a therapeutic mode the apparatus may only be programmed within mandated therapeutic parameter limitations. During therapeutic trials, the user is visually and aurally cued throughout the test sequence and the therapeutic data evolved during the regimen is recorded and recoverable from archival memory. Particular target force modes can be selected to allow stimulation of nitric oxide release, and modulation of serum lipid composition.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07448265&OS=07448265&RS=07448265
owner: MD Systems, Inc.
number: 07448265
owner_city: Westerville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050815
---
This application is a continuation in part of copending application Ser. No. 10 268 363 filed Oct. 10 2002 and claims the benefit of Provisional Application No. 60 330 265 filed Oct. 18 2001.

The use of isometric as compared to rhythmic exercise in the general field of athletic strength development as well as a therapy for strength recovery has been the subject of somewhat controversial discourse over the past decades. In general such exercise has been considered to promote for example coronary risk factors. See generally 

However as such attitudes persisted some investigators commenced to observe contradictions to these generally accepted beliefs. See for example the following publications 

With the approach of protocol developed by Wiley the isometric regimen is closely controlled both in terms of exerted force and in the timing of trials or exertions. The system and method described by Wiley are known to be useful for treating hypertension. Hypertension is associated with an increased risk of a wide range of disease and disorder including stroke organ failure and particularly cardiopathy. The exact causes of hypertension are rarely known with certainty but risk factors for hypertension include obesity genetic factors smoking diet and inactivity. As Wiley has shown not all forms of exercise provide equivalent therapeutic benefit to the cardiovascular system and for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia with a protocol for brief maximal isometric exercise providing a clear benefit.

Hypertension hypercholesterolemia atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease hare interrelated in their causes treatment and effect on the body. The class of drugs known as HMG CoA reductase inhibitors or statins is widely prescribed for treatment of hypercholesterolemia and associated cardiovascular disease including the debilitating effects of progressive atherosclerosis. Various statins that have been clinically utilized include atovastatin cerivastatin fluvastatin ovastatin simvastatin among others. The statin drugs were initially prescribed to relieve hypercholesterolemia and to reduce the blood concentrations of low density lipoprotein LDL and triglycerides. It has become apparent that the statin drugs apparently have additional therapeutic benefits that are independent and or interrelated with the effects of reduction in blood cholesterol concentration. The effect of statin drugs thus includes a reduction in vascular inflammation and a protection of the heart against ischemic disorders. For more information on the pleiotropic effects of the statin drugs see generally 

Although the exact mechanism of statin drug action for cardioprotection is not fully known it is widely believed that statin drugs stimulate nitric oxide synthase activity in vascular endothelium and presumably in other tissues. Disorders of the vascular endothelium related to in nitric oxide metabolism are believed to play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemia. Thus certain cardioprotective effects of statin drugs can be mimicked in part by other physiological stimuli that induce nitric oxide synthase and increase nitric oxide availability. Moreover nitric oxide metabolism is interconnected with the metabolism and regulation of LDL cholesterol and triglycerides and with the progress of atherosclerosis. As one example of this interrelationship changes in nitric oxide levels have been inversely correlated with changes in LDL cholesterol concentrations.

Nitric oxide NO has been identified as a signaling molecule in mammalian and other systems. NO is a labile endogenously produced gas that is enzymatically synthesized can rapidly diffuse and quickly disappear. NO is known to be a potent regulator of blood pressure due to its activity as a vasodilator but has a diverse action on a wide variety of organ systems. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase eNOS is induced to synthesize NO by blood vessel wall shear stress. Upon the activation of eNOS and induction of NO synthesis NO is released by endothelial cells. Based on the position of endothelial cells lining the inner surface of blood vessels NO can be released into the blood stream where it can act both locally and systemically. NO induces vasodilation by a reduction in the contraction of smooth muscle cells lining blood vessels. NO acts as a negative feedback for mean arterial pressure since as arterial pressure increases wall shear stress increases inducing eNOS and increasing the NO concentration. As NO concentration increases smooth muscle contraction is decreased blood vessel lumen diameter increases arteriole resistance decreases and arterial pressure decreases. The modulating action of wall shear stress on eNOS activity and NO production serves to maintain wall shear stress at a constant level. A diagram highlighting some of the interactions between NO local metabolites wall shear stress and smooth muscle contraction is shown in .

Prolonged elevation of wall shear stress in addition to activation of eNOS leads to the transcriptional activation of the eNOS gene in endothelial cells. After several hours eNOS enzyme levels increase due to the induced transcription of the eNOS gene. Increased levels of eNOS enzyme in endothelial cells increases those cells ability to release NO following induction of eNOS activity. It is thus expected that those cells which have experienced prolonged elevation of wall shear stress will have an increased ability to synthesize NO and the same levels of wall shear stress will result in a greater synthesis of NO. One effect of increased eNOS levels is a reduction in the amount of wall shear stress that is required to induce biologically significant NO levels. Blood vessels that have been entrained by prolonged elevation of wall shear stress will release more NO relative to shear stress and the vasodilation effect of NO will be increased Higher relative NO concentration leads to reduced smooth muscle contraction increased blood vessel lumen diameter and decreased arteriole resistance. Assuming that the cardiac output of the heart does not change the net effect of a lower set point for responding to wall shear stress is a reduction in total peripheral resistance in blood vessels and a reduction in mean arterial pressure.

Similar to the effects of the statin drugs an improvement in endothelial function is interconnected with LDL and cholesterol blood levels and NO bioavailability. LDL and cholesterol have been shown to prevent the down regulation of eNOS. In turn down regulation of eNOS is apparently mediated by the stimulation of levels of caveolin 1 by LDL. Caveolin 1 is an important inhibitor of eNOS catalytic activity. Modulation of NO is expected to affect the interrelated blood lipid concentrations of VHDL HDL LDL and cholesterol. To the extent that the pleiotropic activity of the cholesterol lowering statin drugs is modulated by NO levels stimulation of NO bioavailability is expected to affect blood lipid composition. For additional background on the interrelationship between LDL and NO see generally 

As described above it has been known for some time that exercise can provide relief from hypertension in certain individuals. As the modulation of nitric oxide levels is part of a feedback system that responds in part to the stretching and extensibility of blood vessels of the body it is hypothesized that exercise in general plays a role in stimulating cycles of NO release and effectively providing some of the benefits of statin drugs including improvement in endothelial function increased nitric oxide bioavailability anti oxidant effects anti inflammatory protection and stabilization of atherosclerotic plaques. Notwithstanding the effects of the modulation of NO bioavailability exercise is known to modulate blood cholesterol and blood lipid composition.

There is widespread discourse on the relative benefits of particular forms of exercise. There is an ongoing need for patients suffering from hypertension hypercholesteremia atherosclerosis and other cardiovascular and cardiopulmonary diseases to obtain the maximum benefit from the exercise utilized. Patients who are suffering from severe cardiovascular disease may be unable to engage in intense exercise and many patients may be unable to engage in other forms of exercise due to limitations in time or facility availability. The invention disclosed herein provides for a device system and method of exercise that can be optimized to provide an improved benefit to the patient in stimulating endothelial function overall blood vessel health and cardiovascular benefit while at the same time limiting the dangerous side effects of intensive exercise.

In contrast to the approach of Wiley earlier subjects or trainees undergoing isometric exercise stressed the involved musculature to their full or maximum capability publication 11 or at some submaximal force as long as it could be sustained in either case only terminating with the onset of unendurable fatigue. Such approaches often have incurred somewhat deleterious results as evidenced by the injuries sustained in consequence of improper weightlifting procedures. Weightlifting procedures or endeavors exhibit a significant isometric factor. See generally 

The diagnosis of patient hand arm strength using isometric based testing has been employed by physiologists physical therapists and medical personnel for over three decades. These procedures function to evaluate hand arm trauma or dysfunction and involve the patient use of a handgrip based dynamometer. The dynamometer is grasped by the patient and squeezed to a maximum capability under the verbal instruction of an attending therapist or diagnostician. The hand dynamometer most widely used for these evaluations incorporates a grip serving to apply force through closed circuit hydraulics to a force readout provided by an analog meter facing outwardly so as to be practitioner readable. Adjustment of the size of the grip of the dynamometer is provided by inward or outward positioning of a forwardly disposed grip component. The dynamometers currently are marketed under the trade designation Jamar Hydraulic Hand Dynamometer by Sammons Preston of Bolingbrook Ill. An extended history of use of these dynamometers has resulted in what may be deemed a standardization of testing protocols. For instance three of the above noted grip length adjustments are employed in a standardized approach and verbal instructions on the part of the testing attendant as well as the treatment of force data read from the analog meter are now matters of accepted protocol. In the latter regard multiple maximum strength values are recorded whereupon average strengths standard deviations and coefficients of variation are computed by the practitioner. In one test the instrument is alternately passed between the patient s right and left hands to derive a maximum strength output reading each 1.5 seconds or 2.5 seconds. Reading and hand recording strength values for such protocols has remained problematic. The protocols for example have been the subject of recommendations by the American Society of Hand Therapist ASHT and have been discussed in a variety of publications including the following 

In about 1998 the above noted Wiley protocols as described in connection with publication 12 above were incorporated in a compact lightweight isometric device. Described in detail in U.S. Pat. No. 5 904 639 entitled Apparatus System and Method for Carrying Out Protocol Based Isometric Exercise Regimens by Smyser et al. the hand held dynamometer has a hand grip which incorporates a load cell assembly. Extending from the hand grip is a liquid crystal display and two user actuated control switches or switch buttons. The display is mounted in sloping fashion with respect to the grip such that the user can observe important visual cues or prompts while carrying out a controlled exercise regimen specifically structured in terms of force values and timing in accordance with the Wiley protocols. This device is therapeutic as opposed to diagnostic in nature and is microprocessor driven with archival memory. External communication with the battery powered instrument is made available through a communications port such that the device may be configured by programming and additional data such as blood pressure values and the like may be inserted into its memory from an external device. Visual and audible cueing not only guides the user through a multi step protocol but also aids the user in maintaining pre computed target level grip compression levels.

Of course it will be beneficial to incorporate improved diagnostic features for hand arm evaluation techniques with therapist or practitioner designed therapeutic protocols specifically tailored to the condition of a given patient and which provide a control over such therapies clearly establishing such therapies as beneficial to strength development and recovery. One particular diagnostic and therapeutic feature that would be beneficial to incorporate is protocol that modulates wall shear stress of blood vessels so as to increase the bioavailability of nitric oxide and foster a reduction in total peripheral resistance in blood vessels and a reduction in mean arterial pressure along with the other physiologic benefits associated with stimulation of NO signaling pathways including reduction in LDL and cholesterol concentrations and an increase. in arterial flexibility.

The present invention is addressed to a system method and apparatus for carrying out a controlled isometric regimen by a user. Being microprocessor driven the instrument is programmed to carry out established diagnostic as well as newly developed grip based isometric regimens. When employed for carrying out a diagnostic maximum grip test the diagnostician selects configuration parameters and the instrument provides both visual and audible prompts and cues throughout the procedure. Maximum grip forces for each of the sequence of trials of this procedure are selected typically by the diagnostician and when so selected are recorded in instrument memory along with calendar data and processor computed values for average grip force standard deviation of the force values throughout a sequence of tests and corresponding coefficients of variation. At the termination of the diagnostic procedure memory recorded test data are displayable to the diagnostician and may be downloaded through a communications port to a computer facility.

For each of the diagnostic procedures the widthwise extent of the instrument grip may be both varied in standard inch increments from a minimum width. The grip is further configured such that the visually perceptible readout of the instrument may be viewed only by the diagnostician where deemed appropriate.

An important aspect of the therapeutic method associated with the instrument of the invention resides in the limiting of user performance to carry out the regimen of trials. In this regard the instrument is programmed to perform only within predetermined and mandated test limits. Each therapeutic regimen is based upon an initial evaluation of the maximum gripping force capability of the user. Under that limitation target load factors hold on target load intervals intervening rest intervals and trial repetition numbers may be elected only from pre established and mandated memory retained ranges. The program also nominates rest intervals and hold on target intervals in correspondence with user elected target force factors. Thus valuable strength recovery and development may be achieved but only within safe limits.

During each of the above therapeutic regimens an audible warning is elicited whenever the user grip force value exceeds a computed upper limit. During each timed interval wherein the user is prompted to grip at a target force value computed with respect to the pre tested maximum grip force a dynamic bar graph and center point display is provided as a visual cue related to desired grip performance. Additionally a rapid succession of score values are computed and the average thereof recorded at the end of each trial of a given regimen. These scores permit a therapist to access the quality of the performance of the user. In general trial data is recorded in conjunction with calendar data and as before may be downloaded to a computer facility from an instrument contained communications port.

An additional object of the invention is to influence biological parameters of the user by selecting target loads that stimulate particular biological pathways. In one target force mode the invention allows stimulation of nitric oxide bioavailability which directly influences resting blood pressure and overall cardiovascular health. In other instances the target force mode can be directed to maximize the exercise benefit for modulating blood lipid composition including reducing low density lipoprotein LDL and cholesterol in the blood.

The invention accordingly comprises the method system and apparatus possessing the construction combination of elements arrangement of parts and steps which are exemplified in the following detailed description.

For a fuller understanding of the nature and objects of the invention reference should be made to the following detailed description taken in connection with the accompanying drawings.

Isometric exercise apparatus under which the methodology of the invention may be carried out is lightweight portable battery powered and sufficiently rugged to withstand the compressive pressures which it necessarily endures during use. The instrument is programmable such that it may be utilized by a therapeutic practitioner for diagnostic purposes employing established grip test modalities. Strength measurements carried out during these modes are compiled in memory and the practitioner is afforded calculated values for average grip force standard deviation and coefficient of variation with respect to grip force trials. Furthermore individual strength measurements compiled in these averages whether taken rapidly or slowly are stored in memory and may be reviewed by the therapist.

Additionally the instrument is employable as a therapeutic device. First a protocol is nominated by prescribing nominal parameters of the effort. Each isometric regimen is controlled initially by requiring that a maximum grip strength be established for each individual patient or user. Then the practitioner may elect parameters of grip force and timing under mandated memory contained parameter limits. Accordingly the user will be unable to carry out strength enhancement therapies which would otherwise constitute an excessive grip force regimen. For carrying out the noted diagnostic procedures as well as therapy activities the grip widthwise extent is variable from 1 inches to 2 inches such variation being adjustable in inch increments. This is in keeping with standardized diagnostic practices. Further with respect to diagnostic procedures the display or readout of the instrument can be adjusted with respect to the grip structuring such that only the practitioner or therapist may observe the data which is being developed during a diagnostic protocol.

Looking to the instrument or apparatus is represented generally at as having a housing identified generally at . Housing is formed of acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ABS and thus is resistant to impact phenomena and the like. shows that the housing includes a hand grasping portion and an integrally formed interacting portion . Interacting portion supports a readout assembly which is configured as an elongate liquid crystal display LCD . Additionally located at the interacting portion are two finger actuable switches represented generally at . Of these switches switch is designated as a menu switch while switch is designated as a select switch. Note that the readout assembly is angularly oriented with respect to the grip axis of the apparatus . With this configuration the user may observe prompts and cues appearing at the readout as represented by the symbolic user eye station and line of sight represented symbolically at arrow . In this regard note that the hand of the user is grasping the hand grasping portion . For the arrangement shown the hand grasping portion is represented as exhibiting its largest widthwise extent i.e. 2 inches. To gain this larger widthwise extent auxiliary grip components and are employed in conjunction with the hand grasping portion . These auxiliary grip components will be seen to be removable as well as universally positionable so as to provide the noted widthwise adjustments in inch increments.

Referring to the instrument is shown as it is employed for diagnostic activities. For this purpose the auxiliary grip components and as seen in have been reversed in their orientation at hand grasping portion . Note additionally that the symbolic eye station at is now that of the diagnostician with a line of sight as represented symbolically at arrow addressing the readout not shown . Note that the line of sight is directed toward the auxiliary grip component and the data readout for diagnostic purposes is not visually available to the user whose hand is represented at . Seen additionally in is a serial communications port and a battery compartment access cover . The serial port offers for diagnostic purposes the instantaneous transfer of real time data to remote monitoring and data archiving equipment.

Looking to an exploded perspective view of the apparatus is provided. In the figure the grasping portion is seen to be comprised of two mirror image sides and . Integrally molded with the sides and are the two housing components of the interactive portion as shown respectively at and . Plastic inserts or plugs are shown at and which are insertable within respective screw cavities and . Extending from grasping portion side is an integrally molded screw receiving post . In similar fashion screw receiving post is integrally formed with and extends from component . Additionally a screw receiving post extends from component . Post receives a screw inserted through a battery cavity inwardly disposed from cover . Post additionally functions to contribute to the support of a printed circuit board by virtue of its insertion through an aperture formed therein. Note that the printed circuit carrying board also supports communications port . In this regard the port extends into a rectangular opening formed within interactive portion of housing . Further extending inwardly from component are two force plate support plates and

Disposed centrally within the cavity defined by gripping portion sides and is a steel thrust plate having a thickness and rigidity elected to withstand compressive gripping forces which may range for example up to about 205 pounds. Plate is configured with two holes and which are used to restrain the plate from disengaging from the assembly when fitted over respective posts and . Elongate side of thrust plate is configured for insertion within an elongate groove of a base grip component . Grip component is formed of a rigid plastic and includes an outwardly disposed base grasping surface upwardly located in adjacency with the grasping surface is one component of a base connector assembly represented generally at and which is seen to be integrally molded with the grip component and incorporates a slot or opening in conjunction with a tab receiving trough . A tab component not shown of the base connector assembly feature of the base grip component will be seen to extend from the end thereof opposite connector assembly component .

Two oppositely disposed edge extensions and of the trust plate are configured for operative association with a load cell assembly represented generally at . Load cell assembly includes an elongate steel base incorporating two slots for receiving extensions and one such slot being revealed at . Connection between the base and thrust plate is provided by pins not shown which extend through mated bores and and and . The load cell assembly further includes an elongate outer force component . Two field plate form load cells and are mounted from load cell mount structures shown respectively at and formed within base . Such mounting is in cantilever fashion the load cell being attached to mount by a screw and mounting plate assembly . Similarly load cell is attached in cantilever fashion to mount structure by a screw and mounting plate assembly . Outer force component is seen to have a centrally disposed rectangular post portion which is attached by a connector plate assembly to the mutually inwardly extending ends of the load cells and . the attachment plate assembly for this union is seen in general at . Assembly is seen to be formed of two plate components and coupled in turn to load cells and . Screws are used to effect the attachment.

The base grip component positioned oppositely of base grip component is shown at . In similar fashion as component the base grip component is configured with a base connector assembly having one component at which incorporates a slot and trough not shown in similar fashion as described at in connection with component . a tab protrusion of generally cylindrical configuration shown at is disposed oppositely from connector assembly component . The rigid plastic base component is attached to elongate outer force component of the load cell assembly . This attachment is provided by the insertion and crimping of two posts and within respective holes and formed within force component . a slot in component is provided to positively locate it onto the outer profile of component . In general posts and are inserted through holes and and then melted with a hot iron to mechanically secure the two pieces and together as one sub assembly. With the arrangement shown gripping compressive force is asserted from the base component through the thrust plate into the load cell assembly . This force is counteracted by gripping force asserted from base gripping component .

Auxiliary grip component is shown in the figure in spaced adjacency with respect to the base grip component . Auxiliary component is configured with an outwardly disposed auxiliary grasping surface of generally half cylindrical cross section with a grasping surface profile curved concavely outwardly for example at region . This curvature is provided for enhancing grip contact with the palm of the user hand and for applying force centrally to the load cell assembly. Component is formed with an auxiliary connector assembly which includes a flexible engaging tab configured for insertion within the connector component of base grip component . Connection at the opposite end is provided by a curved slot not shown which receives the tab protrusion of base grip component . The connector assemblies are universal such that each of the auxiliary grip components may be mounted upon either of the base grip components or . In this regard not that a similar flexible engaging tab is positioned upwardly upon auxiliary grip component . Similarly the component is configured having a curved slot at its opposite end which receives tabs for example as at . The mounting of either auxiliary grip component or will increase the widthwise extent of the grip by one half inch. Accordingly with both auxiliary grip components installed the widthwise extent of the grip is increased to 2 inches.

Interacting region also includes a top cover . Formed as the other components of ABS plastic the cover includes a rectangular bezel opening within which the LCD is positioned. Integrally formed with top cover is a downwardly depending switch cover through which two rectangular openings and are provided. The switching function is mounted upon a separate circuit board which is seen to carry two push actuated switches as earlier described at and and identified by the same numeration in the instant figure. Located over the switches and is a flexible polymeric cover formed of a flexible polymeric material such as Santoprene a thermoplastic elastomer marketed by General Polymers of Charlotte N.C. Circuit board is supported between two slots formed in the interior of side components and one of these slots is seen at . The LCD is mounted upon a circuit board supported in turn from interactive components and . A bus type wiring harness electrically associates the switching function LCS load cell assembly the battery within compartment and the circuitry carried by circuit board .

A sectional view of the instrument is provided at . In the figure base grip component is shown in conjunction with base connector assembly component . In that regard the slot again is revealed as well as the tab receiving trough . At the opposite end the base connector assembly includes an outwardly extending arcuate tab . Auxiliary gripping component is shown coupled to the base grip . Note that the auxiliary component has a grasping surface the profile of which is undulatory to provide a finger grasping configuration. This undulatory profile further functions to provide a finger grasping configuration which centers the gripping force on handle . The lower portion of the base grip component is seen to be formed having an outwardly extending arcuate tab which slideably nests within the corresponding arcuate slot in auxiliary grip . The connector assembly for base grip component is identical. In this regard the component includes an arcuate outwardly extending tab and a slotted receiver structured identically as that described at . Auxiliary grip component is connected to base grip component by sliding a protruding tab or tongue into arcuate slot . Additionally the flexible engaging tab is shown extending through a slot in connector component .

In both auxiliary grip components and are employed to provide a maximum widthwise grip extent of 2 inches. It may be observed in that the positioning of the auxiliary grips is reversed in the sense of the grip configuration shown in .

Turning to a block diagrammatic representation of the controller components of instrument is revealed. In general the instrument is microprocessor driven for example employing a type 8051 microprocessor as represented at block . The controller is powered by a standard 9 volt battery. That voltage then is regulated to 5 volts for use by the circuit components. A power supply to the strain gauge implemented load cells and is dropped by a resistor such that the maximum current applied is limited to 50 milliamps. Such power supply is represented in the figure at block which in turn is seen to be associated with microprocessor via line and with switch via lines and . Note that switches and respectively are labeled menu and select . Switch serves the additional function of an on switch or enablement switch. Power also is seen to be supplied to the communications connector as represented at line . Communications connector in turn is seen coupled to a communications driver as represented at line . Driver associated with the microprocessor as represented at line . The microprocessor also provides control over an annunciator or buzzer as represented at block and line . Similarly control to the liquid crystal display LCD from microprocessor is represented at line . A real time clock is provided with the controller circuit as represented at block . Time and date data from that clock are used in conjunction with the monitoring and memory features of the instrument such that important data including date and time of a given trial regimen can be retained in memory and downloaded via the communications port when called for. The association of the real time clock function and microprocessor is represented at line . Archival memory as well as temporary memory are provided with the controller. Archival memory may be provided for example as an electrically erasable programmable read only memory EE PROM an 8 kilobyte device which requires no power to sustain its memory retention i.e. it is non volatile. The archival memory is represented at block and its association with the microprocessor is represented at line .

Load cells and are represented with that numeration in . These load cells are each configured as a four resistance balance bridge type load cell. The outputs of load cells and are directed to the amplification function as represented by respective lines and extending to amplifier block . The output of amplifier is represented at line extending to an analog to digital converter function represented at block . Correspondingly output of the converter function is directed to the microprocessor as represented at line . Microprocessor converts the signal to a force value in pounds or kilograms which is displayed in the LCD . The menu switch is shown associated with microprocessor via line while the select switch is associated with that processing function as represented at line .

Each of the instruments is calibrated using nineteen combinations of six standard weights. A best fit is determined and the instrument is called upon to have a root mean square error RMS of 0.1 pounds or less to pass calibration requirements. Once the calibration constants has been determined the system is loaded with two redundant copies of the calibration constants. The zero point of the load cell is monitored at all times during the use of the instrument . If a drift is found then a warning is shown at the LCD display . If any lead wire to the load cell becomes disconnected then the built in monitoring detects this occurrence shows an error message and disables further use of instrument until the power is reset. These features insure that the force reading shown is accurate and true. Absolute values of the outputs of load cells and are summed to provide a force output signal. In general the load measurement accuracy of instrument is better than 0.1 pound of 0.1 of applied force whichever is greater.

In the discourse to follow the sequences of the program protocol carried out by instrument are represented in flow chart fashion. In general these flow charts commence with a configuration sequence if desired and then look to two diagnostic protocols followed by two therapeutic protocols.

Turning to the procedure seen to commence as represented at block with the selection of the grip widthwise extent. In general that grip width is elected to accommodate variations in user hand sizes. The program then continues as represented at line and block wherein where appropriate one or two auxiliary grip components as at and are installed in an orientation providing for user viewing of display as illustrated in connection with or in an arrangement for therapeutic practitioner viewing to the exclusion of the user as described in connection with . The program then continues as represented at line and block providing for the enablement of instrument by actuation of select switch . Upon such actuation as represented at line and block a start up message is provided at display assembly for an interval of two seconds. Then as represented at line and block a prompt is displayed at readout identifying a default configuration wherein pounds as opposed to kilograms are elected an audible tone is enabled and for a diagnostic test referred to as rapid exchange wherein instrument is passed from one hand of the user to the other and then back for a number of exchanges the user providing a grip force trial at each exchange. The rapid exchange default values are ten exchanges with 1.5 seconds available for user griping or squeezing. Following the publication of the screen as represented at block should the user not actuate either the switches or then as represented at line and block the instrument will turn off or power down at the end of a five minute interval. This feature is always active i.e. turning off five minutes after a last switch actuation.

With the publication of the screen as represented at block then as represented at line and block the practitioner or user is called upon to determine whether to enter a configuration sequence or to progress to a diagnostic grip test. To enter the latter diagnostic grip test sequence as represented at line and block by pressing switch display will prompt the user to press the select switch to commence a diagnostic grip test sequence. Where the select switch is actuated then the program enters the diagnostic grip test sequence as represented at line and node A.

Where a determination on the part of the practitioner or user is made to enter a configuration sequence then as represented at line and block the configuration sequence is entered by actuating switch . As represented at line and block the initial configuration looks to units. Recall from block that the instrument defaults to a units evaluated in pounds. As represented at line and block by actuating select switch the units parameter can be converted to kilograms instead of pounds. The program then continues upon depressing or actuating menu switch as represented at either lines or leading to block . As represented at block the user then is given the opportunity to delete the audible tone. In this regard by actuating select switch as represented at line and block the tone is deleted display showing the term tone in connection with the letter N.

The configuration sequence then continues as represented at either lines or with the actuation of menu switch . This actuation of switch provides for the establishing of a rapid exchange diagnostic test cycle time change. As set forth at block the default cycle time is 1.5 seconds. However by actuation of select switch as represented at line and block the operator may change the cycle time to 2.5 seconds. The program then continues by actuating the menu switch as represented at either of lines or . These lines lead to the configuration alteration represented at block . Recall from block that the default number of exchanges for the rapid exchange diagnostic procedure is .

However as represented at line and block the operator may change the number of exchanges from 10 to 20 by actuation of select switch . The program then returns to line by actuation of the menu switch as represented at lines and . As described in connection with block line and node A the operator may elect to proceed with a diagnostic grip test.

Referring to node A reappears in conjunction with line extending to the query posed at block wherein a determination is made as to whether or not to enter a diagnostic grip test mode. Where the operator determines that the diagnostic grip test mode should be entered then as represented at line and block the grip test mode is entered by actuating select switch . The operator is then prompted at display to actuate select switch to enter a max test mode. Accordingly with the actuation of switch as represented at line and block the maximum diagnostic grip test mode is entered. On the other hand as represented at line and node B by actuating the menu switch the practitioner may cause instrument to enter a rapid exchange sequence.

Returning to block the maximum strength grip test can be carried out with 10 maximum squeezing force trials. At the conclusion of a given number of such trials the practitioner actuates select switch whereupon computations are carried out. Accordingly as represented at line and block the user is prompted with the message squeeze hard at the readout . The program will elect the highest force applied during such squeezing activity whereupon the user releases the grip force as represented at line and block . Then instrument will publish the maximum force applied by the user as represented at line and block a first maximum grip evaluation being shown as an example as 64.4 pounds. Block also indicates that the user is prompted to either actuate the select switch to accept the published maximum squeeze evaluation as set forth at block or to squeeze the grip again. Such squeezing again will provide a substitute maximum grip force evaluation. Then as represented at line and block the query is posed as to whether the select switch has been actuated. In the event that it has not then the program loops as represented at line extending to line whereupon a maximum grip effort again is undertaken. Where the operator elects the maximum first trial grip force evaluation then as represented at line and block the program will compute an average of force values standard deviation and coefficient variation albeit it for one trial at this junction in the procedure.

The program then continues as represented at line and block to display computed values which as noted above for the first trial are irrelevant. However as the number of trials increases those computed values gain significance. Next as represented at line and block the program commences to carry out a next maximum grip test by providing a prompt at readout which advises the user to squeeze hard and indicates that this is a second trial as represented by the terms MAX . Following a squeezing of the grip region as represented at line and block the user releases the grip force and as represented at line and block the maximum force asserted by the user is published for example showing 60 pounds for a MAX trial. This prompt further advises the user to actuate select switch to elect the published grip force value or to squeeze again to carry out a next trial. The program then continues as represented at line and block to determine whether or not select switch had been actuated. In the event that it had not been actuated then the program loops as represented at lines and whereupon the user again may carry out the second maximum grip trial. Where switch has been actuated then as represented at line and block the program carries out a computation of the average of the maximum forces asserted and computes standard deviation and coefficient of variation which are submitted to memory. The program then continues as represented at line and block whereupon the values computed in connection with block are published at display . The above maximum grip test trials may be reiterated for 10 trials. Accordingly as represented at line and block the maximum test trials are reiterated for a total of N tests 10 maximum and the computed values of average force standard deviation and coefficient of variation are both submitted to memory and published at display . As represented at line and block the user may restart this max test sequence following the Nth trial by actuating select switch whereupon the program returns as represented at line to . Returning to block by actuating menu switch as represented at line and block a subsequent actuation of select switch will return the program to a previous menu. As represented at line and block by again actuating menu switch as represented at line the program reverts to node B as described in conjunction with . By again actuating select switch as represented at line the program returns to entry into the maximum grip diagnostic test line extending to line seen in . This circular logic is made available at a variety of locations within the program.

Returning to where the query posed at block results in a negative determination that the maximum grip test diagnostic mode is not to be entered then by actuation of menu switch as represented at line and block a determination is made as to whether to exit a diagnostic mode and enter a therapy based mode. Where a therapy mode is not elected then as represented at line and block a previous menu may be elected by actuating the select switch as represented at line and node D. By actuating menu switch then as represented at line the program loops to line and the query posed at block . Where a therapy mode is elected by the user then as represented at line the program diverts to a therapy mode of performance as represented at line and node E.

Looking back to the query posed at block where the menu switch is actuated as opposed to electing a maximum grip value then as represented at line and block the program will reconfigure for restarting the grip test mode. Once at this point in the program as represented at block by again actuating select switch the program reverts as represented at line to line to carry out another maximum grip trial. On the other hand where menu switch is actuated as represented at line and block an indication will be given to the operator that to elect previous menu select switch is to be actuated. As represented at line the program then reverts to node C. Node C again appears in in conjunction with line extending to line . Where menu switch is again actuated the program reverts to block as represented at line .

Looking again to and the query posed at block where the second maximum grip test is not selected by menu switch is actuated then as represented at line and block the program enters a mode for restarting the maximum grip test. By again actuating menu switch as represented at line and block the user is prompted to enter the previous menu position in the program by actuating the select switch . Accordingly by actuating switch as represented at line the program reverts to node C. Returning to block where the select switch is actuated then the program loops as represented at line to line to again undertake the second of the maximum grip tests. By actuating menu switch from the program location of block as represented at line the program reverts to its position at block .

The diagnostic performance mode of the instrument also provides for the carrying out of a rapid exchange RE test. With the rapid exchange test the user may grip instrument in the manner shown in such that the therapist or practitioner may observe readout to the exclusion of the user or patient. With the rapid exchange a maximum grip force is exerted by the user or patient in exchanging between the right and left hands under a controlled exchange timed cycle which will have been elected for example in connection with the configuration mode described in connection with . It may be recalled that the number of exchanges may also be elected by the diagnostician as 10 or 20 efforts or trials. The rapid exchange mode of performance is elected as represented at block and line extending to node B described in connection with . Node B reappears in in association with line and block . Referring to that figure block is seen to provide for a prompt to the practitioner to actuate select switch to enter the rapid exchange mode. Upon actuating switch as represented at line and block a prompt is provided at readout assembly advising the user to squeeze the grip with the right hand to start the rapid exchange sequence. As represented at line and block the program awaits the presence of a right hand squeezing force. Until that squeezing force is asserted the program dwells as represented at loop extending to line . Where a squeezing force is detected then as represented at line and block the program commences to time out the succession of periods or time hacks allocated for this cycle of the rapid exchange diagnostic procedure. That time interval may have been elected in the configuration mode as described in conjunction with blocks and . For example the cycle time Thas a default value of 1.5 seconds or the last value selected.

As represented at line and block the user will have squeezed the grip region and the maximum hand force value evolved will be submitted to memory. Then as represented at line and block a determination is made as to whether the menu switch has been actuated. In the event that it has not as represented at line and block the program determines whether the Nth i.e. 10or 20trial has been completed. In the event that it has not then as represented at line and block the rapid exchange test has not been completed and an audible tone cue time hack is provided indicating that the instrument should be switched to the opposite hand. A short dwell occurs as represented at line and block wherein the instrument determines whether or not a squeeze force has been asserted. In the event that it has not then the program loops as represented at line . Where the user has imparted a squeezing force to the instrument the program continues or loops as represented at line extending to line leading to a next trial in an alternate hand.

Returning to block where menu switch is actuated in the course of carrying out rapid exchange trials an affirmative determination will be made with respect to the query posed at that block. Accordingly as represented at line and block the user is prompted to restart the rapid exchange test by actuating select switch . Where select switch is actuated then as represented at line the program reverts to line and block . On the other hand where menu switch is actuated then as represented at line and block the user is prompted to revert to the previous menu by actuating select switch . Where select switch is so actuated then the program reverts to node C as represented at line . Note additionally that if menu switch is actuated in conjunction with the prompt provided at block then as represented at line the program reverts to line . Returning to block where menu switch is actuated then as represented at line and block the program computes and displays the overall average of the maximum trial values standard deviation and coefficient of variation for the N trials. That data is submitted to memory. Should menu switch be actuated at this juncture then as represented at lines and the program returns to block . Where the select switch is actuated however as represented at line and block the maximum force value for trial N and the average SE and CD for all trials is displayed. On the other hand where the menu switch is actuated then as represented at lines and the program reverts to block .

Where the select switch is actuated repetitively then as represented at line and block the succession of trials through N is displayed. Additionally the unchanging average for all those trials is displayed for convenience. Further a query is posed as to whether the Nth trial has been displayed. Where it has not then the display program loops as represented at line extending to line . On the other hand where the Nth trial has been displayed then as represented at line the program loops to line to repeat the succession of displays.

It may be recalled that in conjunction with block in a therapy mode may be entered by actuation of select switch as discussed in connection with line and node E. Node E reappears in in conjunction with line and block . Block indicates that the readout will publish information that a grip therapy is available by actuation of select switch . It may be recalled that the parameters of time and force are somewhat pre established under the regimen of the instant program. In this regard it is important that the isometric grip exercise be constrained within predefined force and time interval of holding and resting limits. These parameters are nominated in the program and while some variations are permitted those variations are retained within physiologically determined limit values. Of importance of the grip therapy at hand it may be observed that it is predicated upon the patient or users actual and unique the maximum gripping force which initially is evaluated and then treated by a preordained but still electable target valuation. In general the prompt and cues provided at display are made available to the patient or user by a handle configuration as described in conjunction with . Looking to block provides for a display at readout indicating that a grip therapy mode is available by actuation of select switch . As represented at line and block a determination is made as to whether a fixed mode of therapy or a stepped mode of therapy is to be elected. A fixed therapy is elected by actuation of select switch as represented at line extending to block . Block indicates that the fixed exercise configuration mode has entered. With such entry as represented at line and block readout prompts that the user will be given opportunities to adjust the target load factor the number of repetitions of trials of the grip therapy the duration of the holding of the grip force at a target value and the interval for a intergripping rest. However as an initial component of the procedure the maximum grip force value for a given patient is determined. Accordingly upon actuating switch as represented at line and block the user is prompted to squeeze the grip with maximum force by publishing the terms squeeze hard . Then as represented at line and block the squeeze generated load or force value is outputted to the microprocessor . The maximum valuation of this initial force evaluation then is displayed at readout as represented at line and block . In the latter block it may be observed that a sample force valuation of 90.3 pounds is published at readout . The user can elect that valuation as the maximum force value to be used in the program by actuating select switch as represented at line and block . However a prompt at readout also provides that the user may retry this maximum grip force evaluation as represented at loop line extending to line . Where the user or therapist determines that an appropriate grip force has been derived then as represented at line and block the elected maximum force value is submitted to memory and the program continues as represented at line and block . employing the elected maximum squeeze force the program computes a target grip force using a default factor of 50 . Additionally the program establishes a trial repetition number at a default number of 4 a hold on target force interval of 45 seconds and a default rest interval of 120 seconds. As represented at line and block the computed target level then is displayed at readout along with the value of the elected maximum grip force and the default target factor of 50 . The terms Target blink as a prompt that the factor can be altered within an established range. The user or practitioner then is given the opportunity to adjust the target factor percentage in 10 increments from 10 to 100 as represented at line and block by actuating the menu switch . Next as represented at line and block the program computes at a new target value based upon the elected factor an arbitrary designation AA being shown. A lower enabling grip force threshold also is derived. Should the user elect a target factor other than the 50 value by adjustment in connection with block the program will automatically nominate hold on target intervals and rest intervals for each available 10 selection from within the range from 10 to 100 which the user may have elected. This again is for the purpose of protecting the user from excessive effort intervals and inadequate rest intervals. However still within the mandated overall ranges the user or therapist can change those values for the hold on target effort and rest effort. The nominated hold or Effort and rest intervals contained in the program are summarized in Table 1 below.

Turning momentarily to a routine is depicted functioning to carry out the computation and display of the noted score values. This routine is entered into as represented at node identifying it as a display of the score value. The routine commences as represented at line and block indicating that the currently applied grip force or load value is read as the user attempts to match the target force value. Then as represented at line and the score is determined by dividing that read force by the pre computed target force and multiplying the result by 100 to provide the score as a percent. This score is developed for sequential increments of time preferably each increment representing 1 of the hold on target interval CCC . As represented at line and block the score is converted into three display characters. Then as represented at line and block three characters representing the score are sent to readout for display. The score may be above or below 100 100 representing an on target grip force.

Returning to the program continues as represented at line which reappears in extending to block . Block indicates that a display is provided at readout which cues the user as to essentially instantaneous score value the time remaining for holding on target and further cues the user as to the level of grip force being applied with respect to target through the utilization of a center pointer visual cue representing the target load value and an effort dynamic bar graph visual cue having a top position present as a bar graph top line. That top line will be aligned with the center pointer when the load value at output represents a force equal to the target load value. The top line will move away from the center pointer when the load value output or grip force exerted by the user represents a force which deviates from the target load value.

Looking momentarily to a representation of the display so provided for differing grip force activity is set forth. In the dynamic bar graph extends to the right of the center pointer indicating a grip force which is too low. This lower grip force also is indicated by the lower score value of 62 . The display also includes an indication of the time remaining for the hold on target interval for example 100 seconds. also indicates through the dynamic bar graph that the asserted grip force is still too low but improved over that shown in as indicated by the shorter extent of the dynamic bar graph to the right of the center pointer and a higher score value of 75 . shows a cue wherein the user grip force is at the target force the top line of the bar graph being aligned with the center pointer and a score of 100 being displayed. Additionally as before the time remaining for the hold on target interval is displayed. shows that an excessive grip force is being applied by the user the dynamic bar graph extending to the left of the center pointer. This excessive force also is indicated by a score value of 125 . Time remaining in seconds within the hold on target interval also is displayed. finally shows a still more excessive application of grip force on the part of the user the dynamic bar graph top line extending well to the left of the center pointer and a score of 137 being represented. As before time remaining in the on target interval is also displayed.

Returning to the program is seen to continue as represented at line and block wherein a query is made as to whether the hold on target interval has timed out. In the event that it has not then the program dwells as represented by loop line extending to node I which reappears in with line extending to line . In the event of an affirmative determination with respect to the query posed at block then as represented at line and block an audible cue is generated at the annunciator . With the generation of this audible cue then as represented at line and block the rest interval commences to be timed out. It may be recalled that the rest interval was elected in conjunction with block . during this rest interval as represented at line and block the program will provide a display at readout which indicates the number of trials or efforts remaining in conjunction with the elected repetition value. At the termination of the first trial that value will be B 1. The display also provides the average value of score and the interval of time remaining in the rest interval. Next as represented at line and block a query is made as to whether the rest interval has timed out. In the event that it has not then the program dwells as represented at loop line . Where the query posed at block results in an affirmative determination then as represented at line and block an audible cue is generated and the program continues as represented at line and block providing for a reiteration of the trial sequence. As represented at line and block a query is made as to whether the elected number of repetitions of the trial B has been accomplished. In the event that that elected number of repetitions has not been completed then the program dwells as represented at line . In the event of an affirmative determination with respect to the query posed at block then as represented at line and block a final or average score is computed and submitted to archival memory in conjunction with calendar and force data. In the latter regard each of the average grip force values asserted by the user for each trial are recorded. Next as represented at line and block the program determines or selects an appropriate message of congratulation or warning base upon the computed final score. The program then continues as represented at lines and block to publish the selected message at readout and continues as represented at line to node G.

Node G reappears in conjunction with line and block . Where the user or therapist has determined to cause instrument to enter into a stepped therapy mode menu switch is actuated as represented at line and the program displays a prompt to the user as represented at block indicating that the step therapy mode may be entered by actuating select switch as represented at line and node F.

Referring to node F reappears in conjunction with line and block providing for the entry of instrument into a stepped exercise configuration mode. In this therapeutic mode the maximum grip strength unique to the user or patient is determined whereupon the therapeutic gripping regime is one wherein the target load level as well as hold on target intervals and rest intervals vary in accordance the sequence of steps or gripping trials. The program opens as represented at line and block with a display at readout prompting that the user is to be called upon to establish a maximum grip force level and carry out a setting of the number of steps and repetitions of the therapy. The user then actuates the select switch and as represented at line and block the program displays a prompt at readout indicating that the user should carry out a maximum grip force exercise the prompt including the terms squeeze hard . Then as represented at line and block the user will have applied maximum squeezing force to the grip and that will have generated a load value output. While this load value output is being generated as represented at line and block the program displays a cue at readout which publishes the value of the maximum gripping force. Should the practitioner or user wish to attempt to improve that value he or she is prompted to actuate select switch and elect the value published or to squeeze the grip again. Where the user elects the value published then as represented at line and block a determination is made as to whether the select switch has been actuated. In the event that it has not then the system dwells as represented at loop line extending line . Where the select switch has been actuated then as represented at line and block the maximum gripping force value which was selected is submitted to memory and as represented at line and block the system provides a 1 step default value and a repetition of the step exercise is defaulted to a value of four. The program then continues as represented at line wherein the system provides a prompt at readout which displays the value of a selected maximum gripping force and further prompts the user that a default of 1 step is present and a default of four repetitions is present. The term 1 step is intermittent or blinks as a part of this prompt to the user to elect the number of steps desired. This display is represented at block . Then as represented at lines and block the user or practitioner is permitted to adjust the number of steps within a range of 1 to 5 steps. As discussed above this range is mandated within the system and the adjustment in the number of steps may be carried out by actuating menu switch .

The number of steps elected adjusts the percentage of maximum grip force factor in accordance with a preordained schedule. That schedule is provided in Table 2 below. For example if only one step is elected that target grip factor will be 20 . On the other hand if five steps are elected the first trial will be at 100 of maximum grip force. The second step will be at 80 of maximum grip force and so forth. On the other hand if four steps are elected the initial trial will be in conjunction with an 80 maximum grip force factor the second step will be at 60 and so forth as set forth in Table 2. For each of these percentages as set forth in Table 2 the corresponding hold on target or effort interval and rest intervals will follow the values given above in Table 1.

The step value is elected by actuation of select switch and the program continues as represented at line and block . Block replicates a display at readout which prompts the user by indicating that the maximum elected gripping force selected was 90 pounds and that A steps were selected and a further prompt is provided showing blinking or intermittent display of 4 REPS . Then as represented at line and block the operator may adjust the number of repetitions of the program to a value within a preordained number of 1 through 10 by actuating menu switch . The elected number of repetitions then is selected by actuation of switch and as represented at line and block the system displays the now selected parameters of a maximum grip force for example 90 pounds an election of A steps in the regimen and an election of B repetitions. Next as represented at line and block the stepped exercise therapy is entered. Upon entry into this stepped exercise trial mode target values are computed based upon the number of steps elected and the hold on target and rest intervals will be acquired such data with respect to target factors being set forth in Table 2 and the latter hold on target and rest intervals being set forth in Table 1. This function is represented in block . Line reappears in extending to block which prompts the user with a display indicating that to start the step therapy the select switch should be actuated. The operator may return the system to a previous menu at this juncture by actuating menu switch . In this regard as represented at line and block by actuating switch the program will again display that initially elected maximum 90 pound grip force along with the prompt to squeeze again or press select as represented at line and node K. This returns the program to block where node K reappears at line . While again actuating switch as represented at line and block a restarting of the step therapy test prompt is provided advising the user to actuate switch . Again where switch is actuated then as represented at line and block the user is provided a prompt display at readout advising that the previous menu may be elected by actuating select switch . Where that switch is actuated then as represented at line and node H the program returns to block as earlier described in connection with . In this regard node H reappears in that figure in conjunction with line extending to block . Where menu switch is actuated the program loops as represented at line extending to line .

Returning to block where switch has been actuated then as represented at line and block the user is prompted to hold the grip force at the computed target level for 100 . Additionally the prompt term SQUEEZE is provided within the readout . Next as represented at line and block a determination is made as to whether the grip force exerted by the user is within 10 of the computed target value. Where it is not then the system dwells as represented at loop line and the display represented at block continues. Where the asserted grip force is within 10 of the target load then as represented at line and block the mandated hold on target interval timeout set forth in Table 1 commences and as represented at line and block a dynamic comparison value is derived for dynamic bar graph cueing. Next as represented at line and block a computation then is made as to whether the instantaneous grip force is at or above 125 of the target value. Where that is the case then as represented at line and block an audible warning cue is sounded. The program then continues as represented at lines and when the excessive force has been lessened. Line is directed to block which provides for carrying out a computation of a score value as a percentage of target for a sequence of time increments. Computation of this score has been discussed in connection with . The program then continues as represented at line .

Line reappears in extending to block which provides a display at readout with essentially instantaneous score values the noted dynamic bar graph and hold time remaining for the initial step at hand. The dynamic bar graph has been described in conjunction with . Next as represented at line and block a query is posed as to whether the hold time interval has expired. Where it has not then the system dwells as represented at loop line extending to node J. Node J reappears in in conjunction with the line extending to line . However where the hold on target interval has expired then as represented at line and block an audible cue is generated and as represented at line and block a Table 1 mandated rest interval is commenced. The program then continues as represented at line and block wherein the system cues the user that A B 1 efforts remain out of the previously selected A B efforts and further advises of the time remaining for the rest interval and the current score value. With this display the system queries as to whether the rest interval has expired as represented at line and block . Where the rest time remains at hand then the system dwells as represented at loop line extending the line . However where the rest interval has expired then as represented at line and block an audible cue is generated.

Following the generation of this audible cue as represented at line and block the program reiterates the trial sequence following the mandates of Tables 1 and 2 and the elected parameters. As represented at line and block a query then is made as to whether the repetitions and associated efforts are complete. This value is the product of the elected number of steps A multiplied by the elected number of repetitions B. Where that number of reiterations has not occurred then the program continues as represented by look line extending to line . Where the number of repetitions is completed then as represented at line and block a final score is computed and submitted to memory with calendar and force data. Next as represented at line and block the program selects a message to the user which will be based upon the final score. For example the user may be advised to consult a therapist or the program directions in the event of the low score and is congratulated in the event of a good score. As represented at line and block those messages are selected. Where the user actuates select switch the program continues as represented at line and node H.

Turning again to node H reappears in conjunction with line leading to the block displaying a prompt that to cause the program to enter the stepped therapy mode the select switch should be actuated. However where menu switch is actuated then as represented at line and block the program displays a prompt that to enter the previous menu the select switch should be actuated. Where that select switch is so actuated then as represented at line the program reverts to node E which reappears in the instant figure in conjunction with line extending to block . On the other hand where the user actuates menu switch then as represented at line the program reverts to node G. Node G is shown in the instant figure in conjunction with line extending to block .

The user has the option of powering down instrument by pressing select switch for an interval of at least 2 seconds. This power off sequence is represented in the flow chart of . The sequence opens with node and line extending to block . Block indicates that select switch is being actuated and held in an actuated state. During this actuated state as represented at line and block a determination is made as to whether the 2 second interval has elapsed. If it has not then as represented at line and block a query is posed as to whether the select switch has been released before the termination of 2 seconds. If it has not the system dwells as represented at loop line extending to line . Where the query at block results in an affirmative determination then as represented at line and block the instrument is powered down. Where the determination at block indicates that the switch has been released prior to the elapsing of 2 seconds then as represented at line and block the program reverts to the previous or last display which was published at readout .

The protocol based isometric exercise approach of the invention has applicability to a broad range of muscle groups of the user. By employing the protocol which inter alia involves the evaluation of maximum muscle group strength as a precondition to then applying a factor related protocol one of those factors may apply to the measured maximum strength value. The remaining factors which involve for example variations of target loads hold times rest intervals and exercise regimen planning in terms of calendar days achieves a safe and effective utilization of isometric activities. The exercisable anatomical features to be strengthened are generally identifiable as muscle groups of the human anatomy which may include but are not limited jaw muscles neck muscles shoulder muscles upper arm muscles lower arm muscles hand muscles finger muscles diaphragm muscles abdominal muscles lower back muscles upper leg muscles lower leg muscles ankle muscles foot muscles and tow muscles.

Looking to a flow diagram is presented which outlines the methodology achieving this safe utilization of isometric exercises. In the figure block reveals that the user or therapist may establish a goal of strength for the muscle group involved. This may be achieved by measuring the maximum strength of an unimpaired contralateral muscle group. For example a left arm or upper leg muscle group may be tested to determine a strength goad for a right arm or right upper leg muscle. Where no unimpaired contralateral muscle group is available to set this goal strength a medical professional will establish an appropriate goal strength. The method continues as represented at line of block providing for the measurement of maximum strength of the specific anatomical feature to be treated. As represented at line and block the methodology identifies a protocol matrix of factors. In this regard a strengthening protocol is derived which is based upon timed efforts which are equal to a percentage of the measured maximum strength as derived in connection with block . The matrix of factors further include hold times at a factor or factors of the measured maximum strength the repetition of these efforts for a given trial or exercise session and the duration of rest periods where repetitions are involved. Such protocol further will indicate the intervals of repetitions of the exercise sessions themselves during a stated period of time in hours days weeks months and the like. This matrix of factors may be contained for example in computer memory. Looking to line and block the procedure next nominates values to the factors provided in conjunction with block . In this regard the strengthening protocol which is developed utilizes nominated factors from the matrix of these exercise factors. In effect the nominated factors may be identified as effort applied by the specific anatomical feature and the effort time period during which the effort is to be applied such that there is a relationship among the percentage of the measured maximum strength of time wherein the higher the percentage the shorter the effort time and the number of repetitions of these efforts during an exercise session the rest period time between cessation of one effort and the beginning of the next succeeding effort such that there is a relationship between the percentage of the measured maximum strength and the rest time wherein the higher the percentage the longer the rest time and the number of exercise sessions in a given time period hours days weeks months . As represented at line and block the procedure initiates and monitors the exercise protocol with nominated factors. In this regard the procedure monitors and guides the exercise effort to be applied and while being applied provides visual and or audible cues to encourage compliance to the elected protocol using symbols as the visual cues and words which clearly guide the effort to be applied. While that effort is being applied using audible cues and words which assist to properly perform the effort rest periods and repetitions for each exercise session. Looking to line of block the method provides for annunciating an alarm when an exercise effort level is exceeded. In this regard an audible alarm is produced if the exercise effort exceeds a predetermined or factor determined level beyond which it is considered that the exercise effort could be damaging to the human physiology or the specific anatomical feature at hand. As represented at line and block the method provides compliance scores in real time and in summation during the course of an exercise effort and subsequent thereto. As described herein the program calculates a compliance score during each exercise effort in percent of that effort required in the strengthening protocol and provides this compliance score in real time as the effort is being accomplished on the specific anatomical feature. An averaging of this compliance score over each exercise effort time period is devised to depict the degree to which the exercise effort applied has been accomplished. By accumulating the compliance scores during each rest period and then presenting a final compliance score issued in the form of both a number as a percent accomplished and in an instruction set an indication is derived as to how well the exercise protocol was performed or how to improve future compliance. Next as represented at line at block the exercise data is archived for review and potential transfer to a remote interactive entity. This step in the procedure accumulates real time and summary data for each effort or trial and the specific protocol being utilized. It may be noted that these protocols are selected each time the exercisable anatomical feature is elected to be strengthened such that the elected protocol the effort being applied and the compliance being calculated during and at the conclusion of each effort may be reviewed remotely as it is being accomplished using suitable data communication assistance and at the conclusion of each effort. The archive data is time stamped and uniquely identified for retrieval.

Through use of the invention cardiac function and a variety of physiologic effects are produced including effects on the endothelium and the release of biological active signaling molecules including nitric oxide. The following two studies demonstrate the measureable biochemical and biophysical effect of utilization of the system method and apparatus of the invention.

Among many other factors both hypertension and arterial distensibility are independent risk factors for cardiovascular disease. The research of Wiley et al. 1992 and Taylor et al. 2003 demonstrated that isometric training is effective for reducing resting blood pressure RBP . NO is a potent vasodilator and crucial component of the regulation of vascular tension See thus isometric exercise is expected to affect NO production and bioavailability.

As NO is a rapidly diffusible gas release of NO in the blood vessels of the arms or other muscle groups in response to isometric training is expected to have both a local and systemic effect on vasodilation arterial distensibility and resting blood pressure. Thus an increase of arterial distensibility in response to isometric exercise may contribute to reduction in RBP and increased NO bioavailability. A wide variety of muscle groups such as from exercisable regions of the musculature of the user including jaw muscles neck muscles shoulder muscles upper arm muscles lower arm muscles hand muscles finger muscles diaphragm muscles abdominal muscles lower back muscles upper leg muscles lower leg muscles ankle muscles foot muscles and toe muscles may provide a therapeutic benefit by utilization of the isometric exercise protocols of the invention.

To demonstrate the systemic effect of practicing the system and method off the invention the impact of isometric arm and leg exercise on RBP and central and peripheral arterial distensibility was tested in patients being medicated for hypertension. Resting blood pressure was measured by brachial oscillometry and arterial distensibility as measured by Doppler ultrasound and applanation tonometry in the carotid brachial and femoral arteries. Study participants were directed to perform isometric handgrip IHG exercise n 10 or isometric leg press ILP exercise n 6 according to the method of the invention three times per week for eight weeks. Exercise intensity was maintained at 30 of maximal voluntary contraction.

Following eight weeks of IHG exercise systolic blood pressure decreased significantly from 140.2 mmHg 3.82 to 132.3 mmHg 3.97 while no decrease was observed after isometric leg press exercise. Diastolic blood pressure did not change after either IHG or ILP exercise. Measurement of carotid arterial distensibility showed a significant improvement following IHG exercise from 0.1105 mmHg 1 100.0093 to 0.1669 mmHg 1 100.0221 while no such changes occurred in the ILP exercise group. Peripheral arterial distensibility did not change following either IHG or ILP exercise. These studies demonstrate that the isometric handgrip exercise according to the invention improves resting systolic blood pressure and carotid arterial distensibility. As arterial tension is under the direct control of the NO LDL cholesterol signaling system the system and method of the invention allows modulation of NO and indirectly of the LDL cholesterol components.

As described previously hypertension is associated with endothelial dysfunction reduced NO bioavailability and the development of coronary artery disease among other effects on the body of the patient. The isometric hand grip exercise protocol of the invention further reduces blood pressure even in patients already medicated for hypertension. In order to demonstrate the mechanisms of IHG affect on hypertension endothelial function was studied in patients practicing the system and method of the invention. Study participants n 8 62 3.5 years performed 4 sets of 2 minute isometric contractions at 30 of their maximal voluntary contraction. Ulnar reactivity was assessed in alternate hands 3 week for 8 weeks. Resting blood pressure was measured using automated brachial oscillometry. Vascular reactivity was measured in both arms using ultrasound imaging to determine brachial artery flow mediated dilation FMD . Following utilization of the IHG protocol of the invention systolic blood pressure decreased 137 mm Hg 5.3 to 121.7 mm Hg 4.8 mmHg p 0.03 . Relative FMD increased 1.6 0.3 to 4.5 0.5 and normalized to average shear rate 0.007 0.001 to 0.02 0.004 s 1 . Reactive hyperemic flow decreased peak 344.3 36.5 to 258.2 27.2 ml min and average 301.6 33.1 to 239.0 28.4 ml min . Average resting blood vessel diameter and resting flow rates remained unchanged. As systemic shear stress is known to induce the activity of NO as a vasodilator the IHG training apparently causes the release of NO as shown by an increase in flow mediated arterial dilation. The IHG exercise protocol produced a reduced reactive hyperemic flow accompanied by improvements in normalized FMD and a heightened vasoreactive sensitivity to the reactive hyperemic stimulus. The IHG protocol by providing an improved cardiovascular function demonstrates a modification of the wall shear stress setpoint for the activation of eNOS to produce biologically active levels of NO.

The statin class of drugs used in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia surprisingly has a pleiotropic effect on a variety of other systems of the body including on the bioavailability of NO. Thus by down modulating cholesterol biosynthesis statin drugs affect systems that are controlled by NO dependent signaling systems. The method and apparatus of the invention surprisingly by stimulating changes in the structure of the vasculature and by creating increased wall shear stress in the blood vessels experiencing the effects of the inventive protocol also induces broad effects on signaling systems including those that regulate the bioavailability of NO and serum cholesterol and LDL cholesterol levels.

Since certain changes may be made in the above described apparatus method and system without departing from the scope of the invention herein involved it is intended that all matter contained in the description thereof or shown in the accompanying drawings shall be interpreted as illustrative and not in a limiting sense.

