---

title: System and method for leveraging a caller ID to provide a reverse signaling pathway in a network environment
abstract: A method for providing signaling in a network environment is provided that includes receiving, at a mobile station, a new call from a mobility application, the new call including a caller ID segment associated with an existing call for the mobile station. The method further includes evaluating data included in the caller ID segment in order to perform an activity related to the data provided in the caller ID segment.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08180334&OS=08180334&RS=08180334
owner: Cisco Technology, Inc.
number: 08180334
owner_city: San Jose
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051129
---
The present invention relates generally to network communications and more particularly to a system and a method for leveraging a caller ID to provide a reverse signaling pathway in a network environment.

Networking architectures have grown increasingly complex in communications environments. In recent years a series of protocols and architectures have been developed in order to accommodate a diverse group of end users having various needs. Some of these protocols relate to issues associated with handoffs.

As both public and private network systems grow in size and in sophistication proper routing and efficient management of communication sessions and data flows becomes even more critical. In cases where protocols are unable to accommodate a given service or feature an end user is precluded from enjoying the benefits of a given communication architecture. Advances in technology have resulted in the deployment of various types of wireless networks.

However while most of these wireless networks often provide service to adjacent and or overlapping physical spaces most cellular and enterprise network protocols are incompatible. Accordingly the ability to provide an effective mechanism to properly process and direct communications for an end user seeking to realize the benefits provided by multiple network environments offers a significant challenge to network operators component manufacturers and system designers.

In accordance with some of the teachings of the present invention techniques for offering optimal signaling in circuit switched cellular and or packet switched wireless networks are provided. According to some embodiments these techniques enable a mobile station to recognize and process incoming signaling data such that the mobile device can respond to the incoming data in an appropriate fashion. In particular these techniques can enable a mobile station alone or in combination with a mobility application to properly synchronize calls account for issues conditions that arise in the network or offer an awareness to the end user who is associated with the corresponding network communications.

According to a particular embodiment a method for providing signaling in a network environment is provided that includes receiving at a mobile station a new call from a mobility application the new call including a caller ID segment associated with an existing call for the mobile station. The method further includes evaluating data included in the caller ID segment in order to perform an activity related to the data provided in the caller ID segment.

In more specific embodiments the caller ID segment is received after the mobile station has roamed from an enterprise network to a cellular network and experienced a handoff. In yet more specific embodiments the caller ID segment is used to signal to the mobile device to initiate another call. In other embodiments the caller ID segment addresses a real time condition associated with the mobile device or the caller ID segment is used to address 3rd party control issues.

Embodiments of the invention provide various technical advantages. For example the architecture of the present invention provides improved signaling for the end user. The configuration of the present invention utilizes a reverse signaling pathway to achieve this effect. Specifically the present invention operates to place a call to the mobile device such that the mobile device can process the incoming information e.g. recognize the condition being indicated by the incoming data . Hence the handset or mobile device can process this information and react accordingly. This affords the ability for the mobile device to properly synchronize communication flows or to address issues e.g. voice mail that occur in the network.

Moreover this new signaling pathway can be used to encode any given data. The functions to be performed or the data to be recognized by the mobile station is virtually limitless. This concept effectively addresses the signaling issue from the enterprise network to the mobile device and provides real time communications when another call is already in existence. Another advantage of such a signaling protocol is that the proposed signaling pathway does not offer an increased expense for any network participant i.e. it is not necessary to build additional infrastructure to perform the outlined operations . Additional details relating to the capabilities of the present invention are provided below with reference to accompanying .

Certain technical advantages of the present invention may be readily apparent to one skilled in the art from the following figures descriptions and claims. Moreover while specific advantages have been enumerated above various embodiments may include all some or none of the enumerated advantages.

Communication system comprises a cellular network and an enterprise network which are interconnected through a public switched telephone network PSTN . One or more base stations are coupled to cellular network and one or more access points are coupled to enterprise network . Enterprise network includes a gateway a Call Manager that is manufactured by Cisco Systems Inc. of San Jose Calif. and a mobility application which can perform one or more operations associated with a handoff server.

Communication system also includes mobile station which may communicate with a remote device through cellular network using base station and or through enterprise network using a wireless local area network access point WLAN AP . The elements of communication system can operate to permit mobile station to maintain a communication session that is handed between cellular network and enterprise network . According to particular embodiments mobility application and or mobile station utilize one or more of various private branch exchange PBX functions to effect handoff between cellular network and enterprise network .

Prior to discussing the following FIGURES the problems or situations that are being addressed by the proposed flows should be understood. When an end user is on the cellular network and is on a call there is often no signaling path to the phone simultaneously . There can be a voice call or a data call but not both simultaneously. In the case of a voice call where there is circuit switched voice over a cellular network there is a need to achieve signaling between the enterprise network e.g. Call Manager and or the mobility application and the phone. This can be executed by placing a second call to the phone and conveying whatever information that is sought to be communicated in the caller ID segment which was previously used for making the call.

In this scenario the caller ID is not a conventional caller ID as it only represents a set of numbers that have some meaning or signaling. Thus a protocol could be defined to represent different commands which are reflected by numeric digits. The commands could correspond to any PBX feature e.g. any feature to be sent from the network to the phone such as call waiting for example.

Consider a case where there is one active call and one call on hold. In a given scenario a first call is generally anchored in the enterprise network such that the enterprise network can perform a handoff. There is an issue that arises when there is more than one call. In band signaling using Dual tone multi frequency DTMF can accommodate a toggling between two calls. The mobility application can be used to bridge the inbound call from the mobile station to one of the active PSTN calls and it is also observes the held call.

Pressing a button may readily invoke DTMF codes. However the mobile station only knows of one call. The held call may clear i.e. the call is disconnected but the mobile station is oblivious to this status. There is simply no signaling path on the reverse direction i.e. DTMF can be sent from the handset to the enterprise network but not in the reverse direction because it is typically unreliable .

In accordance with the teachings of the present invention communication system operates to place a call to the handset i.e. mobile station such that the handset can process the incoming information e.g. recognize that the held call has disappeared . Now the information associated with the held call can be erased from the call display. This accounts for the inability to properly synchronize the handset as there is generally no signaling pathway that can be leveraged.

The new signaling pathway although potentially lethargic can be used to encode any given data for PBX feature signaling. The functions to be performed or the data to be recognized by the mobile station is limitless.

Communication system addresses the signaling issue described above from the enterprise network to the handset and provides real time communications when another call is already in existence. The proposed signaling pathway is also free as it already exists and infrastructure does not need to be built to accommodate this feature. Additional details relating to some of the capabilities of the present invention are provided below and included in conjunction with descriptions of .

Cellular network is communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing wireless telephony services using cellular protocols and technology. Various cellular protocols and technologies may be used by cellular network including but not limited to global system for mobile communications GSM time division multiple access TDMA code division multiple access CDMA and any other appropriate analog or digital cellular protocol or technology. Furthermore cellular network may utilize signaling system SS protocol for signaling purposes. Cellular network may include any number of base stations as well as base station controllers mobile switching centers and other appropriate communications equipment for use in communicating with mobile station and PSTN . Thus as illustrated cellular network may couple to base station to receive and transmit wireless signals to and from mobile station .

Enterprise network represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for interconnecting elements coupled to enterprise network . Thus enterprise network may represent a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN and or any other appropriate form of network. Furthermore elements within enterprise network may utilize circuit switched and or packet based communication protocols to provide for wireline telephony services. For example elements within enterprise network may utilize Internet Protocol IP . In addition elements within enterprise network may utilize wireless standards such as the 802.11 family of wireless standards to provide for wireless telephony services. Note that the 802.11 family of wireless standards includes among others 802.11a 802.11b and 802.11g. Enterprise network may also utilize interactive voice response IVR . Enterprise network may include any number of wireless network devices gateways Call Managers and other appropriate communications equipment for use in communicating with mobile station and PSTN . In the embodiment illustrated enterprise network includes access point gateway Call Manager and mobility application . Access point represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing wireless access to enterprise network . Access point may utilize one or more of the 802.11 standards. However any appropriate wireless standard or protocol may be used.

Gateway represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for interconnecting enterprise network with cellular network and or PSTN . Gateway may be used to convert communications between different communication protocols. For example gateway may convert communications received from cellular network in SS protocol to any of various other protocols that may be used by enterprise network such as protocols associated with the an integrated services digital network ISDN standard in the case of circuit switched trucking and H.323 session initiation protocol SIP or other appropriate protocols in the case of IP based trucking.

Call Manager represents communications equipment or a communications platform including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing telephony services over enterprise network . For example Call Manager may support VoIP communications using any of various protocols such as SIP signaling connection control point SCCP protocol media gateway control protocol MGCP H.323 and or any other appropriate protocol for VOIP. Furthermore Call Manager may act as an IP PBX and support PBX functions such as hold park transfer redirect and or other high level and low level call management features.

Mobility application represents a server in one embodiment of the present invention but alternatively could be replaced with any other appropriate device e.g. a router switch bridge gateway etc. that facilitates the operations detailed herein. Mobility application includes any suitable collection of hardware software and controlling logic to support a handoff between cellular network and enterprise network and to facilitate signaling protocol as outlined herein in this document.

It should also be noted that the internal structure of mobility application and mobile station are malleable and can readily be changed modified rearranged or reconfigured in order to achieve their intended operations as they pertain a handoff function and the signaling protocol. Software and or hardware may reside in these elements or in just one in order to achieve the teachings of the signaling features of the present invention. Hence software and or hardware is provided in mobile station which knows how to invoke process and recognize cellular features e.g. HOLD resume retrieve call waiting conferencing transfer caller ID advanced display functions redirect three way calling barging operations etc. . This processing capability is present when mobile station is on cellular network or when it is on enterprise network e.g. VOIP network . In addition modifications enhancements to mobility application could also be provided in order to offer both or multiple calls to mobile station .

However due to their flexibility these elements mobility application and mobile station may alternatively be equipped with or include any suitable component device application specific integrated circuit ASIC processor microprocessor algorithm read only memory ROM element random access memory RAM element erasable programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable programmable ROM EEPROM field programmable gate array FPGA or any other suitable element or object that is operable to facilitate the operations thereof. Considerable flexibility is provided by the structures of mobility application and mobile station in the context of communication system and accordingly they should be construed as such.

PSTN represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic through which cellular network and enterprise network may communicate. PSTN may include switches wireline and wireless communication devices and any other appropriate equipment for interconnecting cellular network and enterprise network . PSTN may include portions of public and private networks providing network transport services between various geographic areas and networks.

Mobile station represents a mobile device including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic capable of communicating with remote devices through cellular network and enterprise network and maintaining communication sessions with remote devices during handoff between cellular network and enterprise network . Mobile station may communicate through cellular network using base station and through enterprise network using access point . Furthermore mobile station may interact with Call Manager and or mobility application when appropriate for example to utilize PBX features to effect a handoff between cellular network and enterprise network .

In operation mobile station may initiate and receive telephone calls through cellular network and or enterprise network to establish communication sessions with remote devices. Note that as used herein a remote device refers to any communications device capable of establishing communications sessions with mobile station such as devices located in cellular network enterprise network PSTN or other linked networks. Furthermore as used herein a communication session refers to the transfer of voice video data and or other information between two or more communication devices. For example according to particular embodiments a communication session may involve a call between two communication devices or a conference call involving two or more communication devices.

At any point in time mobile station may determine to handoff a communication session from cellular network to enterprise network or from enterprise network to cellular network . For example after establishing a communication session mobile station may lose or begin to lose connectivity with base station or WLAN access point . Signal degradation may occur due to various causes. For example mobile station may begin to lose wireless connectivity due to physical movement. When possible mobile station may switch between using base station and WLAN access point for communications. Moreover in certain circumstances mobile station may maintain a communication session during handoff between cellular network and enterprise network .

Handoff may occur when mobile station travels from an area serviced by cellular network to an area serviced by enterprise network . Handoff may also occur in the opposite direction when mobile station travels from an area serviced by enterprise network to an area serviced by cellular network . However handoff may occur at any other appropriate time. For example handoff may occur when mobile station is located in an area serviced by both network types due to a predetermined preference of one type of network due to a spontaneous choice of a user of mobile station or in response to analyzing error rates or other data associated with signaling provided by one or both types of networks. For example error rates may be associated with signal strengths of base station and access point and may be dependent upon a location of mobile station .

After receiving a telephone call intended for mobile station Call Manager and or mobility application may include itself in a signaling path associated with the resulting communication session whether the signaling path proceeds through cellular network or enterprise network .

Note that communication system represents only one embodiment of a system that supports handoff between cellular and enterprise wireless networks. Various alternative embodiments are possible. For example while in the illustrated embodiment enterprise network couples to cellular network through PSTN using gateway various other embodiments may include enterprise network coupling to cellular network in other ways. For example enterprise network may couple to cellular network using a service provider that supports VOIP. Thus in alternative embodiments cellular network and gateway may not be included in communication system .

Processing module knows how to recognize cellular features e.g. HOLD resume retrieve call waiting conferencing transfer redirect three way calling etc. as the end user desires. It also knows how to react to this incoming signaling information. The abilities are present when mobile station is on cellular network or enterprise network .

Processor controls the operation and administration of elements within mobility application . For example processor operates to process information received from network interface and memory . Processor includes any hardware and or logic elements operable to control and process information. For example processor may be a programmable logic device a microcontroller a microprocessor and or any other suitable processing device. Processor can also generate the signaling i.e. place the call to be received by mobile station .

Network interface communicates information to and receives information from devices coupled to enterprise network . For example network interface may communicate with gateway Call Manager and access point . Furthermore network interface may receive information from and transmit information to remote devices as well as mobile station . Thus network interface includes any suitable hardware or controlling logic used to communicate information to or from elements coupled to mobility application .

Memory stores either permanently or temporarily data and other information for processing by processor and for communicating using network interface . For example memory may store the data which indicates the condition to be communicated to mobile device . Memory includes any one or a combination of volatile or nonvolatile local or remote devices suitable for storing information. For example memory may include random access memory RAM read only memory ROM magnetic storage devices optical storage devices or any other suitable information storage device or a combination of these devices. As illustrated memory may include one or more memory modules such as code .

Code includes software executable files and or appropriate logic modules capable when executed to control the operation of mobility application . For example code may include executable files capable of supporting signaling between cellular network and or enterprise network and mobile device . Code may include instructions to enable mobility application to initiate a call to mobile device .

Note that mobility application may use any appropriate protocol to communicate with other elements of communication system . For example mobility application may utilize Java telephony application programming interface JTAPI to interact with Call Manager .

In operation of an example handoff typically a call associated with mobile station is properly anchored by mobility application . In order to execute a handoff a new cellular call must be made. Hence mobile station can make the cellular call over cellular network and to mobility application whereby a switch occurs over to that call leg. Mobility application is handling multiple calls and multiple mobile stations.

When a call is placed the call lands on mobility application which recognizes and is aware of the call. Mobility application collaborates with Call Manager to switch or to transfer on the fly the call. In a similar reciprocal fashion when mobile station moves back to enterprise network it communicates with mobility application which transfers the call from a cellular call leg to a voice over IP VOIP call leg.

While these previous examples includes specific functional components for mobility application and mobile station these elements may include any collection and arrangement of components including some or all of the enumerated functional components for supporting the signaling capability outlined herein. Moreover mobility application contemplates implementing each of the functional components using any suitable combination and arrangement of hardware and or logic and implementing any of the functionalities using a computer program stored on a computer readable medium. Furthermore mobility application may be implemented as a stand alone device or aspects of mobility application may be distributed among various devices within enterprise network . Alternatively in some embodiments mobility application may be incorporated into Call Manager .

Turning now to is a simplified flowchart associated with a method for providing signaling operations in communication system . In operation of an example flow consider a scenario where an end user is in enterprise network and there is an incoming call which was placed over a VOIP network i.e. enterprise network . This call is anchored in mobility application i.e. enterprise network . This is illustrated by step .

At step a caller ID is identified by mobility application . Mobility application can then place a simple call to the mobile device at step . The call includes data that is indicative of some condition. The mobile device can process the incoming information at step in order to recognize some condition or issue that relates to this call. In this instance the handset can receive information through the caller ID segment and interpret the accompanying digits to mean that some issue should be addressed by the end user in the enterprise network. Thus at step the mobile device can take specialized actions based on that information.

In another example the phone could reside in the cellular network initially. In this scenario which is only used for purposes of teaching the end user will encounter a call waiting issue. Thus the end user mobile station is in the cellular network on an active call via mobility application in the VOIP network. Mobility application can place a second cellular call to the mobile with a call waiting indication signal in the caller id segment.

Mobile station selects a unique call ID for each new call it receives and sends this to mobility application e.g. using in band DTMF signaling . This call ID is then subsequently used as the call reference in signaling. As outlined previously the signaling can be done using in band DTMF from mobile station to mobility application whereby the caller ID segment for signaling propagates from mobility application to mobile station .

Consider an example in which mobile station has selected for call for call and for call . If the end user is talking on call and call and call are on hold when call clears mobility application can use the call ID in the caller ID call cleared signal to indicate which call has cleared. Note that this offers only one example flow as permutations to such a protocol are clearly within the broad scope of the present invention.

Note also that typically the only channels to get to the handset with signaling information are SMS which is unreliable and which is slow DTMF from the handset to the network and the actual GPRS connection which is not active when the phone is on the call and which is not reliable either. The idea of placing a call to the handset from specialized caller IDs opens up a way of retrieving real time commutations of commands e.g. from a mobile station to a network entity e.g. mobility application IVR etc. . The phone relies on the handset s ability to scan the caller ID segment and take specialized actions based on that information.

Conceptually this idea is not restricted to phones provided that the wireless device has enhanced intelligence to facilitate the signaling process. Moreover this concept could be applied broadly as it could solve a number of problems not necessarily enumerated herein in this Specification. Other embodiments of this concept could offer the ability to facilitate 3rd party control issues or the ability to signal to the phone to initiate another call. Other applications involving various types of wireless devices and their associated operations are clearly within the broad scope of the present invention.

Note that while the preceding examples include specific functional components for mobile station mobile station may include any collection and arrangement of components including some or all of the enumerated functional components for processing signaling information. Moreover mobile station contemplates implementing each of the functional components using any suitable combination and arrangement of hardware and or logic. Thus in one embodiment mobile station is a mobile phone. In other embodiments mobile station may be a personal digital assistant PDA any type of telephone an electronic notebook a laptop computer or any other device operable to establish communications with cellular network and enterprise network .

The preceding discussions illustrate particular methods for effecting signaling between cellular network and enterprise network . However these discussions illustrate only exemplary methods of operation. Furthermore communication system contemplates devices using any suitable techniques elements and applications for performing these functions. Thus many of the steps in the discussions may take place simultaneously and or in different orders than as shown or described. In addition the devices may use methods with additional steps or fewer steps so long as the methods remain appropriate. Moreover other devices of communication system may perform similar techniques to support signaling as outlined herein.

It is critical to note that the stages and steps in the FIGURES illustrate only some of the possible scenarios and operations that may be executed by or within the present system. Some of these stages and or steps may be deleted or removed where appropriate or these stages and or steps may be modified enhanced or changed considerably without departing from the scope of the present invention. In addition a number of these operations have been described as being executed concurrently with or in parallel to one or more additional operations. However the timing of these operations may be altered. The preceding example flows have been offered for purposes of teaching and discussion. Substantial flexibility is provided by the tendered architecture in that any suitable arrangements chronologies configurations and timing mechanisms may be provided without departing from the broad scope of the present invention. Accordingly communications capabilities data processing features and elements suitable infrastructure and any other appropriate software hardware or data storage objects may be included within communication system to effectuate the tasks and operations of the elements and activities associated with executing suitable signaling functions.

Although the present invention has been described in detail with reference to particular embodiments it should be understood that various other changes substitutions and alterations may be made hereto without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. The illustrated network architecture of has only been offered for purposes of example and teaching. Suitable alternatives and substitutions are envisioned and contemplated by the present invention such alternatives and substitutions being clearly within the broad scope of communication system . For example the use of gateway could be supplanted by bridges switches routers or any other suitable devices that are conducive to network communications.

Numerous other changes substitutions variations alterations and modifications may be ascertained to one skilled in the art and it is intended that the present invention encompass all such changes substitutions variations alterations and modifications as falling within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

