---

title: Reactive munition in a three-dimensionally rigid state
abstract: A reactive munition uses a housing made from a housing in a state that is three-dimensionally rigid. The housing can be made of metal, such as aluminum. A reactive filler, such as powdered polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), fills the one or more cavities in the aluminum housing. A jacket encases the housing filled with the reactive filler.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07383775&OS=07383775&RS=07383775
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07383775
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051220
---
The invention is a Continuation in Part claims priority to and incorporates by reference in its entirety U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 223 242 filed Sep. 6 2005 titled Reactive Munition Using Aluminum in a Three dimensionally Rigid State with a Powdered Polytetrafluorethylene PTFE Filling to Willis Mock Jr. and William H. Holt and assigned Navy Case 95909.

The invention described herein was made in the performance of official duties by employees of the Department of the Navy and may be manufactured used licensed by or for the Government for any governmental purpose without payment of any royalties thereon.

The invention relates generally to reactive munitions and more particularly to a reactive munition that includes a housing in a three dimensionally rigid state and a reactive material.

By their very nature reactive munitions use two or more reactive components that chemically react with one another upon initiation. The catalyst for such initiation can be a fusing system or target impact. In either case the reactive components must be kept inert prior to initiation. For small munitions such as pre formed fragments or bullets pre initiation safing of the reactive components is a difficult task as the small delivery package limits a munition designer s options in terms of incorporating safety mechanisms therein.

Described is a reactive munition. The reactive munition is safe to handle is well suited for use in a small delivery package such as a pre formed fragment or bullet and has reactive components that remain safely inert until target impact.

Other aspects of the present invention will become more obvious hereinafter in the specification and drawings.

In accordance with one implementation of the present invention a reactive munition is provided that is suitable for fabrication as fragments and bullets. A housing defines at least one cavity therein. The housing can be of aluminum or other appropriate metal in a state that is three dimensionally rigid. Reactive filler such as powdered polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE fills the one or more cavities. A jacket encases the housing filled with the reactive filler.

The present invention is a reactive munition that can be fabricated as a fragment or a bullet. For example referring now to the drawings and more particularly to a fragment in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is shown and is referenced generally by numeral . Typically fragment will be one of many maintained on a delivery vehicle not shown until it is time to dispense same from the delivery vehicle. It is to be understood that the shape of fragment includes other pre formed shapes and is not limited to the shapes presented herein.

Fragment has an outer casing or jacket with a rigid housing within the jacket . The housing may be made of metal such as aluminum zirconium hafnium tantalum titanium and magnesium or alloys or composites containing these metals. The housing has a cavity formed therethrough that is filled with a reactive filler such as a powdered or solid form of polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE or other fluorinated polymers copolymers terpolymers thermoplastics or epoxies. These filler materials include but are not limited to vinylidene fluoride polychlorotrifluoroethylene and other fluorocarbon materials fabricated from fluorocarbon monomers such as hexafluoropropylene perfluorinated vinyl ether and chlorotrifluoroethylene.

The metal used for the housing must be in a state that makes the housing a three dimensionally stable structure. Accordingly suitable states for the metal include solid rigid foam and honeycomb. These metals include but are not limited to aluminum zirconium hafnium tantalum titanium and magnesium. Aluminum in these states is safe to handle and work with as opposed to powdered aluminum which presents respiratory safety and flammability problems.

The jacket provides the necessary protection for the fragment s reactive components i.e. aluminum housing and reactive filler prior to a target impact. The jacket also provides the needed material strength to survive acceleration for projection toward and to permit penetration into a target and the necessary mass for fragment that when combined with the velocity of fragment provides the needed kinetic energy to pierce a target. Accordingly suitable materials for the jacket include but are not limited to for example metals such as steel tungsten hafnium depleted uranium aluminum titanium magnesium zirconium tantalum etc. or other appropriate jacket materials including high density metals. Certain of these materials can enable additional exothermic chemical reactions on impact with the target.

The cross sectional shape of the jacket can represent a variety of shapes such as a hexagon in and a square in each with their respective advantages. For example the hexagonal cross section shown in maintains integrity at higher impact velocities than a square cross section shown in for the same thickness. Thus the hexagon shape may provide greater penetration against harder targets while the square shape would be more suitable for softer targets.

The jacket can be fabricated in a variety of ways without departing from the scope of the present invention. For example the jacket could be fabricated by drilling milling or electrical discharge machining out a solid piece of metal to accept the housing with reactive filler with the resulting hole in the surface of the jacket being plugged with a plug element made from the material used for the jacket . Another option would be for the jacket to be cast or pressed and sintered about the housing with reactive filler . Note that care must be taken during any casting or pressing and sintering operations to insure that the reactive filler does not melt or react during jacket fabrication.

The cavity of the housing is filled with the reactive filler . For powdered PTFE the powder particles may range in size from approximately 2 to 600 microns in diameter. In general the density of powdered PTFE is less than that of the solid form of PTFE i.e. density of solid PTFE is 2.17 grams cubic centimeter . The solid form of PTFE can be cast and inserted into the cavity . Reactive munitions in accordance with the present invention may utilize powdered PTFE densities ranging from approximately 50 99 of the density of solid PTFE. Typically higher densities are used for higher velocity munitions and lower densities are used for lower velocity munitions.

The shape number and or configuration of cavities in the fragment s housing may vary. For example illustrate a fragment having a number of cavities A D extending through the housing with reactive filler filling each of the cavities. In a fragment illustrates a spherical or cylindrical fragment defined by an outer spherical or cylindrical jacket . The fragment has a single cavity that rather than extending through a metal housing is fully encased by the housing so that the reactive filler is also fully encased within the housing . Still another fragment embodiment is illustrated in where a fragment has a cubed metal housing encased in a jacket . The housing has three orthogonally oriented cavities extending therethrough that meet in the center of the housing . More specifically in the illustration two of the three orthogonal cavities are indicated by A and B with reactive filler filling the cavities as in the previous embodiments.

The present invention is not limited to use in the construction of fragments. For example as illustrated in the novel aspects of the present invention can be applied to bullets. In a bullet has a bullet shaped jacket e.g. suitable materials for jacket include for example metals such as steel tungsten hafnium aluminum titanium magnesium zirconium tantalum depleted uranium alloys or composites containing these metals etc. or other appropriate jacket materials that encase a housing e.g. a metal in solid rigid foam and honeycomb states that include but are not limited to aluminum zirconium hafnium tantalum titanium and magnesium etc. having a cavity formed therethrough. A reactive filler such as powdered PTFE using particle sizes and densities from the ranges defined previously fills cavity . In a bullet utilizes multiple cavities e.g. cavities A B and C in the housing .

Other bullet constructions could be used without departing from the scope of the present invention. For example if the integrity of the bullet jacket during bullet launch is of concern i.e. as may be the case for the axial holes formed in bullets and a construction such as that shown in could be used. More specifically a bullet has a plurality of radial holes formed in bullet jacket . In general radial holes are distributed about and or along bullet jacket in order to achieve a desired balance. Each of radial holes is filled with a housing with reactive filler similar to the previously described embodiments. The number of radial holes and the size shape and placement of radial holes are not limitations of the present invention.

The results of pressure chamber impact experiments of the present invention indicate enhanced damage for solid aluminum with powdered PTFE filler. Further gaseous products collected during the experiments yielded carbon monoxide carbon dioxide the PTFE monomer and other fluorocarbon compounds while post impact analysis of the impact areas yielded solid residue indicating the presence of solid aluminum trifluoride and solid aluminum oxide. These results indicate that the enhanced damage was the result of the chemical reaction of i the aluminum housing ii the powdered PTFE and iii the surrounding atmospheric oxygen when the oxygen comes into contact with the aluminum and powdered PTFE that reach high temperatures upon target impact. However the solid aluminum and PTFE powder are inert with respect to one another prior to target impact. This means that no additional safety mechanisms need be incorporated into the reactive munition thereby simplifying construction of a reactive munition and minimizing costs associated therewith. Further solid aluminum is easy and safe to work with as opposed to powdered metals typically used in reactive munitions.

Although the invention has been described relative to specific embodiments thereof there are numerous variations and modifications that will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art in light of the above teachings. For example based on experimental results of fragments bullets constructed in accordance with the present invention alternate metals other than aluminum may be used. That is when higher density munitions are required aluminum may be replaced with a higher density metal such as zirconium density 6.52 grams cubic centimeter hafnium density 13.3 grams cubic centimeter tantalum density 16.4 grams cubic centimeter etc. For lower density munitions it may be possible to replace aluminum with a metal such as magnesium density 1.74 grams cubic centimeter . It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced other than as specifically described.

