---

title: Method and apparatus for reducing noise corruption from an alternative sensor signal during multi-sensory speech enhancement
abstract: A method and apparatus classify a portion of an alternative sensor signal as either containing noise or not containing noise. The portions of the alternative sensor signal that are classified as containing noise are not used to estimate a portion of a clean speech signal and the channel response associated with the alternative sensor. The portions of the alternative sensor signal that are classified as not containing noise are used to estimate a portion of a clean speech signal and the channel response associated with the alternative sensor.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07590529&OS=07590529&RS=07590529
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07590529
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050204
---
The present invention relates to noise reduction. In particular the present invention relates to removing noise from speech signals.

A common problem in speech recognition and speech transmission is the corruption of the speech signal by additive noise. In particular corruption due to the speech of another speaker has proven to be difficult to detect and or correct.

Recently a system has been developed that attempts to remove noise by using a combination of an alternative sensor such as a bone conduction microphone and an air conduction microphone. This system estimates channel responses associated with the transmission of speech and noise through the bone conduction microphone. These channel responses are then used in a direct filtering technique to identify an estimate of the clean speech signal based on a noisy bone conduction microphone signal and a noisy air conduction microphone signal.

Although this system works well it tends to introduce nulls into the speech signal at higher frequencies and also tends to include annoying clicks in the estimated clean speech signal if the user clacks teeth during speech. Thus a system is needed that improves the direct filtering technique to remove the annoying clicks and improve the clean speech estimate.

A method and apparatus classify a portion of an alternative sensor signal as either containing noise or not containing noise. The portions of the alternative sensor signal that are classified as containing noise are not used to estimate a portion of a clean speech signal and the channel response associated with the alternative sensor. The portions of the alternative sensor signal that are classified as not containing noise are used to estimate a portion of a clean speech signal and the channel response associated with the alternative sensor.

The invention is operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers telephony systems distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

The invention may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The invention is designed to be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules are located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard a microphone and a pointing device such as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer is operated in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a hand held device a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on remote computer . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Memory is implemented as non volatile electronic memory such as random access memory RAM with a battery back up module not shown such that information stored in memory is not lost when the general power to mobile device is shut down. A portion of memory is preferably allocated as addressable memory for program execution while another portion of memory is preferably used for storage such as to simulate storage on a disk drive.

Memory includes an operating system application programs as well as an object store . During operation operating system is preferably executed by processor from memory . Operating system in one preferred embodiment is a WINDOWS CE brand operating system commercially available from Microsoft Corporation. Operating system is preferably designed for mobile devices and implements database features that can be utilized by applications through a set of exposed application programming interfaces and methods. The objects in object store are maintained by applications and operating system at least partially in response to calls to the exposed application programming interfaces and methods.

Communication interface represents numerous devices and technologies that allow mobile device to send and receive information. The devices include wired and wireless modems satellite receivers and broadcast tuners to name a few. Mobile device can also be directly connected to a computer to exchange data therewith. In such cases communication interface can be an infrared transceiver or a serial or parallel communication connection all of which are capable of transmitting streaming information.

Input output components include a variety of input devices such as a touch sensitive screen buttons rollers and a microphone as well as a variety of output devices including an audio generator a vibrating device and a display. The devices listed above are by way of example and need not all be present on mobile device . In addition other input output devices may be attached to or found with mobile device within the scope of the present invention.

Air conduction microphone also receives ambient noise V generated by one or more noise sources . Depending on the type of alternative sensor and the level of the noise noise may also be detected by alternative sensor . However under embodiments of the present invention alternative sensor is typically less sensitive to ambient noise than air conduction microphone . Thus the alternative sensor signal generated by alternative sensor generally includes less noise than air conduction microphone signal generated by air conduction microphone . Although alternative sensor is less sensitive to ambient noise it does generate some sensor noise W .

The path from speaker to alternative sensor signal can be modeled as a channel having a channel response H. The path from ambient noise sources to alternative sensor signal can be modeled as a channel having a channel response G.

The alternative sensor signal from alternative sensor and the air conduction microphone signal from air conduction microphone are provided to analog to digital converters and respectively to generate a sequence of digital values which are grouped into frames of values by frame constructors and respectively. In one embodiment A to D converters and sample the analog signals at 16 kHz and 16 bits per sample thereby creating 32 kilobytes of speech data per second and frame constructors and create a new respective frame every 10 milliseconds that includes 20 milliseconds worth of data.

Each respective frame of data provided by frame constructors and is converted into the frequency domain using Fast Fourier Transforms FFT and respectively. This results in frequency domain values B for the alternative sensor signal and frequency domain values Y for the air conduction microphone signal.

The frequency domain values for the alternative sensor signal and the air conduction microphone signal are provided to enhancement model trainer and direct filtering enhancement unit . Enhancement model trainer trains model parameters that describe the channel responses H and G as well as ambient noise V and sensor noise W based on alternative sensor values B and air conduction microphone values Y. These model parameters are provided to direct filtering enhancement unit which uses the parameters and the frequency domain values B and Y to estimate clean speech signal circumflex over X .

Clean speech estimate is a set of frequency domain values. These values are converted to the time domain using an Inverse Fast Fourier Transform . Each frame of time domain values is overlapped and added with its neighboring frames by an overlap and add unit . This produces a continuous set of time domain values that are provided to a speech process which may include speech coding or speech recognition.

The present inventors have found that the system for identifying clean signal estimates shown in can be adversely affected by transient noise such as teeth clack that is detected more by alternative sensor than by air conduction microphone . The present inventors have found that such transient noise corrupts the estimate of the channel response H causing nulls in the clean signal estimates. In addition when an alternative sensor value B is corrupted by such transient noise it causes the clean speech value that is estimated from that alternative sensor value to also be corrupted.

The present invention provides direct filtering techniques for estimating clean speech signal that avoids corruption of the clean speech estimate caused by transient noise in the alternative sensor signal such as teeth clack. In the discussion below this transient noise is referred to as teeth clack to avoid confusion with other types of noise found in the system. However those skilled in the art will recognize that the present invention may be used to identify clean signal values when the system is affected by any type of noise that is detected more by the alternative sensor than by the air conduction microphone.

In step air conduction microphone values Y and alternative sensor values B are collected. These values are provided to enhancement model trainer .

Speech detection unit determines which alternative sensor values and air conduction microphone values correspond to the user speaking and which values correspond to background noise including background speech at step .

Under one embodiment speech detection unit determines if a value corresponds to the user speaking by identifying low energy portions of the alternative sensor signal since the energy of the alternative sensor noise is much smaller than the speech signal captured by the alternative sensor signal.

Specifically speech detection unit identifies the energy of the alternative sensor signal for each frame as represented by each alternative sensor value. Speech detection unit then searches the sequence of frame energy values to find a peak in the energy. It then searches for a valley after the peak. The energy of this valley is referred to as an energy separator d. To determine if a frame contains speech the ratio k of the energy of the frame e over the energy separator d is then determined as k e d. A speech confidence q for the frame is then determined as 

Under one embodiment a fixed threshold value is used to determine if speech is present such that if the confidence value exceeds the threshold the frame is considered to contain speech and if the confidence value does not exceed the threshold the frame is considered to contain non speech. Under one embodiment a threshold value of 0.1 is used.

In other embodiments known speech detection techniques may be applied to the air conduction speech signal to identify when the speaker is speaking. Typically such systems use pitch trackers to identify speech frames since such frames usually contain harmonics that are not present in non speech.

Alternative sensor values and air conduction microphone values that are associated with speech are stored as speech frames and values that are associated with non speech are stored as non speech frames .

Using the values in non speech frames a background noise estimator an alternative sensor noise estimator and a channel response estimator estimate model parameters that describe the background noise the alternative sensor noise and the channel response G respectively at step .

Under one embodiment the real and imaginary parts of the background noise V and the real and imaginary parts of the sensor noise W are modeled as independent zero mean Gaussians such that Eq. 2 Eq. 3 where is the variance for background noise V and is the variance for sensor noise W.

The variance for the background noise is estimated from values of the air conduction microphone during the non speech frames. Specifically the air conduction microphone values Y during non speech are assumed to be equal to the background noise V. Thus the values of the air conduction microphone Y can be used to determine the variance assuming that the values of Y are modeled as a zero mean Gaussian during non speech. Under one embodiment this variance is determined by dividing the sum of squares of the values Y by the number of values.

The variance for the alternative sensor noise can be determined from the non speech frames by estimating the sensor noise Wat each frame of non speech as Eq. 4 where G is initially estimated to be zero but is updated through an iterative process in which is estimated during one step of the iteration and G is estimated during the second step of the iteration. The values of Ware then used to estimate the variance assuming a zero mean Gaussian model for W.

Where D is the number of frames in which the user is not speaking. In Equation 5 it is assumed that G remains constant through all frames of the utterance and thus is not dependent on the time frame t.

Equations 4 and 5 are iterated until the values for and G converge on stable values. The final values for and G are stored in model parameters .

At step model parameters for the channel response H are initially estimated by H and estimator using the model parameters for the noise stored in model parameters and the values of B and Y in speech frames . Specifically H is estimated as 

In addition the variance of a prior model of H is determined at step . The value of can be computed as 

Once the values for H and have been determined at step these values are used to determine the value of a discriminant function for each speech frame at step . Specifically for each speech frame teeth clack detector determines the value of 

The present inventors have found that a large value for Findicates that the speech frame contains a teeth clack while lower values for Findicate that the speech frame does not contain a teeth clack. Thus the speech frames can be classified as teeth clack frames using a simple threshold. This is shown as step of .

Under one embodiment the threshold for F is determined by modeling F as a chi squared distribution with an acceptable error rate. In terms of an equation 

Under one embodiment 0.99. In otherwords this model will classify a speech frame as a teeth clack frame when the frame actually does not contain a teeth clack only 1 of the time. Using that error rate the threshold for F becomes 365.3650 based on published values for chi squared distributions. Note that other error free rates resulting in other thresholds can be used within the scope of the present invention.

Using the threshold determined from the chi squared distribution each of the frames is classified as either a teeth clack frame or a non teeth clack frame at step . Because F is dependent on the variance of the background noise and the variance of the sensor noise the classification is sensitive to errors in determining the values of those variances. To ensure that errors in the variances do not cause too many frames to be classified as containing teeth clacks teeth clack detector determines the percentage of frames that are initially classified as containing teeth clack. If the percentage is greater than a selected percentage such as 5 at step the threshold is increased at step and the frames are reclassified at step such that only the selected percentage of frames are identified as containing teeth clack. Although a percentage of frames is used above a fixed number of frames may be used instead.

Once fewer than the selected percentage of frames have been identified as containing teeth clack either at step or step the frames that are classified as non clack frames are provided to H and estimator to recomputed the values of H and . Specifically equation 6 is recomputed using the values of Band Ythat are found in non clack frames .

At step the updated value of H is used with the value of G and the values of the noise variances and by direct filtering enhancement unit to estimate the clean speech value as 

By estimating H using only those frames that do not include teeth clack the present invention provides a better estimate of H. This helps to reduce nulls that had been present in the higher frequencies of the clean signal estimates of the prior art. In addition by not using the alternative sensor signal in those frames that contain teeth clack the present invention provides a better estimate of the clean speech values for those frames.

The flow diagram of represents a batch update of the channel responses and the classification of the frames as containing teeth clacks. This batch update is performed across an entire utterance. provides a flow diagram of a continuous or online method for updating the channel response values and estimating the clean speech signal.

In step of an air conduction microphone value Y and an alternative sensor value B are collected for the frame. At step speech detection unit determines if the frame contains speech. The same techniques that are described above may be used to make this determination. If the frame does not contain speech the variance for the background noise the variance for the alternative sensor noise and the estimate of G are updated at step . Specifically the variances are updated as 

where d is the number of non speech frames that have been processed and Gis the value of G before the current frame.

If the current frame is a speech frame the value of F is computed using equation 9 above at step . This value of F is added to a buffer containing values of F for past frames and the classification of those frames as either clack or non clack frames.

Using the value of F for the current frame and a threshold for F for teeth clacks the current frame is classified as either a teeth clack frame or a non teeth clack frame at step . This threshold is initially set using the chi squared distribution model described above. The threshold is updated with each new frame as discussed further below.

If the current frame has been classified as a clack frame at step the number of frames in the buffer that have been classified as clack frames is counted to determine if the percentage of clack frames in the buffer exceeds a selected percentage of the total number of frames in the buffer at step .

If the percentage of clack frames exceeds the selected percentage shown as five percent in the threshold for F is increased at step so that the selected percentage of the frames are classified as clack frames. The frames in the buffer are then reclassified using the new threshold at step .

If the current frame is a clack frame at step or if the percentage of clack frames does not exceed the selected percentage of the total number of frames at step the current frame should not be used to adjust the parameters of the H channel response model and the value of the alternative sensor should not be used to estimate the clean speech value. Thus at step the channel response parameters for H are set equal to their value determined from a previous frame before the current frame and the alternative sensor value Bis estimated as B HY. These values of H and Bare then used in step to estimate the clean speech value using equation 11 above.

If the current frame is not a teeth clack frame at either step or step the model parameters for channel response H are updated based on the values of Band Yfor the current frame at step . Specifically the values are updated as 

The new values of and Hare then used to estimate the clean speech value at step using equation 11 above. Since the alternative sensor value Bis not corrupted by teeth clack the value determined from the alternative sensor is used directly in equation 11.

After the clean speech estimate has been determined at step the next frame of speech is processed by returning to step . The process of continues until there are no further frames of speech to process.

Under the method of frames of speech that are corrupted by teeth clack are detected before estimating the channel response or the clean speech value. Using this detection system the present invention is able to estimate the channel response without using frames that are corrupted by teeth clack. This helps to improve the channel response model thereby improving the clean signal estimate in non teeth clack frames. In addition the present invention does not use the alternative sensor values from teeth clack frames when estimating the clean speech value for those frames. This improves the clean speech estimate for teeth clack frames.

Although the present invention has been described with reference to particular embodiments workers skilled in the art will recognize that changes may be made in form and detail without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

