---

title: Electronic association of a user expression and a context of the expression
abstract: Embodiments include an apparatus, device, system, computer-program product, and method. In an embodiment, a method is provided. The method includes receiving an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The method also includes receiving an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The method further includes electronically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08229252&OS=08229252&RS=08229252
owner: The Invention Science Fund I, LLC
number: 08229252
owner_city: Bellevue
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050425
---
The present application is related to claims the earliest available effective filing date s from e.g. claims earliest available priority dates for other than provisional patent applications claims benefits under 35 U.S.C. 119 e for provisional patent applications and incorporates by reference in its entirety all subject matter of the herein listed application s the present application also claims the earliest available effective filing date s from and also incorporates by reference in its entirety all subject matter of any and all parent grandparent great grandparent etc. applications of the herein listed application s . The United States Patent Office USPTO has published a notice to the effect that the USPTO s computer programs require that patent applicants reference both a serial number and indicate whether an application is a continuation or continuation in part. The present applicant entity has provided below a specific reference to the application s from which priority is being claimed as recited by statute. Applicant entity understands that the statute is unambiguous in its specific reference language and does not require either a serial number or any characterization such as continuation or continuation in part. Notwithstanding the foregoing applicant entity understands that the USPTO s computer programs have certain data entry requirements and hence applicant entity is designating the present application as a continuation in part of its parent applications but expressly points out that such designations are not to be construed in any way as any type of commentary and or admission as to whether or not the present application contains any new matter in addition to the matter of its parent application s .

An embodiment provides a method. The method includes receiving an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The method also includes receiving an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The method further includes electronically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The method may further include saving the electronically associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In addition to the foregoing other method embodiments are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

An embodiment provides a method. The method includes electronically associating a context information indicative of a recognizable item and an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable item. The method also includes saving the electronically associated context information indicative of a recognizable item and annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable the item.

Another embodiment provides a method. The method includes recognizing an aspect of an item in response to an annotation environment signal that may include a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The method also includes recognizing a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to an expression signal that may include an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The method further includes electronically associating the recognized user expression and the recognizable aspect of the item. In addition to the foregoing other method embodiments are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

A further embodiment provides a device. The device includes a context receptor module operable to receive an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The device also includes an annotation receptor module operable to receive an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The device further includes an associator module operable to associate the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item.

The device may include a context identifier module operable to recognize the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The device may include an annotation identifier module operable to recognize the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The device may further include a storage device operable to save the electronically associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In addition to the foregoing other device embodiments are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

An embodiment provides a computer program product. The computer program product includes program instructions operable to perform a process that associates information in a computer system and a computer readable signal bearing media bearing the program instructions. The process includes receiving an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and receiving an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The process also includes associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The process may further include saving the associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In addition to the foregoing other computer program product embodiments are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

Another embodiment provides a method. The method includes receiving an annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression. The method also includes receiving a context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression and logically linking the annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression and the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression. In addition to the foregoing other method embodiments are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

A further embodiment provides a method. The method includes receiving information generated by a handheld writing device indicative of a handwriting movement by a writing element of the handheld writing device and receiving information generated by the handheld writing device indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement. The method also includes generating an annotation by logically linking the handwriting movement and the content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement. In addition to the foregoing other method embodiments are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

An embodiment provides a computer program product. The computer program product includes program instructions configured to perform a process that associates information in a computer system and a computer readable signal bearing media bearing the program instructions. The process includes receiving information generated by a handheld writing device indicative of a handwriting movement by a writing element of the handheld writing device. The process also includes receiving information generated by the handheld writing device indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement and generating an annotation by logically linking the handwriting movement and the content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement. The signal bearing media may include a computer storage media. The signal bearing media may include a communication media.

The foregoing is a summary and thus by necessity contains simplifications generalizations and omissions of detail. Consequently those skilled in the art will appreciate that the summary is illustrative only and is not intended to be in any way limiting. Other aspects inventive features and advantages of the devices and or processes described herein as defined solely by the claims will become apparent in the detailed description set forth herein.

In the following detailed description of exemplary embodiments reference is made to the accompanying drawings which form a part hereof. In the several figures like referenced numerals identify like elements. The detailed description and the drawings illustrate exemplary embodiments. Other embodiments may be utilized and other changes may be made without departing from the spirit or scope of the subject matter presented here. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense and the scope of the claimed subject matter is defined by the appended claims.

A user may enter commands and information into the computing device through input devices such as a number of switches and buttons illustrated as hardware buttons connected to the system via a suitable interface . Input devices may further include a touch sensitive display screen with suitable input detection circuitry . The output circuitry of the touch sensitive display is connected to the system bus via a video driver . Other input devices may include a microphone connected through a suitable audio interface and a physical hardware keyboard not shown . In addition to the display the computing device may include other peripheral output devices such as at least one speaker .

Other external input or output devices such as a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like may be connected to the processing unit through a USB port and USB port interface to the system bus . Alternatively the other external input and output devices may be connected by other interfaces such as a parallel port game port or other port. The computing device may further include or be capable of connecting to a flash card memory not shown through an appropriate connection port not shown . The computing device may further include or be capable of connecting with a network through a network port and network interface and through wireless port and corresponding wireless interface may be provided to facilitate communication with other peripheral devices including other computers printers and so on not shown . It will be appreciated that the various components and connections shown are exemplary and other components and means of establishing communications links may be used.

The computing device may be primarily designed to include a user interface having a character key based other user data input via the touch sensitive display using a stylus not shown . Moreover the user interface is not limited to an actual touch sensitive panel arranged for directly receiving input but may alternatively or in addition respond to another input device such as the microphone . For example spoken words may be received at the microphone and recognized. Alternatively the computing device may be designed to include a user interface having a physical keyboard not shown .

The device functional elements not shown are typically application specific and related to a function of the electronic device. The device functional elements are driven by a device functional element s interface which coupled with the system bus . A functional element may typically perform a single well defined task with little or no user configuration or setup such as a refrigerator keeping food cold a cell phone connecting with an appropriate tower and transceiving voice or data information and a camera capturing and saving an image.

The computing system environment typically includes a variety of computer readable media products. Computer readable media may include any media that can be accessed by the computing device and include both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not of limitation computer readable media may include computer storage media and communications media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media include but are not limited to random access memory RAM read only memory ROM electrically erasable programmable read only memory EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by the computing device . Communications media typically embody computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and include any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communications media include wired media such as a wired network and a direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF optical and infrared media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and nonvolatile memory such as ROM and RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within the computing device such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and program modules that are immediately accessible to or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates an operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Often the operating system offers services to applications programs by way of one or more application programming interfaces APIs not shown . Because the operating system incorporates these services developers of applications programs need not redevelop code to use the services. Examples of APIs provided by operating systems such as Microsoft s WINDOWS are well known in the art.

The computing device may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media products. By way of example only illustrates a non removable non volatile memory interface hard disk interface that reads from and writes to non removable non volatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from and writes to a removable non volatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from and writes to a removable non volatile optical disk such as a CD ROM. Other removable nonremovable volatile non volatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards DVDs digital video tape solid state RAM and solid state ROM. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as the interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable non volatile memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computing device . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing an operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from the operating system application programs other program modules and program data . The operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computing device through input devices such as a microphone keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a joystick game pad satellite dish and scanner. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computing system environment may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computing device although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks such as a personal area network PAN not shown . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computing system environment is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computing device typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or via another appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computing device or portions thereof may be stored in a remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

In the description that follows certain embodiments may be described with reference to acts and symbolic representations of operations that are performed by one or more computing devices such as computing device of . As such it will be understood that such acts and operations which are at times referred to as being computer executed include the manipulation by the processing unit of the computer of electrical signals representing data in a structured form. This manipulation transforms the data or maintains them at locations in the memory system of the computer which reconfigures or otherwise alters the operation of the computer in a manner well understood by those skilled in the art. The data structures in which data is maintained are physical locations of the memory that have particular properties defined by the format of the data. However while an embodiment is being described in the foregoing context it is not meant to be limiting as those of skill in the art will appreciate that the acts and operations described hereinafter may also be implemented in hardware.

Embodiments may be implemented with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing devices and computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and configurations that may be suitable for use with an embodiment include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices personal digital assistants multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network minicomputers mainframe computers and distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices.

Embodiments may be described in a general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. An embodiment may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

The following includes a series of illustrations depicting implementations of processes. For ease of understanding certain illustrations are organized such that the initial illustrations present implementations via an overall big picture viewpoint and thereafter the following illustrations present alternate implementations and or expansions of the big picture illustrations as either sub steps or additional steps building on one or more earlier presented illustrations. This style of presentation utilized herein e.g. beginning with a presentation of a illustration s presenting an overall view and thereafter providing additions to and or further details in subsequent illustrations generally allows for a rapid and easy understanding of the various process implementations.

In an embodiment the exemplary document environment hereafter document may include a single sheet a part of a page a single page a poster a display multiple pages a chapter a volume and or a file. In a further embodiment the document may include a book such as a bound volume a box such as a retail package a container a carton a label a currency bill or note and or check. In another embodiment the document may include an article of clothing an item a structure a vehicle and or an indicator such as a temperature gauge or speedometer. In an embodiment a document includes any thing having a human recognizable content.

The document includes a content portion . The content portion may include a word illustrated as a word Rhett a phrase illustrated as the phrase Frankly my dear I don t give a damn and or other printed or native content schematically illustrated as a textual paragraph . In another embodiment the content portion may include a textual content portion. For example a textual content portion may include words printed on a page such as a page of a book and or words printed on a cover or a spine of a book. In a further embodiment the content portion may include a human language content for example text printed in roman alphabet characters math symbols and or script characters such as Asian language characters. In another embodiment the content portion may include a human readable content and or graphical content. In an embodiment the content portion may include a graphical content having a meaning or a significance to a human such as a picture a drawing a figure a photograph an illustration a diagram a doodle a decoration a sketch and or a portrait. In another embodiment the content portion may be arbitrary and not recognizable by an individual human reader. In a further embodiment the content portion may include any content primarily useful to a human reader. For example a content portion may include a textual and or graphical label on a retail article such as clothing a retail package or a carton. A content portion may include an address written on shipping label or an address written on a side of a building. A content portion may include an odometer reading on a vehicle or a temperature reading on a thermometer. In another embodiment the content portion may include an incidental element not primarily employed by a human reader but that aids in distinguishing the document. For example an incidental element may include a coffee stain a torn page and or a physical attribute of the document. In an embodiment a content portion may include a human and or machine recognizable characteristic form or shape such a pair of skis a car and or a dress.

In an embodiment the content portion of the document may be displayed on a surface such as a paper surface a surface of a sheet of paper a surface of a newspaper a surface of a book and or a surface of a poster. In a further embodiment the surface may include a surface of a box a surface of a container a surface of a carton a surface of a label a surface of a currency bill or note and or a surface of a check. In another embodiment a surface may include a surface of an article of clothing a surface of an item a surface of a structure a surface of a vehicle and or a surface of an indicator. In an embodiment a surface may include content located in at least two planes. In another embodiment a surface may include a planar surface. In an embodiment the content portion may be electronically displayed such as a text displayed through the surface and or a text projected on the surface. The surface electronically displaying the content portion may include a surface of a computer monitor a surface of a television screen and or a surface of an e paper 

The exemplary handheld writing device includes a writing element . In an embodiment the writing element may include an active writing element such as an ink cartridge operable to discharge a marking fluid onto a surface of a document. The active writing element may include a replaceable ink cartridge. In another embodiment the active writing element may include a pencil lead. In a further embodiment the writing element may include a non marking element such as non marking stylus.

The writing device also includes a writing detector module operable to generate information indicative of a handwriting movement by the writing element . The handwriting movement is illustrated as My favorite movie line. The writing detector module may be implemented in any manner including software hardware firmware and or a combination thereof. An embodiment of the writing detector module may be implemented using reflected light optical image sonar ultrasound and or accelerometer detection of a handwriting movement. The handwriting movement may be formed in response to hand movements. In an alternative embodiment the handwriting movement may be formed in response to movements of another part of a body such as by movement of a user s head while holding the writing device in their mouth.

In an embodiment information includes data that may be processed stored or transmitted by a computing device. In another embodiment information includes a meaning of data as may be interpreted by or meaningful to people. In an embodiment data includes a piece or pieces of information. Data may include facts quantities characters and or symbols. Data may be subject to operations by a computer saved and transmitted by electrical signals.

In an embodiment the writing detector module may be implemented by illuminating a surface of the document from the handheld writing device and determining the handwriting movement of the writing element in response to reflected illumination from the surface such as more fully described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 741 335 titled OPTICAL TRANSLATION MEASUREMENT issued on May 25 2004 Kinrot et al. as inventor U.S. Pat. No. 6 452 683 titled OPTICAL TRANSLATION MEASUREMENT issued on Sep. 17 2002 Kinrot et al. as inventor and U.S. Pat. No. 6 330 057 titled OPTICAL TRANSLATION MEASUREMENT issued on Dec. 11 2001 Lederer et al. as inventor each of which is incorporated herein by reference in their entirety for all that they disclose and teach. In another embodiment the writing detector module may be implemented by capturing images of a pattern in a writing base and handwriting movements of the pen determined by calculating positions of the writing element based on the images of the writing base such as more fully described in U.S. Pat. No.        published as US 2004 0179000 titled ELECTRONIC PEN MOUNTING PART THEREFOR AND METHOD OF MAKING THE PEN filed Jun. 26 2002 under application Ser. No. 10 179 949 Fermgard et al. as inventor which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety for all that is discloses and teaches. In a further embodiment the writing detector module may be implemented using ultrasound to track a handwriting movement of a writing element such as more fully described in U.S. Pat. No.        published as US 2003 0173121 titled DIGITZER PEN filed Mar. 18 2002 under application Ser. No. 10 098 390 Zloter et al. as inventor which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety for all that it discloses and teaches. In an embodiment the writing detector module may be implemented using a sensor package that measures velocity acceleration and angular acceleration in a handheld writing device such as more fully described in U.S. Pat. No.        published as US 2004 0260507 titled 3D INPUT APPARATUS AND METHOD THEREOF filed Jun. 17 2004 under application Ser. No. 10 868 959 Chang et al. as inventor which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety for all that it discloses and teaches. In another embodiment the writing detector module may be implemented using an image processing approach that captures and saves segments of a writing movement as a separate image. The final output is a combination of multiple images superimposed on each other.

In another embodiment the writing detector module may generate information indicative of a handwriting movement by capturing images of the handwriting movement and stitching the images together.

In an embodiment the writing detector module may include an electrical circuit operable to generate information indicative of a handwriting movement of the writing element. In a further embodiment the writing detector module may include operability to generate information indicative of a movement of the writing element generated by an activity of writing by hand. In another embodiment the writing detector module may include operability to generate information indicative of a movement of the writing element in response to a hand generated activity.

In a further embodiment the writing detector module may generate raw handwriting movement information. In another embodiment the writing detector module may process the raw handwriting movement information.

The writing device also includes a context detector module operable to generate information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element. In an embodiment a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting may include a content portion separated from the handwriting movement of less than approximately one to two inches. In another embodiment a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement may include a content portion and a handwriting movement both on a page. In a further embodiment a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement may include a content portion on a body that includes the handwriting movement. In an inanimate example the content portion may be a book title and or author printed on a book spine or cover and the handwriting movement being on a page of the book. In an animate example the content portion may include a portion of a human body such as a skin surface having a landmark and the handwriting movement being on the skin surface and proximate to the landmark such a surgeon marking incision lines before beginning a procedure.

The context detector module may be implemented in any manner including software hardware firmware and or any combination thereof. In an embodiment the context detector module may include an electrical circuit operable to generate information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element such as the phrase and or the word . An embodiment includes a context detector module operable to generate information indicative of a content portion of a displayed document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element. A further alternative embodiment includes a context detector module operable to generate information indicative of a content portion of an electronically displayed document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element. Another embodiment includes a context detector module operable to generate information indicative of a printed content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element. An embodiment includes a context detector module operable to generate information indicative of a printed content portion of a paper based document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element. A further alternative embodiment includes a context detector module operable to generate information indicative of a content portion of an e paper document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element.

In an embodiment the context detector module may include an image capture device having a lens . The image capture device includes operability to capture at least one image of the content portion proximate to the handwriting movement such as the phrase and or the word . The image capture device and the lens may have any location with respect to the handheld writing device suitable for capturing at least one image of a content portion proximate to the handwriting movement including within an outer periphery of the handheld writing device and or outside the outer periphery. In another embodiment the image capture device includes operability to capture image information of the displayed content portion proximate to the handwriting movement with a resolution sufficient to render the image information into textural information by an optical character resolution process.

In a further embodiment the image capture device includes operability to capture at least one image of a displayed content portion as a writer moves the writing element of the handheld writing device toward the document . In another embodiment the image capture device includes operability to capture at least one image of a displayed content portion as a writer imparts a handwriting movement to the writing element. In a further embodiment the image capture device includes operability to capture at least one image of a displayed content portion as a writer moves the writing element of the handheld writing device away from the document. The lens may include a user adjustable orientation allowing a user to optimize image capture.

In an embodiment the context detector module may include a user activatable switch not shown allowing a user to select when the information indicative of a content portion of a document element will be captured. For example the image capture device may include a user activatable switch allowing a user to select when an image of a content portion is obtained. A user may aim the lens at a content portion and capture an image by activating the switch. The switch may include a hardware switch a motion sensitive switch and or a voice activated switch.

In an embodiment the context detector module may further include operability to acquire contextual information from another source and to use that contextual information to generate information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element. For example the handwriting movement may occur proximate to a surface or a device operable to generate contextual information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement. The surface may include a touch sensitive screen coupled to a circuit operable to generate the contextual information. Alternatively the handwriting movement may occur proximate to a surface monitored by an ultrasonic system coupled to a circuit operable to generate contextual information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement.

In a further embodiment the context detector module may generate raw information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element. In another embodiment the context detector module may process the raw context portion information.

In another embodiment the context detector module may include operability to generate information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement using other technologies. For example information indicative of a content portion may be generated using data from a radio frequency identification device RFID associated with the document a global positioning satellite system and or other data signal.

In an alternative embodiment the handheld writing device may include a recognition module . The recognition module includes operability to generate information indicative of a human readable content in response to the information indicative of the hand driven movement of the writing element. For example in an embodiment the recognition module may determine a presence of human readable content in the information indicative of the hand driven or handwriting movement generated by the writing detector module recognize the human readable content as My favorite movie line and generate information indicative of that content. In another embodiment the recognition module may determine a presence of human readable content recognize the handwriting movements as forming the human readable content as a script character and generate information indicative of that script character.

In an operation of an embodiment a reader may wish to annotate the document with a comment or sketch. The reader holds the handheld writing device in their hand in a manner similar to a conventional pen or pencil and begins handwriting an annotation using the writing element proximate to a content portion . The handheld writing device captures a handwriting movement or hand driven movement of the writing element imparted by the user s hand to the writing device and through the writing detector module generates information indicative of the handwriting movement. The handheld writing device captures a context of the handwriting movement through the context detector module by capturing at least one image of the content portion of the document proximate to the handwriting movement. The context may be captured before the handwriting movement during the handwriting movement and or after the handwriting movement. The context detector module generates information indicative of the content portion of the document proximate to the handwriting movement.

The electronic pen also includes a writing detector module operable to generate information indicative of a hand driven movement of the writing element. In an embodiment a hand driven movement includes a hand generated movement. In an alternative embodiment the writing detector module includes operability to generate information indicative of a hand driven movement of the writing element in contact with the surface of a document . In another alternative embodiment the writing detector module includes operability to generate information indicative of a hand driven movement of the writing element in contact with the surface of a paper document. In a further embodiment the writing detector module includes operability to generate information indicative of a hand driven movement of the writing element in contact with a surface displaying an electronic document. The writing detector module may be implemented in any manner including software hardware firmware and or a combination thereof. An embodiment of the writing detector module may be implemented using reflected light optical image sonar ultrasound and or accelerometer detection of the handwriting movement. In an embodiment the writing detector module may be implemented in a manner at least substantially similar to the writing detector module of .

The electronic pen further includes a context detector module operable to generate information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand driven movement of the writing element. In an alternative embodiment the context detector module may include operability to generate information indicative of a content portion of a page of multiage document proximate to the handwriting movement of the writing element. In another alternative embodiment the context detector module may include operability to generate information indicative of a hand generated writing movement of the writing element. The context detector module may be implemented in any manner including software hardware firmware and or any combination thereof. In an embodiment the context detector module may be implemented in a manner at least substantially similar to the writing detector module of .

In an alternative embodiment the electronic pen may include at least one additional module. Additional modules may include a communications module and a storage module . In an embodiment the communications module includes operability to transmit at least one of the signal indicative of a hand driven movement of a writing element and the signal indicative of at least a portion of a document proximate to the hand driven movement of the writing element. The term signal means at least one current signal voltage signal or signal. In another embodiment the communications module includes operability to transmit in real time at least one of the information indicative of a hand driven movement of a writing element and the information indicative of at least a portion of a document proximate to the hand driven movement of the writing element. In a further embodiment the communications module includes operability to transmit at least one of processed information corresponding to the information indicative of a handwriting movement of a writing element and processed information corresponding to the information indicative of at least a portion of a document proximate to the writing movement of the writing element.

The communications module may transmit a signal. In an optional embodiment the communications module both receives and transmits signals transceiver . For example and without limitation signal includes a current signal voltage signal magnetic signal or optical signal in a format capable of being stored transferred combined compared or otherwise manipulated. The communications module may include wireless wired infrared optical and or other communications techniques. In an embodiment the communications module may include operability for communication with a computing device such as the thin computing device of and or the computing device of . The communications module may include an antenna for wireless communication a connection for wired connection and or an optical port for optical communication.

The digital storage module may include any suitable digital storage medium. For example a digital storage medium may include a computer storage medium. The digital storage module includes operability to save at least one of the information indicative of a hand driven movement of a writing element and the information indicative of at least a portion of a document proximate to the hand driven movement of the writing element. Information may be saved in any form or format such as a raw data form or a processed data form. In conjunction with the communications module information may be saved as generated and then be available for uploading at a later time. For example information may be stored batched and subsequently transmitted. In another example information may be stored and subsequently transmitted after the electronic pen is docked.

In operation of an embodiment the electronic pen acquires a handwritten annotation and a context of the handwritten annotation in a manner at least substantially similar to the handheld writing device of . In addition the electronic pen may transmit signals indicative of the handwritten annotation and the context of the annotation using the communication module . One or both of the signals may be transmitted in real time as a reader writes an annotation. In an alternative embodiment one or both of the signals may be processed by a component of the electronic pen prior to transmission. In another alternative embodiment the electronic pen may save one or both of the signals in the digital storage medium . The saved signal may be transmitted at a later time.

In an alternative embodiment the apparatus includes a pen configured to mark relative to an existing character such as the word of a document based at least in part on a marking position relative to the existing character of the document wherein the mark and an indicator of the marking position are saved within the pen.

In a further embodiment a recognizable aspect may include a textual content portion. For example a textual content portion may include words printed or displayed on a surface such as a page of a book and or words printed on a cover or a spine of a book. In a further embodiment a recognizable aspect may include a human language content for example text printed in roman alphabet characters math symbols and or script characters such as Asian language characters. In another embodiment a recognizable aspect may include a human readable content and or graphical content. In an embodiment a recognizable aspect may include a graphical content having a meaning or a significance to a human such as a picture a drawing a figure a photograph an illustration a diagram a doodle a decoration a sketch and or a portrait. In another embodiment a recognizable aspect may be arbitrary and recognizable by an individual human reader and not recognizable by another individual human reader. In a further embodiment a recognizable aspect may include any content primarily useful to a human reader. For example a recognizable aspect may include a textual and or graphical label on a retail article such as clothing a retail package or a carton. A recognizable aspect may include an address written on a shipping label or an address written on a side of a building. A recognizable aspect may include dynamically displayed matter such as an alignment of an indicator needle with a speed value on a vehicle speedometer or a temperature reading on a thermometer. In another embodiment a recognizable aspect may include an incidental element not primarily employed by a human reader but that aids in distinguishing the item. In an embodiment a recognizable aspect may include any aspect recognizable by a human a computing device a recognition program running on a computing device a computer implement method and or a machine. In another embodiment a recognizable aspect may include a characteristic form and or shape such a pair of skates a car and or a dress. In an embodiment an aspect may be recognizable locally in response to information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. In another embodiment an aspect may be recognizable in response to information provided by a remote third party responsive at least in part to information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item.

The exemplary handheld system includes a writing element operable to form a user expression. The user expression is illustrated as a handwritten user expression Check the Internet for best ski prices . In an embodiment the writing element may include an active writing element such as an ink cartridge operable to discharge a marking fluid onto a surface of a document. The active writing element may include a replaceable ink cartridge. The active writing element may include a disappearing ink. The active writing element may include a pencil lead. In a further embodiment the writing element may include a non marking element such as non marking stylus. In an alternative embodiment the system may include a microphone operable to capture an audible user expression such as a sound word and or sentence.

The handheld system includes an annotating device operable to generate information indicative of a user expression associated with a recognizable aspect of the item . In an embodiment where the user expression includes the handwritten user expression visually or spatially associated with the recognizable trademark content Head Ski and or the text content i Slalom on the top surface the annotating device includes operability to generate information indicative of the handwritten user expression formed by the writing element . Where the exemplary item includes a retail item in a store such as the ski the writing element may include a non marking writing element. Alternatively when the item includes a retail item in a store a user may adhere a Post It type notepaper proximate to a recognizable aspect handwrite on the Post It so as not to damage or mar the item capture the handwritten expression and then remove the Post It. In an embodiment where the user expression includes an audible user expression such as a spoken sentence Check the Internet for best ski prices the annotating device may include operability to generate information indicative of the spoken sentence received by the microphone .

The annotating device may be implemented in any manner including software hardware firmware and or a combination thereof. The annotating device may be implemented in a manner at least substantially similar to the writing detector module of . In an embodiment the annotating device may include operability to generate information indicative of a user verbal expression not shown associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The annotating device may include operability to generate information indicative of the handwritten user expression Check the Internet for best ski prices associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The annotating device may include operability to generate information indicative of a user hand drawn expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The annotating device may include operability to generate information indicative of a user gesture associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The annotating device may include operability to generate information indicative of a user gesture formed at least in part by a user limb. The annotating device may include operability to generate information indicative of a user gesture formed with a user held stylus.

Continuing with the handheld system includes an annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item such as the text content i Slalom . The annotation environment capture device may be implemented in any manner including software hardware firmware and or any combination thereof. The context detecting device may be implemented in a manner at least substantially similar to the context detector module of . In an embodiment the context detecting device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item in response to data acquired from at least one of several technologies and or data sources. For example data indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may be acquired from data corresponding to the recognizable aspect of the item such as for example time of day time of user expression time period of user expression user entered time time bracket date location presence of another person presence of other items temperature elevation bearing and or global position coordinates. By way of further example data corresponding to the recognizable aspect of an item may be acquired at least in part from a radio frequency identification device RFID . The RFID may be directly associated with the aspect of item associated with the item and or indirectly associated with the item.

In another embodiment the context detecting device may include an image capture device having a lens . The image capture device and or the lens may be implemented in a manner at least substantially similar to the image capture device and or lens of . In an embodiment the context detecting device may include a user activatable switch allowing a user to select when the information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item will be captured. For example a user may aim the lens at a recognizable aspect of an item and capture an image by activating the switch . The switch may include a hardware switch a motion sensitive switch and or a voice activated switch. In a further embodiment the context detecting device may generate raw information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. In another embodiment the context detecting device may process the raw information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item.

In an embodiment the context detecting device may include operability to generate information indicative of a machine recognizable aspect of an item such as the ski . A machine recognizable aspect of the ski may include a ratio of its length dimension to its width not shown . The context detecting device may include operability to generate information indicative of an optically recognizable aspect of an item. The context detecting device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable human readable content of an item such as the trademark content Head Ski . The context detecting device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable native text of an item such as the text content i Slalom . The context detecting device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable shape aspect of an item such as the ski shape . The context detecting device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable dimensional aspect of an item such as the length dimension of the ski .

In an alternative embodiment of the handheld system an impact and or pressure sensitive switch may include a non marking element version of the writing element . Tapping the non marking element against a surface of an item such as the surface activates the switch . In an embodiment activation of the switch causes the annotating device to record a verbal user expression. In another embodiment activation of the switch causes the context detecting device to acquire an image of a recognizable aspect of the item such as the trademark content Head Ski .

In a further embodiment the context detecting device may include a module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item. The module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item may include an artificial intelligence module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item. The module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item may include a pattern recognition module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item.

In an embodiment the system may include a communications device not shown . The communications device may include operability to communicate at least one of the information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In another embodiment the system may include a storage device not shown . The storage device may include operability to save at least one of the information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item.

As used in this document an item may include a thing an article an object an occurrence a garment a vehicle a body a person a worldly matter and or a state of an item. An item may include a representation. An item may be very small such as would require aided vision for human viewing or an item may be very large such as a building an aircraft vehicle and or a vessel that a human could walk through. An item may be animate and or inanimate.

A user expression may be associated by the user with an item or an aspect of an item in any manner. In an embodiment the user expression may be physically associated with an aspect of an item by the user. For example a user may associate a user expression and an aspect of an item by writing the user expression on the item and proximate to the aspect. Writing proximate to the text content i Slalom is an example of a user expression associated by the user with an aspect of an item. In another embodiment the user expression may be temporally associated with an item or aspect of an item. For example a user may temporally associate a user expression and an item or aspect of an item by speaking at a time when the item or aspect of the item is spatially proximate to the user. In another embodiment a user may associate a user expression and an item or aspect of an item by a gesture. For example a user may gesturally associate a user expression and an item or aspect of an item by tapping on or pointing to the item or aspect of the item while speaking.

In operation of an embodiment a user may wish to associate a user expression with a recognizable aspect of an item. For example a user signing a printed credit card slip in a restaurant may wish to associate information indicative of their entries and the printed credit card slip. In addition a user may wish to associate information indicative of the meal and the printed credit card slip. In this example the handheld system generally having a shape of a common writing pen may be used. A written user expression associated with the credit card slip may include a user written entry for a tip a user written entry for a total charge and a user written signature entry made with the active writing element having an ink tip.

In an embodiment the written entries are captured by the annotating device . In another embodiment images of the written entries are captured by the image capture device . Further before during and or after the writing the user may verbally express a description the meal and the quality of the meal in association with the printed credit card slip and perhaps a description of a wine consumed during the meal. A user verbal expression is captured by the microphone .

Also before during and or after the writing the image capture device captures an image indicative of at least one recognizable aspect of the printed credit card slip. A recognizable aspect of the credit card slip may include a name of the restaurant a date a time a charge for meals a sever name and or a charge for wine.

The annotating device generates information indicative of the user s verbal expression s and or the user s handwritten expression s . The context detecting device generates information indicative of a recognizable aspect of the credit card slip. The information indicative of a recognizable aspect of the credit card slip and or the information indicative of the user expression may be saved in the handheld system for later communication to a computing device such as a computer device running an expense account program.

The exemplary head mountable system includes a frame which includes an earpiece and an eye cover . In an optional embodiment the eye cover may be omitted. The frame includes a configuration to be worn in a manner similar to a pair of eyeglasses. In an embodiment the eye cover includes a configuration that allows a substantially unobstructed line of sight illustrated as a eye gaze between an eye and an aspect of an item illustrated as the recognizable text . In an embodiment the frame provides a structure that incorporates an annotating device an annotation environment capture device and a microphone and associated sound capture circuitry. In an optional embodiment the frame may also provide a structure that incorporates a user activatable switch . In another embodiment the system may include any configuration allowing it to be worn on a head.

The annotation environment capture device includes operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. In an embodiment annotation environment capture device includes a tracking module operable to track the eye gaze directed proximate to a recognizable aspect of the item. In another embodiment the annotation environment capture device includes an image capture module operable to acquire an image of a recognizable aspect of the item. In a further embodiment the annotation environment capture device includes an image capture module and a lens operable to acquire an image of a recognizable aspect of the item in response to a signal indicative of a received user command. The user command may include a verbal command a gestural command and or activation of a switch such as the switch . The capture module and the lens direct a lens track on a recognizable aspect of an item.

The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include a module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item. The module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item may include an artificial intelligence module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item. The module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item may include a pattern recognition module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item.

The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include a tracking module operable to track an eye gaze directed proximate to the recognizable aspect of the item. The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include a receiver circuit operable to receive a signal containing data indicative of a recognizable aspect of the item. The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include an image capture module operable to acquire an image of a recognizable aspect of the item. The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include an image capture module operable to acquire an image of a recognizable aspect of the item in response to a signal indicative of a received user command.

The annotation environment capture device may include operability to generate information indicative of a machine recognizable aspect of an item. In an embodiment a machine recognizable aspect of an item may include the author name the cover title the page number the binding title the electronically readable product code and or the text content . The annotation environment capture device may include operability to generate information indicative of an optically recognizable aspect of an item. In an embodiment an optically recognizable aspect of an item may include the author name the cover title the page number the binding title and or the text content. The annotation environment capture device may include operability to generate information indicative of a human recognizable aspect of an item. In an embodiment a human recognizable aspect of an item may include the author name the cover title the page number the binding title and or the text content. The annotation environment capture device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable native text of an item. In an embodiment a recognizable native text of an item may include the author name the cover title the page number the binding title and or the text content. The annotation environment capture device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable visual aspect of an item. In an embodiment a recognizable aspect of an item may include an optically recognizable author name cover title page number binding title and or text content. The annotation environment capture device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable image aspect of an item. In an embodiment a recognizable image aspect may include a picture a figure a drawing and or a graphic element not shown of the item. The annotation environment capture device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. In an embodiment a recognizable aspect may include any recognizable aspect of the book. The annotation environment capture device may include operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable human readable content. In an embodiment a recognizable human readable content may include the author name the cover title the page number the binding title and or the text content. The context detecting device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include a context detecting device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable audio aspect of an item. For example the context detecting device may include an operability to generate information indicative of a recognizable excerpt of a music piece such as a song or an excerpt of a speech.

The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include an annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item in response to an input received from the user. For example an input received from a user may include an interaction with a user to select an item to which the user expression is associated from among at least two candidate items in an image. By way of further example an input received from a user may include an interaction with a user to select an aspect of an item to which the user expression is associated from among at least two candidate aspects of an item. The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include an annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item in response to an input responsive to a gesture by the user. For example an input responsive to a user gesture may include a user pointing to an item to which the user expression is associated from among at least two candidate items in an environment.

The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include an annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable shape aspect of an item. The annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include an annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable dimensional aspect of an item.

In a further embodiment the annotation environment capture device may include a module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item. The module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item may include an artificial intelligence module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item. The module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item may include a pattern recognition module operable to recognize data indicative of the recognizable aspect of an item.

The annotation environment capture device may be implemented in any manner including software hardware firmware and or any combination thereof. The annotation environment capture device may be implemented in a manner at least substantially similar to the context detector module of .

Continuing with the annotating device includes operability to generate information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In an embodiment the annotating device may include operability to generate information indicative of a user verbal expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In an embodiment a user verbal expression may include a verbal sound a word at least two words and or a sentence. In another embodiment a user verbal expression may include any vocal expression a user wishes to associate with the recognizable aspect of the item. In an embodiment the annotating device includes operability to generate information indicative of a preformed user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In a further embodiment a preformed user verbal expression may include at least one word representative of at least two words. For example a verbalized word high may represent a verbal expression of this aspect is of high interest to me. 

The annotating device may be implemented in any manner including software hardware firmware and or any combination thereof. The annotating device may be implemented in a manner at least substantially similar to the context detector module of .

In operation of an embodiment a user may don the exemplary head mountable system in a manner similar to eyeglasses. The person may direct their eye gaze through the eye cover and at one or more recognizable aspects of an item such as for example the text content . Alternatively the user s gaze may be directed toward any other recognizable aspect of the book described above for example the title . The tracking module tracks the gaze of the user s eye and aligns the lens track of the lens of the image capture module with the recognizable text content. An image of the text content may be captured. The capture may be automatic such as in response to a predetermined time that the gaze is directed toward the recognizable text context and or such as in response to the user making a verbal expression associated with the recognizable text context. Alternatively the capture may be in response the user activating the switch through a touch or verbal command. The context detector generates information indicative of the recognizable text context responsive to the captured image.

Continuing with the exemplary operation the user may utter a verbal expression for connection or association with the recognizable aspect of the book which in this example includes the recognizable text aspect . The verbal expression may be any verbal expression. For example a verbal expression may include This is really interesting stuff or This statement contradicts a statement at page 12. The verbal expression is captured by the microphone . The annotating device generates information indicative of the user expression in response to the captured verbal expression.

In an alternative embodiment the exemplary human wearable system may comprise two separate human wearable elements. For example the annotation environment capture device may be carried in a first element wearable on a person s head and the annotation device carried in a second element wearable around the person s neck. In a further embodiment the annotating device may include an annotating device having a configuration selected from a group consisting of a handheld device a wearable device and a head mountable device. The annotation environment capture device includes an annotation environment capture device having a configuration other than the selected configuration of the annotating device. In another embodiment the annotation environment capture device may include an annotation environment capture device having a configuration selected from a group consisting of a handheld device a wearable device and a head mountable device. The annotating device includes an annotating device having a configuration other than the selected configuration of the annotation environment capture device.

The book includes microphone and associated sound capture circuitry an annotating device and an antenna coupled with a communications device not shown . The annotating device includes operability to generate information indicative of a user expression associated with a recognizable aspect of the item illustrated as the book . The annotating device is at least substantially similar to the annotating device of . The microphone and associated sound capture circuitry is at least substantially similar to the microphone and associated sound capture circuitry of . At least one of the communications devices may be configured as a receiver circuit a transmission circuit and or a transceiver circuit.

In operation of an embodiment a user may don and use the exemplary head mountable system to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item in a manner at least substantially similar to the system of . Also as described in conjunction with the user utters a verbal expression for connection or association with the recognizable aspect of the book which in this example includes the recognizable text aspect . In the embodiment illustrated in the verbal expression is captured by the microphone . The annotating device generates information indicative of the user expression in response to the captured verbal expression. In one embodiment one of the book and the head mountable system may transmit the respective information generated by their device to the other. In another embodiment the book and the system may transmit the respective information generated by their devices to a third device.

The system includes a tracking module carried in the frame and operable to track a user finger and or a user fingertip proximate to a recognizable aspect of the item such as the recognizable text content printed on and or native to the page surface . In an embodiment the tracking module may include operability to track a gesture formed by the user finger and or the user fingertip.

In an alternative embodiment the tracking module includes operability to track a stylus. For example a tracked stylus may include a hand holdable stylus not shown proximate to a recognizable aspect of the item.

In operation a user may place their fingertip and or their finger on the surface of the page and proximate to the recognizable text content . The tracking module tracks the finger and or fingertip and upon occurrence of a predetermined condition acquires data indicative of the recognizable text content . The predetermined condition may include a gesture with the finger and or fingertip proximate to the recognizable text content. For example in an embodiment the predetermined condition may include tapping the fingertip three times on the page surface proximate to the recognizable text content. In another embodiment the predetermined condition may include the user activating the switch . In a further embodiment the predetermined condition may include the user speaking a voice command received at the microphone . In an embodiment the predetermined condition may include the fingertip remaining stationary and proximate to the recognizable text content for a predetermined time. The context detector generates information indicative of a recognizable aspect of the text content in response to the acquired data. Alternatively the fingertip may be placed proximate to another recognizable aspect of the book . For example another recognizable aspect of the book may include the cover title .

The user may create an expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the book . In an embodiment the user may create a verbal expression for association with the recognizable aspect of the item. The verbal expression may be received by the microphone . In another embodiment the user may create the expression by a user gesture associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The user gesture may be formed at least a part by a user limb associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The user gesture may be captured by the image capture module .

In another embodiment the annotation environment capture device may remain incorporated in the system and a microphone and an annotating device may be incorporated into a structure of the book . For example the microphone and annotating device may be incorporated as illustrated in conjunction with the book of .

The exemplary head mountable system includes the frame as described in conjunction with . The frame includes a handwriting tracking module operable to acquire data indicative of the handwritten annotation . In an embodiment the handwriting tracking module includes operability to acquire data indicative of the handwritten annotation in response to detected movements by the pen writing tip . In another embodiment the handwriting tracking module includes operability acquire data indicative of the handwritten annotation in response to images of the pen writing tip and or the handwritten characters. The images may be captured by the capture module .

In operation of an embodiment a user may don and use the exemplary head mountable system and allow the system to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item in a manner at least substantially similar to the system of . In addition the user may grasp the pen in their hand and hand generate a user expression such as the annotation using the pen tip and proximate to a recognizable aspect such as the recognizable text content . Data indicative of the hand generated annotation is acquired by the handwriting tracking module and the annotating device generates information indicative of the user expression associated with the recognizable text content .

In an alternative embodiment not illustrated the handwriting instrument may include an annotating device operable to generate information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The annotating device may be at least substantially similar to the annotating device described in conjunction with .

The environment also includes a stylus corresponding to a preformed user expression. In an embodiment illustrated in the stylus is illustrated as a stylus set of three individual styluses that include a green stylus a blue stylus and a yellow stylus . In an embodiment the set of styluses are illustrative of hi liter type highlighting markers used by students and others to annotate course materials. A stylus may have any preformed expression. For example in an embodiment the yellow stylus may correspond to a preformed user expression of highly interesting material. the red stylus may correspond to a preformed user expression of dumb material. In an embodiment a stylus may transmit a signal indicative of a preselected or preformed annotation. In another embodiment a stylus may include an optically recognizable feature indicative of a preselected or preformed annotation. An optically recognizable feature may include a color a bar code and or a shape.

In operation of an embodiment a user may don and use the exemplary head mountable system and allow the system to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item in a manner at least substantially similar to the system of . In addition the user may grasp a stylus in their hand such as the yellow stylus and use the stylus to associate a preformed user expression with the recognizable text content of the document. The user expression may be associated in any manner that may be captured by the stylus tracking module . For example in an embodiment the stylus tracking module may be operable to capture a tapping of a tip of the yellow stylus proximate to the recognizable text content as a preformed user expression of highly interesting material. In another embodiment the stylus tracking module may be operable to capture a closed figure drawn around the recognizable text content with the tip of a stylus as a preformed user expression the nature of which is established by the particular stylus selected from the stylus set . The annotating device generates information indicative of the user expression associated with the recognizable text context in response to the captured preformed user expression.

In an embodiment the operational flow may include at least one additional operation such as an operation . At the operation a signal is received indicative of the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of an item.

In an embodiment the operational flow may include a storage operation . At the storage operation the electronically associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item are saved. The electronically associated information may be stored in a computer readable media such as for example a computer storage media.

Operation of an embodiment of the operational flow is illustrated here in conjunction with the above described exemplary annotation systems. For example the exemplary human wearable annotation system described in conjunction with includes an annotation device operable to generate information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In an embodiment the exemplary human wearable annotation system may provide the information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item as an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The exemplary human wearable annotation system also includes an annotation environment capture device operable to generate information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The exemplary human wearable annotation system may also provide information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item as an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item.

In operation the first acquisition operation may receive an annotation environment signal generated by the annotation capture device that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The annotation environment signal may be raw or may be processed. The annotation environment signal may be received in substantially real time or it may be received in non real time. The second acquisition operation may receive an expression signal generated by the annotation device that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The expression signal may be raw or may be processed. The expression signal may be received in substantially real time or it may be received in non real time. The linking operation electronically associates the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In an embodiment the electronic association may include a simple linking of signals in response to a common element of a time track present in both signals. In another embodiment where both signals include a processing before they are acquired by the operational flow the electronic association may include a linking of the signals based at least in part on information present in at least one of the signals.

Another example of an operation of an embodiment of the operational flow may be illustrated in conjunction with the exemplary system described in conjunction with . In addition to the exemplary human wearable annotation system the system includes a handwriting instrument illustrated as the pen . In an embodiment the pen includes an annotating device not shown similar to the annotating device of and operable to generate information indicative of a user expression associated with a recognizable aspect of an item. In the embodiment the annotating device of the pen may provide the information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item as an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item.

In operation as above the first acquisition operation may receive an annotation environment signal generated by the annotation capture device that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The annotation environment signal may be raw or may be processed. The annotation environment signal may be received in substantially real time or it may be received in non real time. The second acquisition operation may receive an expression signal generated by the annotation device not shown of the pen that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The expression signal may be raw or may be processed. The expression signal may be received in substantially real time or it may be received in non real time. As described above the linking operation electronically associates the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item.

In an embodiment a degree resolution and or recognizing provided by the operation and or the operation may occur at any point along a continuum of recognition that spans from a minimal recognition to a complete recognition. For example in an embodiment only a minimal recognition of the recognizable aspect of an item and or recognition of the user expression may be required to associate a context information and an annotation information at the linking operation . This may occur in a first pass or pre recognition form of the operational flow that performs an initial linking of a context information and an annotation information. In an embodiment where the context information includes a photograph of an environment a degree of recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include recognizing that a book is present in the environment. Another degree of recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include recognizing one book in an environment that includes two books. In another embodiment if the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item includes information indicative of a blue book on a shelf that contains at least two books respectively of different colors a minimal degree of recognizing may include recognizing the blue aspect of the book item.

In a further example the user expression may include a verbal expression a gesture and or a preformed expression. In an embodiment a minimal degree of recognition of a user expression may include recognizing that a user verbal expression occurred that a user handwritten expression occurred and or that a user preformed expression occurred. In another embodiment a degree of recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include recognizing that a handwritten character is associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In a further embodiment a degree of recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include recognizing that a spoken word is associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In another embodiment a high degree of recognition of the recognizable aspect of an item and or recognition of the user expression may be required. For example a high degree of recognition may be required to associate a context information and an annotation information at the linking operation . In another example a high degree of recognition or a detailed recognition may be required to produce an output useable by a human and or machine user. A machine user may include a security system. The security system may receive a verbal user expression by a security guard associated with a suspicious person in a crowd. For example a security guard may point to a monitor displaying a crowd that includes a suspicious person wearing a black beret and verbally express or annotate the display by saying find out who that person is. 

Continuing with the previous example a high degree of recognizing an aspect of an item may include recognizing to a point of recognizing a title of a book in the environment such as identifying TI as the title of the blue book or Homer as the author of the blue book. A high degree of recognizing a user expression may include recognizing a spoken word of the verbal expression recognizing a word or character of a handwritten expression and or recognizing the particular preformed expression from the possible instances of preformed expressions.

Continuing with the previous example in another embodiment a degree of recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include recognizing the handwritten character associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. For example the handwritten character may be recognized as a particular ASCII character and or a particular Asian language character. In a further embodiment a degree of recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include recognizing a particular spoken word associated with the recognizable aspect of the item.

In a further embodiment the item may include a document a paper a book a book in a paper form and or a book in an electronic form collectively referred to as a book. . In this embodiment the recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include recognizing a version of a book as well as a recognizable text aspect of the book. At the operation the electronically associated context information and annotation information may include information about the book in which the annotation was written and the location on a particular page of the book. The physical book may be identified from the content information alone. The identification may be for any purpose such as for purchase location in a library and or gathering annotations made by a user over time. The electronic association of context information and annotation information may allow a user to see a specified annotation placed in context such as on the relevant page of the appropriate book on a display screen. A user may request that the page containing an annotation be printed with or without the annotation which can appear in context on that page either as written or as recognized text. A user may query the electronically associated context information and annotation information for annotations and see either matching annotations or pages passages associated with the matching annotations results e.g. find where I have said what poetry produces images of several key pages of the Silmarillion.

In another embodiment a user can select particular page of a book and query an electronically associated context information and annotation information to determine whether they ever made an annotation to the selected page or a selected textual portion of the page. A system may then retrieve and provide the annotation in association with the selected page or selected textual portion of the page. In an embodiment an annotation may be used to find a book and a book may be used to find an annotation.

In an embodiment the exemplary operational flow of allows a user to make handwritten annotations to an item at any place and or at any time in their life. The user may or may not have the entire document. In a book embodiment the context may include a reference to a book being annotated that exists in at least two forms. For example many books such as the classic book TIof may have been printed in various versions editions and languages. An advantage may be provided if the electronic association of the context information of a book and the annotation information include an electronic association of a canonical representation of the book and the annotation information. A user may query a plurality of instances of the electronically associated context information and content information for annotation information related to a canonical book.

A book being annotated may be an exemplar such as a portion of physical printed page of a book. A user may annotate a photocopy of a subset of a book such as a page at least two pages a chapter etc. A user may annotate their copy of a book or even a copy of a book checked out from the library. All of the annotations may be electronically associated with that book. A user could go back to some central location and access all of the annotations they ever made to a book that they encountered in their life such as TI. In some situations a user may have read or annotated several copies or editions of the book during their life. All of the annotations they ever made for the book and its various editions would be available at a central place. The annotations may be saved with respect to a canonical or ultimate representation of the book. For example the annotator may request Show me the annotations I ve made to TI. 

At the operation the recognizable aspect of an item is recognized in response to a parameter present in the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. In an embodiment the parameter may include a temporal parameter such as a time stamp and or a time track. In another embodiment the parameter may include a coordinate system such as GPS coordinates. In a further embodiment the parameter may include a temperature a date an orientation of a device that captured the parameter with respect to the item. The operation identifies the recognizable aspect of an item.

The context receptor module includes operability to receive an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The annotation environment signal may be generated by any source. For example sources of the annotation environment signal may include the exemplary handheld writing device described in conjunction with the exemplary apparatus described in conjunction with the exemplary handheld system described in conjunction with and or the exemplary human wearable system described in conjunction with . In an embodiment the context receptor module includes wired connector that receives the annotation environment signal. In another embodiment the context receptor module includes a wireless receiver or transceiver that receives the annotation environment signal. In an embodiment the context receptor module receives the annotation environment signal and provides it substantially unchanged illustrated as a signal to the associator over connection . In another embodiment the context receptor module may provide a processing of the annotation environment signal and provides it as a signal illustrated as the signal to the associator. The processing of the annotation environment signal may include any level of processing. The processing may include a pre recognition step and or stage. In an embodiment the processing may include assigning a time track to the annotation environment signal. In another embodiment the processing may include slicing the annotation environment signal into segments such as five second time segments. Other embodiments may include marking segments of the annotation environment signal based on a location parameter such as a location based upon GPS coordinates temperature an orientation parameter of a device that generated the annotation environment signal such as a compass direction and or date. In an embodiment the processing may include a noise reduction and or a conditioning.

The annotation receptor module includes operability to receive an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The expression signal may be generated by any source. For example sources of the expression signal may include the exemplary handheld writing device described in conjunction with the exemplary apparatus described in conjunction with the exemplary handheld system described in conjunction with the exemplary human wearable system described in conjunction with the exemplary pen described in conjunction with and or the exemplary stylus and or stylus set described in conjunction with . In an embodiment the annotation receptor module includes wired connector that receives the expression signal. In another embodiment the annotation receptor module includes a wireless receiver and or transceiver that receives the expression signal. In an embodiment the annotation receptor module receives the expression signal and provides it substantially unchanged illustrated as a signal to the associator over connection . In another embodiment the context receptor module may provide a processing of the annotation environment signal before providing it illustrated as the signal to the associator. The processing may include a pre recognition step and or stage. In an embodiment the processing may include assigning a time track to the expression signal. In another embodiment the processing may include slicing the expression signal into segments such as five second time segments. Other embodiments may include marking segments of the expression signal based on a location parameter such as a location based upon GPS coordinates temperature an orientation parameter of a device that generated the expression signal such as a compass direction and or a date. In an embodiment the processing may include a noise reduction and or a conditioning.

The associator module includes operability to associate the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In another embodiment the associator module includes operability to establish a correlation between the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The associator receives the signal provided by the context receptor module and the signal provided by the annotation receptor module . The associator may associate the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item using any suitable technique manner and or method. For example in an embodiment the associator may associate the context information and the annotation information in response to a temporal aspect. In another embodiment the associator may associate in response to a pre recognition processing of the expression signal and or the annotation environment signal. For example the associator may associate in response to corresponding time segments of the expression signal and the annotation environment signal.

The storage module includes operability to save the electronically associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The storage module receives the electronically associated context information and annotation information from the associator module over the connector . In an embodiment the storage module may include any suitable computer readable storage media such as described in conjunction with .

In an alternative embodiment the annotation receptor module and the context identifier module are coupled by a connector that is operable to communicate a first signal not shown . In an embodiment the first signal may include a first data signal provided by the annotation receptor module corresponding to an attribute of the expression signal which may be used by the context identifier in recognizing the recognizable aspect of the item. For example the first data signal may be responsive to a time track present in the expression signal. The time track may indicate when a preformed stylus touched a page of a document such as the stylus touching the surface displaying the recognizable text content of . The context identifier module may receive and recognize the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the first data signal and the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. In another embodiment the first signal may include a first data signal provided by the context identifier module responsive to a recognized recognizable aspect of an item.

In an alternative embodiment the annotation identifier module and the context reception module are coupled by a connection operable to communicate a second signal not shown . In an embodiment the second signal may include a second data signal provided by the context receptor module corresponding to an attribute of the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The second signal may be used by the annotation identifier module in recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. In another embodiment the second signal may include a second data signal provided by the annotation identifier module corresponding to an attribute of the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item which may be used by the context receptor.

The context receptor module the context identifier module the annotation receptor module the annotation identifier module the associator module and or the storage module may be implemented in any manner. In an embodiment an implementation of a module may include an implementation in hardware software and or firmware. In another embodiment an implementation of a module may include a combination of hardware software and or firmware. In a further embodiment one or more of the modules may be implemented in a thin computing device such as the thin computing device of and or a computing system such as the computing system environment of .

In an embodiment the process may include recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item . In another embodiment the process may includes recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item . In a further embodiment the process may further include requesting a recognition of the recognizable aspect of the item from a remote computing device and receiving the recognition of the recognizable aspect of the item from the remote computing device . In an embodiment the process may include saving the associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item .

In an embodiment the signal bearing media may include a computer storage media . In another embodiment the signal bearing media may include a communications media .

In an embodiment the exemplary operational flow may include at least one additional operation such as the storage operation . The storage operation saves the logically linked annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression and context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression.

An embodiment provides a method. The method includes receiving an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The method also includes receiving an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The method further includes electronically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The method may further include saving the electronically associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item.

The method may include recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include a first degree of recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item. The recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include a second degree of recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item wherein the second degree of recognizing may include a higher resolution than the first degree of recognizing. The recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item in response to a parameter present in the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item may include recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item in response to a pattern present in the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include requesting a recognition of the recognizable aspect of the item from a remote computing device and receiving the recognition of the recognizable aspect of the item from the remote computing device. The recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include receiving a recognition of the recognizable aspect of the item from a remote computing device. The recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item may include recognizing a recognizable aspect of a canonical version of the item. The method may further include identifying the recognizable aspect of an item.

The method may further include recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include a first degree of recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include a second degree of recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item wherein the second degree of recognizing may include a higher resolution than the first degree of recognizing. The recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include recognizing a parameter present in the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include recognizing a pattern present in the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to a parameter present in the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include requesting a recognition of the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item from a remote computing device and receiving the recognition of the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item from the remote computing device. The recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include receiving the recognition of the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item from a remote computing device. The recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The method may further include identifying the user expression.

The electronically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include logically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The electronically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include temporally associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The electronically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include correlating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item such that one of the information may be retrieved by referring to the other information. The electronically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include cohering the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The electronically associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include electronically associating a recognized recognizable aspect and a recognized user expression.

The receiving an annotation environment signal may include receiving an annotation environment signal generated by a handheld device. The receiving an annotation environment signal may include receiving an annotation environment signal generated by a wearable device. The receiving an annotation environment signal may include receiving an annotation environment signal generated by a head mountable device. The receiving an expression signal may include receiving an expression signal generated by a handheld device. The receiving an expression signal may include receiving an expression signal generated by a wearable device. The receiving an expression signal may include receiving an expression signal generated by a head mountable device. The receiving an annotation environment signal may include receiving an annotation environment signal generated by a handheld device and the receiving an expression signal may include receiving an expression signal generated by the handheld device. The receiving an annotation environment signal may include receiving an annotation environment signal generated by a wearable device and the receiving an expression signal may include receiving an expression signal generated by the wearable device. The receiving an annotation environment signal may include receiving an annotation environment signal generated by a head mountable device and the receiving an expression signal may include receiving an expression signal generated by the head mountable device.

An embodiment provides a method. The method includes electronically associating a context information indicative of a recognizable item and an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable item. The method also includes saving the electronically associated context information indicative of an item and annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the item. The context information indicative of a recognizable item may include a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable item may include annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item.

Another embodiment provides a method. The method includes recognizing an aspect of an item in response to an annotation environment signal that may include a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The method also includes recognizing a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to an expression signal that may include an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The method further includes electronically associating the recognized user expression and the recognizable aspect of the item.

A further embodiment provides a device. The device includes a context receptor module operable to receive an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The device also includes an annotation receptor module operable to receive an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The device further includes an associator module operable to associate the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The device may include a context identifier module operable to recognize the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The device may include a first coupler between the context identifier module and the annotation receptor module and operable to communicate a first signal. The device may include an annotation identifier module operable to recognize the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The device may include a second coupler between the annotation identifier module and the context receptor module operable to communicate a second signal. The device may include a context identifier module operable to recognize the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and an annotation identifier module operable to recognize the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The device may include a third coupling between the annotation identifier module and the context identifier module operable to communicate a third signal. The associator module operable to associate the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item may include an associator module operable to establish a correlation between the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The device may further include a storage device operable to save the electronically associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The storage device may include a non volatile storage device.

An embodiment provides a computer program product. The computer program product includes program instructions operable to perform a process that associates information in a computer system and a computer readable signal bearing media bearing the program instructions. The process includes receiving an annotation environment signal that includes a context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and receiving an expression signal that includes an annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The process also includes associating the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The process may further include recognizing the recognizable aspect of an item in response to the context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item. The process may further include recognizing the user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item in response to the annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The process may further include requesting a recognition of the recognizable aspect of the item from a remote computing device and receiving the recognition of the recognizable aspect of the item from the remote computing device. The process may further include saving the associated context information indicative of a recognizable aspect of an item and annotation information indicative of a user expression associated with the recognizable aspect of the item. The signal bearing media may include a computer storage media. The signal bearing media may include a communications media.

Another embodiment provides a method. The method includes receiving an annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression. The method also includes receiving a context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression and logically linking the annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression and the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression. The method may include recognizing the hand formed expression in response to the annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression. The recognizing the hand formed expression in response to the annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression may include a first degree of recognizing the hand formed expression in response to the annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression. The recognizing the hand formed expression in response to the annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression may include a second degree of recognizing the hand formed expression in response to the annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression wherein the second degree of recognizing includes a higher resolution than the first degree of recognizing.

The method may further include recognizing the content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression in response to the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression. The recognizing the content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression in response to the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression may include a first degree of recognizing the content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression in response to the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression. The recognizing the content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression in response to the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression may include a second degree of recognizing the content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression in response to the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression wherein the second degree of recognizing includes a higher resolution than the first degree of recognizing. The recognizing the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression may include recognizing a context information indicative of a content anchor portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression. The recognizing the context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression may include recognizing a context information indicative of a non content anchor portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression. The method may further include saving the logically linked annotation information indicative of a hand formed expression and context information indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the hand formed expression.

A further embodiment provides a method. The method includes receiving information generated by a handheld writing device indicative of a handwriting movement by a writing element of the handheld writing device and receiving information generated by the handheld writing device indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement. The method also includes generating an annotation by logically linking the handwriting movement and the content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement.

An embodiment provides a computer program product. The computer program product includes program instructions configured to perform a process that associates information in a computer system and a computer readable signal bearing media bearing the program instructions. The process includes receiving information generated by a handheld writing device indicative of a handwriting movement by a writing element of the handheld writing device. The process also includes receiving information generated by the handheld writing device indicative of a content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement and generating an annotation by logically linking the handwriting movement and the content portion of a document proximate to the handwriting movement. The signal bearing media may include a computer storage media. The signal bearing media may include a communication media.

Those having skill in the art will recognize that the state of the art has progressed to the point where there is little distinction left between hardware and software implementations of aspects of systems the use of hardware or software is generally but not always in that in certain contexts the choice between hardware and software can become significant a design choice representing cost vs. efficiency tradeoffs. Those having skill in the art will appreciate that there are various vehicles by which processes and or systems and or other technologies described herein can be effected e.g. hardware software and or firmware and that the preferred vehicle will vary with the context in which the processes and or systems and or other technologies are deployed. For example if an implementer determines that speed and accuracy are paramount the implementer may opt for a mainly hardware and or firmware vehicle alternatively if flexibility is paramount the implementer may opt for a mainly software implementation or yet again alternatively the implementer may opt for some combination of hardware software and or firmware. Hence there are several possible vehicles by which the processes and or devices and or other technologies described herein may be effected none of which is inherently superior to the other in that any vehicle to be utilized is a choice dependent upon the context in which the vehicle will be deployed and the specific concerns e.g. speed flexibility or predictability of the implementer any of which may vary. Those skilled in the art will recognize that optical aspects of implementations will require optically oriented hardware software and or firmware.

The foregoing detailed description has set forth various embodiments of the devices and or processes via the use of block diagrams flow diagrams operation diagrams flowcharts illustrations and or examples. Insofar as such block diagrams operation diagrams flowcharts illustrations and or examples contain one or more functions and or operations it will be understood by those within the art that each function and or operation within such block diagrams operation diagrams flowcharts illustrations or examples can be implemented individually and or collectively by a wide range of hardware software firmware or virtually any combination thereof. In one embodiment several portions of the subject matter described herein may be implemented via Application Specific Integrated Circuits ASICs Field Programmable Gate Arrays FPGAs digital signal processors DSPs or other integrated formats. However those skilled in the art will recognize that some aspects of the embodiments disclosed herein in whole or in part can be equivalently implemented in standard integrated circuits as one or more computer programs running on one or more computers e.g. as one or more programs running on one or more computer systems as one or more programs running on one or more processors e.g. as one or more programs running on one or more microprocessors as firmware or as virtually any combination thereof and that designing the circuitry and or writing the code for the software and or firmware would be well within the skill of one of skill in the art in light of this disclosure. In addition those skilled in the art will appreciate that the mechanisms of the subject matter described herein are capable of being distributed as a program product in a variety of forms and that an illustrative embodiment of the subject matter described herein applies equally regardless of the particular type of signal bearing media used to actually carry out the distribution. Examples of a signal bearing media include but are not limited to the following recordable type media such as floppy disks hard disk drives CD ROMs digital tape and computer memory and transmission type media such as digital and analog communication links using TDM or IP based communication links e.g. packet links .

It will be understood by those within the art that in general terms used herein and especially in the appended claims e.g. bodies of the appended claims are generally intended as open terms e.g. the term including should be interpreted as including but not limited to the term having should be interpreted as having at least the term includes should be interpreted as includes but is not limited to etc. . It will be further understood by those within the art that if a specific number of an introduced claim recitation is intended such an intent will be explicitly recited in the claim and in the absence of such recitation no such intent is present. For example as an aid to understanding the following appended claims may contain usage of the introductory phrases at least one and one or more to introduce claim recitations. However the use of such phrases should not be construed to imply that the introduction of a claim recitation by the indefinite articles a or an limits any particular claim containing such introduced claim recitation to inventions containing only one such recitation even when the same claim includes the introductory phrases one or more or at least one and indefinite articles such as a or an e.g. a and or an should typically be interpreted to mean at least one or one or more the same holds true for the use of definite articles used to introduce claim recitations. In addition even if a specific number of an introduced claim recitation is explicitly recited those skilled in the art will recognize that such recitation should typically be interpreted to mean at least the recited number e.g. the bare recitation of two recitations without other modifiers typically means at least two recitations or two or more recitations . Furthermore in those instances where a convention analogous to at least one of A B and C etc. is used in general such a construction is intended in the sense one having skill in the art would understand the convention e.g. a system having at least one of A B and C would include but not be limited to systems that have A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and or A B and C together etc. . In those instances where a convention analogous to at least one of A B or C etc. is used in general such a construction is intended in the sense one having skill in the art would understand the convention e.g. a system having at least one of A B or C would include but not be limited to systems that have A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and or A B and C together etc. .

The herein described aspects depict different components contained within or connected with different other components. It is to be understood that such depicted architectures are merely exemplary and that in fact many other architectures can be implemented which achieve the same functionality. In a conceptual sense any arrangement of components to achieve the same functionality is effectively associated such that the desired functionality is achieved. Hence any two components herein combined to achieve a particular functionality can be seen as associated with each other such that the desired functionality is achieved irrespective of architectures or intermedial components. Likewise any two components so associated can also be viewed as being operably connected or operably coupled to each other to achieve the desired functionality. Any two components capable of being so associated can also be viewed as being operably couplable to each other to achieve the desired functionality. Specific examples of operably couplable include but are not limited to physically mateable and or physically interacting components and or wirelessly interactable and or wirelessly interacting components.

While particular aspects of the present subject matter described herein have been shown and described it will be apparent to those skilled in the art that based upon the teachings herein changes and modifications may be made without departing from this subject matter described herein and its broader aspects and therefore the appended claims are to encompass within their scope all such changes and modifications as are within the true spirit and scope of this subject matter described herein. Furthermore it is to be understood that the invention is solely defined by the appended claims.

