---

title: Fuel injector bearing plate assembly and swirler assembly
abstract: A bearing plate assembly for a turbine engine fuel injector includes a bearing plate , with an opening  bordered by a race . A swivel ball  nests inside the race and is rotatable relative thereto. A lock, which may be a tip bushing  resists disengagement of the swivel ball from the race. A fuel injector nozzle  extends through an opening  in the swivel ball. During engine operation, the ball can swivel inside the race to accommodate rotational movement of the nozzle about lateral and radial axes.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07628019&OS=07628019&RS=07628019
owner: United Technologies Corporation
number: 07628019
owner_city: Hartford
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050321
---
This invention was made under U.S. Government Contract N00019 02 C 3003. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

This invention relates to fuel injector bearing plate assemblies and air swirler assemblies for turbine engines and particularly to assemblies that accommodate rotational movement of a fuel injector.

The combustor module of a modern aircraft gas turbine engine includes an annular combustor circumscribed by a case. The combustor includes radially inner and outer liners and a bulkhead extending radially between the forward ends of the liners. A series of openings penetrates the bulkhead. An air swirler with a large central opening occupies each bulkhead opening. A fuel injector bearing plate with a relatively small cylindrical central opening is clamped against the swirler in a way that allows the bearing plate to slide or float relative to the swirler.

The combustor module also includes a fuel injector for supplying fuel to the combustor. The fuel injector has a stem secured to the case and projecting radially inwardly therefrom. A nozzle which is integral with the stem extends substantially perpendicularly from the stem and projects through the cylindrical opening in the bearing plate. The portion of the nozzle that projects through the bearing plate is cylindrical and has an outer diameter nearly equal to the diameter of the opening in the bearing plate.

During engine operation combustion air enters the front end of the combustor by way of the air swirler. The swirler swirls the incoming air to thoroughly blend it with the fuel supplied by the fuel injector. The thorough blending helps minimize undesirable exhaust emissions from the combustor. The swirler also regulates the quantity of air delivered to the front end of the combustor. This is important because excessive air can extinguish the combustion flame a problem known as lean blowout. Turbine engines are especially susceptible to lean blowout when operated at or near idle and or when decelerated abruptly from high power. The aforementioned near equivalent diameters of the fuel nozzle and the opening in the bearing plate help prevent air leakage that would make the combustor more vulnerable to lean blowout.

During engine operation the components near the front end of the combustor such as the air swirler and bulkhead are exposed to high temperatures due to their proximity to the combustion flame. The fuel injector stem and the case to which the stem is mounted are exposed to relatively lower temperatures. The temperature differences cause these components to expand and contract differently which displaces the fuel nozzle radially and or circumferentially relative to the swirler. The fact that the bearing plate is slidably mounted to the swirler as noted above allows the bearing plate to slide and accommodate the displacement of the nozzle while continuing to prevent detrimental air leakage in the vicinity of the nozzle.

Although conventional bearing plates are effective at accommodating translational displacement of the nozzle relative to the swirler they cannot readily accommodate changes in the angular orientation of the nozzle. For example if thermal gradients pressure loading or other influences cause the nozzle and or the bulkhead to rotate about a laterally or radially extending axis the nozzle and or the central opening in the bearing plate can experience fretting wear. This wear can allow air leakage through the opening which makes the combustor more susceptible to lean blowout. In extreme circumstances the rotational movement can fracture the fuel nozzle. In addition the rotational movement of the nozzle can pull the bearing plate away from the swirler a phenomenon known as burping which allows undesirable air leakage past the planar interface between the bearing plate and the swirler.

What is needed is a fuel injector bearing plate assembly and a swirler assembly that accommodate rotation of the fuel injector nozzle relative to the combustor hardware for example the bulkhead and swirler .

According to one embodiment of the invention a bearing plate assembly includes a bearing plate with a fuel injector opening bordered by a race with a curved inner surface. A swivel ball with an outer surface geometrically similar to the race inner surface is trapped in the opening by a lock. During engine operation the swivel ball is capable of swiveling in the race to accommodate rotation of a fuel injector nozzle projecting through the swivel ball.

In another more detailed embodiment the bearing plate includes tabs to facilitate its slidable attachment to a swirler.

The foregoing and other features of the various embodiments of the invention will become more apparent from the following description of the best mode for carrying out the invention and the accompanying drawings.

A fuel injector comprises a radially extending stem and a nozzle integral with the stem and extending approximately perpendicularly therefrom. The stem is secured to an engine case . At least a portion of the nozzle is cylindrical.

The bearing plate assembly includes the bearing plate with three radially projecting tabs . Each tab occupies one of the interruptions in the swirler rail. A retainer such as spiral ring with a shiplapped split is captured in the groove to clamp the bearing plate against the swirler face . The clamping force which depends in part on the offset distance G presses the bearing plate firmly enough against the swirler face to resist air leakage past the interface or contact plane between the bearing plate and the swirler face. However the clamping force is weak enough to allow the bearing plate to slide or float radially and circumferentially relative to the swirler in response to influences such as differential thermal growth. The bearing plate is dimensioned so that the outer edges of all three tabs will always be axially trapped behind the retainer irrespective of the actual position of the bearing plate in relation to the swirler. The tabs also cooperate with the neighboring rail segments to limit rotation of the bearing plate relative to the swirler. Limiting the rotation is desirable to prevent excessive wear. Finally the tabs help resist any tendency of the bearing plate to wobble and locally separate from the swirler face . We have concluded that three tabs provide better wobble resistance than two tabs.

Ideally the retainer is the illustrated spiral ring which can be radially compressed to facilitate installation in the groove or it can be circumferentially fed into the groove by way of interruptions . Other forms of retainer such as a conventional snap ring can also be used.

Other ways of clamping the bearing plate to the swirler although less preferred may also be satisfactory. shows a swirler assembly in which a retaining plate is welded to a swirler at weld joint to axially trap the bearing plate . show devises projecting radially from bearing plate and swirler respectively. T shaped pins each include a tail and a crossbar . The tail of each pin extends through corresponding clevis slots and is welded or brazed to the bearing plate clevis to slidably clamp the bearing plate to the swirler. The slots in the swirler devises are circumferentially wide enough that the bearing plate although confined to contact plane can translate both parallel and perpendicular to line .

Referring again to the bearing plate has a central opening bordered by a slightly axially elongated race . Radially inner surface of the race is a curved surface specifically a spherical surface. Two pairs of diametrically opposed loading slots are provided at the forward end of the race. Each slot has a circumferential width W. In a less preferred embodiment only one pair of loading slots is present as seen in .

Referring additionally to a swivel ball has a forward end an aft end a curved outer surface and a cylindrical central opening . The outer surface is the same shape as the race inner surface and therefore is ideally a spherical surface with a center of curvature C. A chamfer borders the forward end of the opening . The swivel ball has an axial length L slightly less than the circumferential width Wof the loading slots at the forward end of the bearing plate race. The swivel bail is installed in the race by a technician who orients the ball with its length L aligned in the same direction as the width Wof one of the pairs of loading slots . The technician then inserts the ball into the race by way of the loading slots and pivots the ball degrees into its assembled position seen best in . In the assembled state the swivel ball nests snugly inside the bearing plate race to resist air leakage past the interface between the race inner surface and the swivel ball outer surface .

The bearing plate and swivel ball are made of Stellite 6B or Stellite 31 cobalt base alloy AMS specifications 5894 and 5382 respectively both of which exhibit a low coefficient of friction at elevated temperatures.

The swivel ball is asymmetric about a plane that is perpendicular to the swivel ball axis and passes through the center C of spherical outer surface . The outer surface extends a distance Dforward of the plane but extends a greater distance Daft of the plane. The asymmetry reduces the axial length of the ball which can be important in aircraft engines where space is at a premium and extra weight is always undesirable. The polarity of the asymmetry Dexceeding D results in a larger fraction of the area of surface residing aft of the plane than forward of the plane. This can be important because during engine operation local pressure differences cause the swivel ball to be urged aftwardly to the right in . The larger surface area aft of plane helps distribute the resulting loads more widely over the race inner surface thereby reducing stresses on the ball and the race.

A fuel nozzle tip bushing serves as a lock to prevent the swivel ball from pivoting into an orientation that would allow it to back out of the loading slots and become disengaged from the bearing plate race. The bushing has a radially outer cylindrical surface whose diameter is nearly equal to the diameter of opening in the swivel ball. The bushing also has a radially inner cylindrical surface whose diameter is nearly equal to the diameter of the cylindrical portion of the fuel injector nozzle . A chamfer borders the forward end of cylindrical surface . Ears extend radially from the forward end of the bushing and into close proximity with race surface . The aft end of the bushing is plastically deformable. During assembly operations a technician presses the bushing into the central opening of the swivel ball until the ears enter the loading slots . The chamfer on the swivel ball helps guide the bushing into the opening. The technician then deforms the aft end of the bushing so that the deformed end grasps the aft end of the swivel ball. In the deformed state of the bushing is shown with solid lines the undeformed state is shown in phantom. The bushing is made of Haynes 25 cobalt base alloy AMS specification 5759 .

With the bushing installed as described above the swivel ball can swivel inside the race but not enough to allow the ball to back out of the loading slot . Excessive ball rotation is prevented because the ears contact race surface which resists further rotation. For example if the ball of were to swivel clockwise about an axis perpendicular to the plane of the illustration and extending through C the ear near the top of the illustration would contact race surface which would prevent further rotation.

Although the invention has been described in the context of an annular combustor its applicability extends to other combustor architectures such as can and can annular combustors.

Although this invention has been shown and described with reference to a specific embodiment thereof it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes in form and detail may be made without departing from the invention as set forth in the accompanying claims.

