---

title: Gas turbine power plant with supersonic shock compression ramps
abstract: A gas turbine engine. The engine is based on the use of a gas turbine driven rotor having a compression ramp traveling at a local supersonic inlet velocity (based on the combination of inlet gas velocity and tangential speed of the ramp) which compresses inlet gas against a stationary sidewall. The supersonic compressor efficiently achieves high compression ratios while utilizing a compact, stabilized gasdynamic flow path. Operated at supersonic speeds, the inlet stabilizes an oblique/normal shock system in the gasdynamic flow path formed between the rim of the rotor, the strakes, and a stationary external housing. Part load efficiency is enhanced by use of a lean pre-mix system, a pre-swirl compressor, and a bypass stream to bleed a portion of the gas after passing through the pre-swirl compressor to the combustion gas outlet. Use of a stationary low NOx combustor provides excellent emissions results.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07434400&OS=07434400&RS=07434400
owner: 
number: 07434400
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050330
---
This application is a Continuation In Part of prior U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 672 358 filed Sep. 25 2003 now abandoned entitled GAS TURBINE POWER PLANT WITH SUPERSONIC GAS COMPRESSOR assigned on Mar. 16 2004 and Mar. 29 2004 and recorded on Apr. 19 2004 at Reel Frame 015230 0021 to Ramgen Power Systems Inc. of Bellevue Wash. which utility application claimed priority from prior U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 414 796 filed on Sep. 26 2002 the disclosures of which are incorporated herein in their entirety by this reference including the specification drawings and claims of each application.

This invention was made with United States Government support under Contract No. DE FC026 00NT40915 awarded by the United States Department of Energy. The U.S. Government has certain rights in the invention.

A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material that is subject to copyright protection. The applicant no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

This invention relates to a high efficiency novel gas turbine power plant in which saving of power as well as improved compression performance and durability are attained by the use of supersonic shock compression of the inlet air. Power plants of that character are particularly useful in stationary electric power generating equipment.

A continuing demand exists for simple highly efficient and inexpensive power plants as may be useful in a wide variety of applications particularly including electrical power generator sets. Importantly gas turbine power plant applications could substantially benefit from incorporating a compressor that offers a significant efficiency improvement over currently utilized designs. In view of increased energy costs particularly for both for electricity and for natural gas it would be desirable to attain reduction in parasitic energy loses involved in inlet combustion gas compression. Importantly it would be quite advantageous to provide a novel gas turbine power plant which provides improvements 1 with respect to reduced parasitic losses for gas compression 2 with respect to reduced first cost for the equipment and 3 with respect to reduced maintenance costs. Fundamentally particularly from the point of view of reducing long term energy costs this would be most effectively accomplished by attaining inlet combustion gas compression at a higher overall cycle efficiency than is currently known or practiced industrially. Thus the important advantages of a new gas turbine power plant design which incorporates the desirable feature of improved efficiency particularly at part load operation can be readily appreciated.

We have now invented a gas turbine power plant based on the use of a gas turbine driven inlet gas compression rotor having a compression ramp traveling at a local supersonic inlet velocity based on the combination of inlet gas velocity and tangential speed of the ramp which compresses inlet combustion gas against a stationary sidewall. In using this method to compress inlet combustion gas the supersonic compressor efficiently achieves high compression ratios while utilizing a compact stabilized gasdynamic flow path. Operated at supersonic speeds the inlet stabilizes an oblique normal shock system in the gasdynamic flow path formed between the rim of the rotor the strakes and a stationary external housing.

Efficiency can be further enhanced by using a pre swirl inlet compressor wheel prior to entry of gas to the supersonic compression ramp. Such pre swirl inlet compression wheel a provides an initial pressure boost over incoming often ambient atmospheric pressure in the case of air compression gas pressure and b energizes inlet gas in a counterswirling direction to impart an initial velocity vector on the inlet gas so as to increase apparent mach number when the inlet gas is ingested by the supersonic compression ramp.

By use of a gas bypass valve arrangement the low pressure compressed combustion gas output i.e. mass flow rate from the pre swirl compressor unit can be turned down as necessary while maintaining high rotating velocity utilizing a fixed shaft speed i.e. constant rotating velocity where necessary or desirable such as is necessary when utilizing constant speed compressor apparatus while maintaining minimal output loads. Moreover this technique allows maintenance of relatively high efficiency compression with good turn down capability since the supersonic compressor wheel continues to operate at an efficient high speed condition. In turn the reduced mass flow of inlet combustion gas allows easy control and turndown of the combustion gases exiting the combustor so that the power output of the gas turbine power plant is easily controlled.

The structural and functional elements incorporated into this novel gas turbine power plant design overcomes significant and serious problems which have plagued earlier attempts at supersonic compression of gases in gas turbine power plant applications. First at the Mach numbers at which the compressor in our device operates in the range from about Mach 1.5 or lower to about Mach 4.0 the design minimizes aerodynamic drag. This is accomplished by both careful design of the shock geometry as related to the rotating compression ramp and the stationary wall as well as by effective use of a boundary layer control and drag reduction technique. Thus the design minimizes parasitic losses to the compression cycle due to the drag resulting simply from rotational movement of the rotor. This is important commercially because it enables the compressor to avoid large parasitic losses that undesirably consume energy and reduce overall efficiency of the gas turbine power plant.

Also more fundamentally the compressor design utilized in this turbine power plant can develop high compression ratios with very few aerodynamic leading edges. The individual leading edges of the thousands of rotor and stator blades in a conventional high pressure ratio compressor as currently utilized in the gas turbine industry contribute to the vast majority of the viscous drag loss of such systems. However since the design of the gas turbine power plant disclosed herein utilizes in one embodiment less than five individual aerodynamic leading edges subjected to stagnation pressure viscous losses are significantly reduced compared to conventional gas turbine compressor sections heretofore known or utilized. As a result the compression section of the novel gas turbine power plant disclosed and claimed herein has the potential to be up to ten percentage points more efficient than the compressor utilized in a conventional gas turbine when compared at compression ratios in the range from about ten to one 10 1 to about thirty to one 30 1 .

Second the selection of materials and the mechanical design of rotating components in the compressor section of the power plant provided herein avoids use of excessive quantities or weights of materials a vast improvement over large rotating mass bladed centrifugal compressor designs . Yet the design provides the necessary strength particularly tensile strength where needed in the rotor commensurate with the centrifugal forces acting on the extremely high speed rotating components.

Third the design provides for effective mechanical separation of the low pressure incoming gas from the exiting high pressure gases while allowing gas compression operation along a circumferential pathway.

This novel design enables the use of lightweight components in the gas compression pathway. To solve the above mentioned problems we have now developed compressor design s for gas turbine power plants which overcome the problems inherent in the heretofore known apparatus and methods known to us which have been proposed for the application of supersonic gas compression to gas turbine engines. Of primary importance we have now developed a low drag rotor which has one or more gas compression ramps mounted at the distal edge thereof. A number N of peripherally preferably partially helically extending strakes S partition the entering gas flow sequentially to the inlet to a first one of the one or more gas compression ramps and then to a second one of the one or more gas compression ramps and so on to an Nth one of the one or more gas compression ramps. Each of the strakes S has an upstream or inlet side and a downstream or outlet side. For rotor balance and gas compression efficiency purposes in one embodiment the number X of gas compression ramps R and the number of strakes N are the same positive integer number and in such embodiment N and X is at least equal to two. In an embodiment shown herein the number of strakes N and the number X of gas compression ramps R are both equal to three. The compressed gas exiting from each of the one or more gas compression ramps is effectively prevented from short circuiting or returning to the inlet side of subsequent gas compression ramps by the strakes S. More fundamentally the strakes S act as a large screw compressor fan or pump to move compressed combustion gases along with each turn of the rotor.

To accommodate the specific strength requirements of high speed rotating service various embodiments for an acceptable high strength rotor are feasible. In one embodiment the rotor section may comprise a carbon fiber disc. In another it may comprise a high strength steel hub. In each case the combustion gas compression ramps and strakes S may be integrally provided or rim segments and gas compression modules may be releasably and replaceably affixed to the rotor.

Attached at the radial edge of the rotor are one or more of the at least one combustion gas compression ramps. The combustion gas compression ramps are situated so as to engage and to compress that portion of the entering gas stream which is impinged by the gas compression ramp upon its rotation which in one embodiment is about the aforementioned shaft. The compressed gases escape rearwardly from the gas compression ramp and decelerate and expands outwardly into a gas expansion diffuser space or volute prior to entering a compressed gas outlet nozzle. The compressed combustion gases are then routed to the burner can s for mixing with fuel and then the hot combustion gases are routed outward through a gas turbine to turn the shaft thus powering the inlet combustion gas compressor as well as to provide output shaft power.

Finally many variations in the gas turbine power plant provided herein such as gas flow configuration and in provision of the inlet gas preswirl compression and in providing outlet gas passageways or various gas turbine arrangements may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the teachings hereof. Finally in addition to the foregoing this novel gas turbine power plant is simple durable and relatively inexpensive to manufacture and to maintain.

The foregoing figures being merely exemplary contain various elements that may be present or omitted from actual implementations depending upon the circumstances. An attempt has been made to draw the figures in a way that illustrates at least those elements that are significant for an understanding of the various embodiments and aspects of the invention. However various other elements of the gas turbine power plant including a supersonic gas compressor and a stationary burner especially as applied for different variations of the functional components illustrated may be utilized in order to provide a robust gas turbine power plant having a supersonic gas compression unit and stationary burner and still be within the overall teachings of the present invention and the legal equivalents thereof.

Referring now to the drawing depicts a partial cut away perspective view of our gas turbine power plant utilizing a novel supersonic gas compression apparatus in conjunction with a stationary can combustor . Major components shown in this include a stationary housing or case a first inlet for supply of low pressure combustion gas to be compressed and a high pressure compressed gas outlet throat from whence the compressed combustion gases exit to enter the compressed gas chamber in burner can . In this design a first rotor is provided having a central axis defined along centerline here shown defined by common shaft see also and adapted for rotary motion therewith in case . The first rotor extends radially outward from its central axis to an outer surface portion and further to an outer extremity on strakes S. On first rotor one or more supersonic shock compression ramps R are provided. Each one of the supersonic shock compression ramps R forms a feature on the outer surface portion of first rotor Q. Within housing a first circumferential stationary interior peripheral wall is provided radially outward from first rotor . Stationary interior peripheral wall is positioned radially outward from the central axis defined by centerline and is positioned very slightly radially outward from the outer extremity of first rotor . The first stationary peripheral wall has an interior surface portion . Each one of the one or more supersonic shock compression ramps R cooperates with the interior surface portion of the stationary peripheral wall to compress incoming combustion gas therebetween.

One or more helical strakes S are provided adjacent each one of the one or more supersonic compression ramps R. An outwardly extending wall portion SW of each of the one or more strakes S extends outward from at least a portion of the outer surface portion of rotor along a height HH see to a point adjacent the interior surface portion of the peripheral wall . The strakes S effectively separate the low pressure inlet gas from high pressure compressed gas downstream of each one of the supersonic gas compression ramps R. Strakes S are in the embodiment illustrated by the circumferential flow paths depicted in provided in a helical structure extending substantially radially outward from the outer surface portion of the first rotor . As shown in the number of the one or more helical strakes S is N and the number of the one or more supersonic gas compression ramps R is X and the number N of strakes S is equal to the number X of compression ramps R. The strakes S through SN partition entering gas so that the gas flows to the respective gas compression ramp R then incident to the inlet area of the gas compressor. As can be appreciated from the preferably helical strakes S S and S are thin walled with about 0.15 width axially at the root and about 0.10 width at the tip. With the design illustrated herein it is believed that leakage of gases will be minimal.

For rotor balance purposes we prefer that the number X of gas compression ramps R and the number N of strakes S be the same positive integer number and that N and X each be at least equal to two. In one embodiment N and X are equal to three as illustrated herein. The strakes S through SN allow feed of gas to each gas compression ramp R without appreciable bypass of the compressed high pressure gas to the entering low pressure gas. That is the compressed gas is effectively prevented by the arrangement of strakes S from short circuiting and thus avoids appreciable efficiency losses. This strake feature can be better appreciated by evaluating the details shown in where strakes S and S revolves in close proximity to the interior wall surface . The strakes S and S have a localized height HS and a localized height HS respectively which extends to a tip end TS and TS respectively that is designed for rotation very near to the interior peripheral wall surface of housing to allow for fitting in close proximity to the tip end TS or TS with that wall.

As seen in in each of the gas compression ramps R the inlet gas stream is compressed at apparent supersonic velocity to create an oblique normal shock structure between the respective gas compression ramp and the adjacent peripheral wall. Each of the one or more gas compression ramps R has an outwardly sloping gas compression ramp face . The face has a base which is located adjacent the intersection of the outwardly sloping face and the outer surface portion of the respective rotor or . The face and the outer surface of rotors and intersect at a preselected design angle alpha of from about one 1 degree to about fifteen 15 degrees which angle alpha varies based on the design mach number and gas properties such as temperature and density. The gas compression ramps R also include a throat and downstream thereof an inwardly sloping gas deceleration section . The deceleration transition section is provided to step down to the outer surface of the rotor or .

For improving efficiency each of the one or more gas compression ramps R has one or more boundary layer bleed ports B. In the configuration illustrated in at least one of the one or more boundary bleed ports B is located at the base of the gas compression ramp R. As depicted a pair of shovel scoop shaped cutouts B are shown each having a generally parallelepiped sidewall configuration. Bleed air enters structures B as indicated by reference arrows in . Also as shown in at least one of the one or more boundary bleed ports B are located on the face of the gas compression ramp R. Bleed air enters structures B as indicated by reference arrows in . As depicted in each one of the gas compression ramps R further comprise a bleed air receiving chamber each of which is configured for effectively containing therein for ejection therefrom bleed air provided thereto as indicated by exit bleed air reference arrows in .

As depicted in downstream of first rotor is a first high pressure gas outlet throat configured to receive and pass therethrough high pressure outlet gas resulting from compression of inlet combustion gas by the one or more gas compression ramps R on the and transfer the high pressure combustion gas to the compressed gas chamber in can combustor s i.e. burner cans . One or more stationary low NOx type can combustors can be utilized often with the general configuration as illustrated in to receive the output from the gas outlet throat and mix the compressed air with fuel such as natural gas or liquid hydrocarbon to oxidize the fuel to create high temperature pressurized combustion gases for feed to 1 a single stage radial turbine 2 a first axial turbine stage and 3 a second axial turbine stage or other suitable turbine arrangement as will be found useful by those of ordinary skill in the art and to whom this specification is directed to generate a motive force by thrust reaction of the combustion gases against the turbines. These turbine stages are provided in turbine section which includes an outer casing .

For improved efficiency and operational flexibility the compressor may be designed to further include a first inlet casing portion having therein a pre swirl impeller . The pre swirl impeller is located intermediate the low pressure gas inlet and first rotor . The pre swirl impeller is configured for compressing the low pressure inlet combustion gas LP to provide an intermediate pressure gas stream IP at a pressure intermediate the pressure of the low pressure inlet combustion gas LP and the high pressure outlet gas HP as noted in . In one application for the apparatus depicted combustion air at ambient atmospheric conditions of 14.7 psig is compressed to about 20 psig by the pre swirl impeller . However the pre swirl impeller can be configured to provide a compression ratio of up to about 2 1. More broadly the pre swirl impeller can be configured to provide a compression ratio from about 1.3 1 to about 2 1.

Also for improving efficiency the gas turbine power plant can be provided in a configuration wherein downstream of the pre swirl impeller but upstream of the one or more gas compression ramps R on rotor a plurality of inlet guide vanes are provided such as set of straight inlet guide vanes in . For better efficiency a set of curved inlet guide vanes as illustrated in are utilized impart a spin on gas passing therethrough so as to increase the apparent inflow velocity of gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R. Additionally such inlet guide vanes assist in directing incoming gas in a trajectory which more closely matches gas flow path through the ramps R to allow gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps to be at approximately the same angle as the angle of offset to minimize inlet losses.

In one embodiment as illustrated the pre swirl impeller can be provided in the form of a centrifugal compressor wheel. As illustrated in pre swirl impeller can be mounted on a common shaft with the rotor and with gas turbines and . It is possible to customize the design of the pre swirl impeller and the inlet guide vane set to result in a supersonic gas compression ramp inlet inflow condition with the same pre swirl velocity or Mach number but a super atmospheric pressure. Since the supersonic compression ramp inlet basically multiples the pressure based on the inflow pressure and Mach number a small amount of supercharging at the pre swirl impellers can result in a significant increase in cycle compression ratio.

In a circumferential view of the gas flow path into and out of the rotating shock compressor wheel is provided where the configuration is developed without an inflow pre swirl feature in that the inlet guide vanes function only as a flow straightener imparting no pre swirl into the flow before it is ingested by the shock compression ramp R on the rotor . Note that this figure also illustrates the use of a radial diffuser having a plurality of radial diffuser blades downstream of the discharge side of the rotating shock compression ramp R to then deflect compressed high pressure gas HP outward toward throat shown in in the direction of reference arrows .

With or without the aid of pre swirl impeller it is important that the apparent velocity of gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R is in excess of Mach 1 so that the efficiency of supersonic shock compression can be exploited. However to increase efficiency it would be desirable that the apparent velocity of gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R be at least Mach 1.5 and more preferably in excess of Mach 2. More broadly the apparent velocity of gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R can currently practically be between about Mach 1.5 and Mach 3.5 although wider ranges are certainly possible within the teachings hereof.

As depicted in another aspect of the current invention is the provision where desirable for maintaining relatively high efficiency at reduced power output from the gas turbine power plant to further include adjacent the outlet of the pre swirl impeller an outlet for intermediate pressure gas and a bypass line between the intermediate outlet and the outlet for exhaust gases EG so that the bypass line is configured to route a portion of the intermediate pressure gas IP to the hot exhaust gas outlet . In this configuration it is advantageous to utilize gas flow regulating valve . The valve is configured to vary the rate of passage of intermediate pressure gas therethrough so as to in turn vary the amount of intermediate pressure gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R on rotor . In one embodiment valve is adjustable at any preselected flow rate from a a closed position wherein the valve seals the bypass line so that as a result substantially no intermediate pressure gas escapes to the exhaust gas outlet and b an open position wherein the valve allows fluid communication between the pre swirl impeller outlet and the hot gas outlet or c a preselected position between the closed position and the open position.

With respect to the configuration just described in conjunction with it must be appreciated that it is possible to customize the design of the pre swirl impeller or comparable axial compressor stage so as to provide supersonic inlet flow conditions with the same pre swirl velocity or Mach number to the ramp R on rotor but at super atmospheric pressure. Since the supersonic inlet ramp R multiplies the pressure based on the inflow pressure and Mach number a small amount of inflow supercharging via pre swirl impeller or comparable compressor can result in a significant increase in cycle compression ratio. Importantly increasing the cycle compression ration can result in an increase in cycle thermal efficiency so long as component efficiencies can be maintained.

In one embodiment this design concept can be achieved by providing the inlet guide vanes and the pre swirl compressor so as to supply the rotating supersonic inlet ramps R with constant super atmospheric conditions. In an alternate design as illustrated by the embodiment depicted in supersonic inflow conditions can be varied during operation of the engine system. As noted above a controlled portion of compressed air is sent via bypass line between the intermediate outlet and the outlet for exhaust gases EG so that the bypass line is configured to route a portion of the intermediate pressure gas IP to the hot exhaust gas outlet downstream of the turbine expansion process here shown through gas turbine stages and . Bypass valve and associated control valve thus allows the mass flow through the supersonic gas compression system to be varied during engine operation. This feature can be utilized to facilitate the starting of the engine by better matching the mass flow through the system with the preferred operational requirements of the rotating supersonic inlet ramps R.

Also the just described intermediate pressure gas bypass feature could be employed in the full speed part load throttling process of the engine. When properly controlled such a bypass feature can be used to achieve improved part load emission characteristics compared to a system with no such bypass or comparable variable mass flow features. To further illustrate this feature attention is directed to and .

For further explanation of this just mentioned process one possible staging of this process is indicated by the five regions depicted in . Station represents full power operation whereas station represents zero power output operations. With near full load operation as shown between stations and the bypass valve would be completely closed and a decrease in power output would be achieved by decreasing the fuel flow into the system without changing the mass flow of air through the system. This would result in a decrease in overall equivalence ratio as well as a decrease in combustion flame temperature as further illustrated in .

To further decrease the output of the system as indicated between regions two and three where the power output is significantly decreased below rated power the bypass valve would be progressively opened resulting in a decreasing pressure in the air supplied to the inlet guide vanes as well as a decrease in the air pressure supplied to the rotating supersonic compression ramps R. This decrease in pressure results in a decreasing system mass air flow as indicated along the right hand axis in . Note that as the air mass flow was decreased in the region between reference points two and three the flow of fuel F was simultaneously decreased so as to maintain the equivalence ratio and the combustion flame temperature. As a result the associated decrease in power output is accomplished without violating the lean extinction limit or the combustion stability limit.

In the region between reference points three and four decreasing the output of the engine system well below 50 of rated power is accomplished by decreasing the equivalence ratio as shown in . Thus all of the steps in transitioning from operating conditions indicated by the reference points one through five in and are accomplished with the combustion process operating in a lea n premix low NOx mode to maintain low emissions throughout the load throttling process. This technique allows for expansion of the range of stable combustion in the lean premix mode which is a significant advantage of this novel method for the control and especially the part load control of a gas turbine engine. This can be better appreciated by recognizing that optimized lean premix combustion systems heretofore known or practiced have typically operated near the lean extinction and or combustion instability limits so that it was typically not possible to decrease the equivalence ratio and therefore decrease system power output without inducing lean extinction or combustion instability. Thus prior art systems transition to a high pilot or diffusion combustion mode for low power operation which can result in a dramatic increase in emissions that in many applications severely limits the ability of such systems to operate at part power levels.

For the final decrease in system output in the region between reference points four and five in and which region is basically from very low percentage of rated power to the condition of approaching idle or a condition of full speed but zero power output the combustors in the engine disclosed herein would be operated in a high pilot mode utilizing a diffusion stabilized flame. As discussed above and as illustrated in this results in a dramatic increase in emissions both NOx and CO as shows an increase from about 6 ppm NOx to about 500 ppm NOx during such transition. However one of the key advantages of the instant method of operation of a gas turbine engine is that it extends the system operating range over which conventional lean premix combustion techniques can be employed to control emissions.

In yet another variation instead of dumping intermediate pressure compressed inlet gas IP via bypass valve so that the bypassed IP compressed gas ultimately mixes exhaust gases EG as just described above a bleed line with bleed valve and associated valve control unit can be utilized to bleed intermediate pressure gas IP to either the atmosphere as indicated by arrow labeled with reference numeral or to a useful application such as a compressed air supply system or directly to other pressurized gas consumptive uses. In such a case bypass valve may be closed or the flow of IP gas may be split as suitable in a given application.

The gas turbine power plant is ideal for many applications requiring a compact low cost gas turbine power plant. Importantly the compressor portion of the power plant provides an ideal apparatus for the compression of combustion gases. It has been calculated that the overall compressor apparatus is capable of providing compression of a selected gas at an isentropic efficiency in excess of ninety 90 percent and in some ranges in excess of ninety five 95 percent as is graphically illustrated in The compressor operates most efficiently at a non dimensional specific speed from about 60 to about 120. As confirmed by the performance ranges depicted in the compressor is capable of compressing a selected gas at an isentropic efficiency in excess of ninety five percent.

For assuring operation at high rotational speed to achieve high apparent Mach number at the inlet of each of the one or more gas compression ramps R a high strength rotor is provided. In one embodiment such a rotor include a high strength central disc. As illustrated in such rotors and in particular a central disc portion may include a tapered portion at least in part i.e. that is thinner at increasing radial distance from the center of rotation. To increase aerodynamic efficiency at least a portion of such rotor can be confined within a close fitting housing having a minimal distance D between an outer surface of the rotor and an inner surface of the close fitting housing so as to minimize aerodynamic drag on the rotor. These aspects of the design of such compressors can be seen in .

The compressor disclosed herein allows practice of unique methods of compressing combustion gas for use in a gas turbine engine. Practice of such methods involves providing one or more gas compression ramps on a rotor which is rotatably secured for high speed rotary motion with respect to stationary housing having an inner surface. Each of the one or more gas compression ramps is provided with an inlet low pressure combustion gas stream. The low pressure gas is compressed between one of the one or more gas compression ramps and the inner surface of the stationary housing which is located circumferentially about the rotor to generate a high pressure combustion gas therefrom. To achieve gas compression and to avoid bypass of the compressed gas back to the entering low pressure gas stream one or more helical substantially radially extending strakes are provided along the periphery of the rotor. Each on of the one or more strakes S is provided adjacent to one of the one or more gas compression ramps R. At least a portion of each of the one or more strakes S extends outward from at least a portion of an outer surface portion of the rotor to a point adjacent to the inner surface of the stationary housing. The rotor is driven by mechanical power via a gas turbine driven shaft operatively connected to the compressor rotor and thus to each of the one or more gas compression ramps. In one embodiment the apparent inlet velocity of the one or more gas compression ramps i.e. the approach speed between incoming gas and the opposing motion of a selected gas compression ramp R is at least Mach 1.5. More broadly the apparent inlet velocity of the one or more gas compression ramps is between Mach 1.5 and Mach 4. At the design point in one embodiment the apparent inlet velocity of said gas compression ramps is approximately Mach 3.5.

This method of combustion air compression allows high efficiency compression of combustion air for a gas turbine engine power plant. Such an efficient gas turbine power plant will have many important applications.

Overall the designs incorporated into compressor provide for minimizing aerodynamic drag by minimizing the number of leading edge surfaces subjected to stagnation pressure within the compressor. In one embodiment as illustrated herein the number of leading edge surfaces subjected to stagnation pressure is less than five i.e four. And each of the one or more gas compression ramps are circumferentially spaced equally apart so as to engage a supplied gas stream substantially free of turbulence from the previous passage through a given circumferential location of any one said one or more gas compression ramps. The cross sectional areas of each of the one or more gas compression ramps can be sized and shaped to provide a desired compression ratio. Further the helical strakes can be offset at a preselected angle delta and wherein the angle of offset matches the angle of offset of each one of the one or more gas compression ramps and wherein so that the angles match to allow gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps to be at approximately the same angle as the angle of offset to minimize inlet losses.

The rotor is rotatably secured in an operating position by a fixed support stationary housing or casing in a manner suitable for extremely high speed operation of the rotor such as rotation rates in the range of 10 000 to 20 000 rpm or even up to 55 000 rpm or higher. In this regard bearing assemblies must provide adequate bearing support for high speed rotation and thrust with minimum friction while also sealing the operating cavity so as to enable provision of a vacuum environment adjacent the rotor disc to minimize drag. The detailed bearing and lubrication systems may be provided by any convenient means by those knowledgeable in high speed rotating machinery and need not be further discussed herein.

It is to be appreciated that the various aspects and embodiments of a gas turbine power plant having a a supersonic gas compressor and b stationary low NOx can combustor s and the method of operating such devices as described herein are an important improvement in the state of the art. The novel gas turbine power plant having a supersonic gas compressor is simple robust reliable and useful for work in various gas turbine power plant applications. Although only a few exemplary embodiments have been described in detail various details are sufficiently set forth in the drawings and in the specification provided herein to enable one of ordinary skill in the art to make and use the invention s which need not be further described by additional writing in this detailed description.

Importantly the aspects and embodiments described and claimed herein may be modified from those shown without materially departing from the novel teachings and advantages provided by this invention and may be embodied in other specific forms without departing from the spirit or essential characteristics thereof. Therefore the embodiments presented herein are to be considered in all respects as illustrative and not restrictive. As such this disclosure is intended to cover the structures described herein and not only structural equivalents thereof but also equivalent structures. Numerous modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention s may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described herein. Thus the scope of the invention s as set forth in the appended claims and as indicated by the drawing and by the foregoing description is intended to include variations from the embodiments provided which are nevertheless described by the broad interpretation and range properly afforded to the plain meaning of the claims set forth below.

