---

title: Expeditious synthesis of DPD
abstract: This invention provides a practical synthesis route for 4,5-dihydroxypentane-2,3-dione (DPD), an unstable small molecule which is proposed to be the source of universal signaling agents for quorum sensing in bacteria. The synthesis route includes new intermediates and allows preparation of isotopically-labeled DPD and ent-DPD. The method provides sufficient quantities of DPD for study of spontaneous binding of borate to DPD, the signal for the marine bacteria 
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07652172&OS=07652172&RS=07652172
owner: The Trustees of Princeton University
number: 07652172
owner_city: Princeton
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050920
---
This application claims benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Provisional Ser. No. 60 611 551 filed Sep. 20 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

This invention was funded in part through grants from the National Institutes of Health. Therefore the federal government has certain rights in this invention.

This invention provides a practical synthesis route for 4 5 dihydroxypentane 2 3 dione DPD a relatively unstable small molecule which is proposed to be the source of universal signaling agents for quorum sensing in bacteria. The synthesis route includes new intermediates and allows preparation of isotopically labeled DPD and ent DPD. The method provides sufficient quantities of DPD for study of spontaneous binding of borate to DPD the signal for the marine bacteria

DPD 1 is an enigmatic molecule. It has been known since 1971 as the product of catabolism of S adenosylhomocysteine in many bacteria Duerre et al. 1971 and more recently it is proposed to be the core molecule from which all bacterial AI 2 signaling molecules are derived Miller et al. 2004 . These molecules are widely used in inter species communication in the bacterial world Federle et al. 2001 . It is a simple molecule but was reported to be quite unstable toward rearrangement Winzer et al. 2002 Slaughter et al. 1999 and oligomerization Semrnelhack et al. 2004 Meijler et al. 2004 and has only recently been synthesized and tentatively characterized in dilute solution Meijler et al. 2004 .

An efficient synthesis strategy for DPD allows characterization of DPD isomers hydration processes and boron complexation. The availability of much larger quantities of DPD than previously obtainable either enzymatically or by a less efficient synthetic route should facilitate understanding DPD s role in bacterial quorum sensing for many species.

The present invention relates to an efficient and practical synthesis for DPD its isomers and isotopically labeled DPD. The availability of large quantities of DPD as well as isotopically labeled versions thereof allows a detailed study of the isomerization hydration and boron complexation phenomena of DPD and aids in elucidation of DPD s role in bacterial quorum sensing.

One aspect of the invention relates to a method to synthesize protected DPD. Protected DPD can be purified and isolated as a solid permitting storage of large quantities of this DPD precursor.

It has been discovered in accordance with this invention that DPD is stable under acidic conditions and that conversion of protected DPD to DPD proceeds efficiently and to near completion as much as 95 99 removal of the protection group. Hence another aspect of the invention takes advantage of this characteristic. Protected DPD is prepared in acid solutions and after hydroylsis of the protecting group the pH is adjusted and the solution used directly or with dilution in biological and other evaluations. For biological evaluations the by product of deprotection does not interfere with biological quorum sensing assays at least when the protecting group is cyclohexylidene.

Yet another aspect of the invention relates to the novel chemical intermediates used in synthesis of DPD as well as the isotopically labeled forms of DPD and ent DPD and the pharmaceutically acceptable salts if relevant. These intermediates include compounds 10 11 and 12 of the invention and the isotopically labeled intermediates include compounds 15 18 as well as their C labeled counterparts .

For the synthesis of the protected DPD molecules the method involves a reacting gluconic acid lactone with dimethoxycyclohexanone for a time and under conditions to produce 5 6 O cyclohexylideneglucono 1 4 lactone b subjecting the lactone to oxidative cleavage to produce 2 3 O cyclohexylideneglyceraldehyde c halogenating the glyceraldehyde molecule under conditions to produce 1 1 dihalo 3 4 cyclohexylidenedioxy but 1 ene dihaloalkene d purifying the dihaloalkene before reacting converting its alkene moiety to an alkyne anion e quenching the anion by one of two routes by reacting the alkyne anion with i a methylating agent to produce 1 1 dihalo 3 4 cyclohexylidenedioxypent 3 yne or ii with water to produce 1 1 dibromrn 3 4 cyclohexylidenedioxybut 3 yne and subsequently methylating that compound to produce 1 1 dibromo 3 4 cyclohexylidenedioxypent 3 yne and recovering that alkyne f oxidizing that alkyne in non aqueous solution under conditions to thereby produce 4 5 cyclohexylidenedioxy 2 3 pentadione which is the protected DPD molecule and g recovering protected DPD.

When the gluconic acid lactone starting material is a racemic mixture of the and stereoisomers of gluconic acid lactone then the protected DPD is a racemic mixture of S 4 5 cyclohexylidenedioxy 2 3 pentadione and R 4 5 cyclohexylidenedioxy 2 3 pentadione racemic DPD . The present method also allows stereospecific synthesis of DPD and ent DPD. When the gluconic acid lactone starting material is gluconic acid lactone the protected DPD is S 4 5 cyclohexylidenedioxy 2 3 pentadione DPD 1 . When the gluconic acid lactone starting material is gluconic acid lactone the protected DPD is R 4 5 cyclohexylidenedioxy 2 3 pentadione ent DPD 14 .

For step a the reaction of gluconic acid lactone with dimethoxycyclohexanone to produce 5 6 O cyclohexylideneglucono 1 4 lactone is preferably done according to the method of Vekemans et al. 1985. Other methods known to those of skill in the art can be used and those giving a high yield of the lactone are preferred.

The lactone can be used directly without further purification in step b or can be purified before being subjected to oxidative cleavage to produce 2 3 O cyclohexylideneglyceraldehyde. The oxidative cleavage preferably uses KIOas described in Example 3. These conditions can be varied as known by those of skill in the art. Moreover other oxidation methods that lead to the glyceraldehyde can be used.

For step c the glyceraldehyde is halogenated to produce 1 1 dihalo 3 4 cyclohexylidenedioxybut 1 ene. Halogenation can be accomplished using fluorine chlorine bromine or iodine and halogenation methods are well known in the art. The preferred halogenation method is bromination according to the method of Yoshida et al. 1992 see Example 4 or other variation of the Corey Fuchs protocol. If necessary the dihaloalkene is purified before further use and this is preferable for the dibromoalkene.

In step d the alkene moiety of the dihaloalkene is converted to an alkyne anion with concomitant loss of the halogens. The alkyne anion can be quenched in step e to produce the alkyne by either of two routes and it is this point in the synthesis that allows introduction of carbon isotopes C or C.

By one route the alkyne anion is methylated to produce 1 1 dihalo 3 4 cyclohexylidenedioxypent 3 yne. Methylation reagents and conditions are well known and isotopically substituted methylation agents such as CHI and CHI are readily obtainable. The alkyne should be purified before further use in the synthesis but this may be optional under some conditions.

By the other route the anion is quenched with water to produce 1 1 dibromo 3 4 cyclohexylidenedioxybut 3 yne and that molecule is subsequently methylated to produce 1 1 dibromo 3 4 cyclohexylidenedioxypent 3 yne. The methylation step of this route can be done as described in the paragraph above see also e.g. Example 5. Quenching with water before methylation appears to improve the yield of the alkyne. This route is also useful for isotopically labeling the compounds see e.g. Example 7. The alkyne should be purified before further use in the overall synthesis but this may be optional under some conditions.

The next step f involves oxidizing the alkyne in non aqueous solution to produces 4 5 cyclohexylidenedioxy 2 3 pentadione i.e. the protected DPD molecule . The preferred oxidation protocol uses RuONaIOand produces the protected DPD is high yield that can be readily purified. This method is that of Seebach Zibuch et al. 1988 but other oxidation methods are suitable. The method of Seebach provides excellent yields.

The Examples provide details of these syntheses steps and those of skill in the art know how to vary solvents temperature and reactions conditions to achieve these synthetic steps. Methods of purifying the various intermediates and compounds described herein are also well known to those of skill in the art. The examples illustrate but should not be considered limiting to a variety of purification schemes.

In a variation on the above method the synthesis can begin by preparing an 5 6 O alkylidene protected gluconic acid lactone having a protecting group represented by the formula

As used herein alkyl means both branched and straight chain saturated aliphatic hydrocarbon groups having 1 to 8 carbon atoms. Alkyl groups include but are not limited to for example methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl butyl isobutyl and the like. The cycloalkyl ring has from 3 to 8 carbon atoms and include cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl and the like.

As used herein aryl includes aryl and substituted aryl. Thus aryl of this invention means any stable 6 to 14 membered monocyclic bicyclic or tricyclic ring containing at least one aromatic carbon ring for example phenyl naphthyl indanyl tetrahydronaphthyl tetralinyl and the like. The presence of substitution on the aryl group is optional but when present the substituents can be halo alkyl alkoxy hydroxyl amino cyano nitro trifluoromethyl acylamino or carbamoyl provided that such substituents do not interfere with the synthesis e.g. by necessitating use of conditions that are not compatible with a step in the synthesis.

As used herein stable compound or stable structure means a compound that is sufficiently robust to survive isolation to a useful degree of purity from a reaction mixture. As those of skill in the art appreciate the actual chemical stability of each compound will however vary depending on the particular substituents and their positions relative to one another. Methods to measure chemical stability are known to those of skill in the art.

Another aspect of the invention provides a method of converting protected DPD to DPD and is applicable for use with any protected DPD molecule i.e. whether it is a protected DPD made according to the above synthetic pathway or a different pathway and whether it has a different protecting group including but not limited to alkylidene protection groups described herein or other 1 2 diol protecting groups . To remove the protecting group an amount of protected DPD in an aqueous solution under acidic conditions is allowed to hydrolyze. Hydrolysis goes to near completion under these conditions 95 to 99 complete depending on the duration temperature and pH. Hydrolysis of at least about 95 or more is considered near completion. The hydrolysis thus produces a stable solution of DPD under the appropriate acidic conditions. The protected DPD can be suspended in an aqueous solution having an acidic pH to allow the reaction to proceed or the protected DPD can be suspended in an aqueous solution which is subsequently acidified to the desired pH. The pH for hydrolysis is preferably less than about 3 preferably from about 0.5 to 2.0 and more preferably from about 1.3 to about 1.5.

As with the synthetic pathway the protected DPD can be a racemic mixture or a stereoisomer i.e. S 4 5 cyclohexylidenedioxy 2 3 pentadione or R 4 5 cyclohexylidenedioxy 2 3 pentadione to yield DPD or ent DPD respectively . After sufficient hydrolysis has occurred the method further comprises adjusting the pH to about neutral pH or a desired pH range typically from about pH 7 to about pH 8.5 using a buffering agent suitable for storing DPD or for evaluating the bioactivity of DPD. Preferred pH ranges for evaluating bioactivity are from about pH 7 to about pH 7.5. For storage the final pH is any value suitable for storing DPD. Stable DPD solutions can be obtained at acidic pH for DPD concentrations that range up to at least 100 mM and possibly higher depending on the temperature of the solution. A preferred DPD concentration is 30 mM.

The synthesis strategy outlined in constitutes an improvement of that recently reported by Meijler et al. 2004 for many reasons. The present invention employs different tactics that significantly improve the synthetic efficiency and make DPD readily available in multigram quantities. The previous synthesis of DPD made use of a labile methyl orthoester as a protecting group which could be removed in dilute aqueous solution to produce DPD in situ for biological evaluation. The delicacy of that protecting group required that it be introduced at a late stage as a replacement for the acetonide group. However this protection strategy led to complications with the oxidation to form the diketone analog of 11 10 yield . In addition the acetonide series involves two intermediates of inconveniently high volatility.

With access to DPD prepared enzymatically Schauder et al. 2001 the present invention establishes that DPD is stable at pH 1.5 2 in dilute aqueous solution for extended periods no significant decrease in bioactivity after 16 h at 20 C. for concentrations of DPD at least of 30 mM and up to 100 mM . While enantio pure glyceraldehyde equivalents provide a convenient conceptual starting point for the synthesis of DPD and other small molecules the handling of these molecules can be difficult. Isopropylidene glyceraldehyde can be generated as either enantiomer in a few steps but it is quite volatile and dimerizes readily Grauert et al. 1985 . These drawbacks have led to the development of other protecting groups for glyceraldehyde. For a general discussion see Schmid et al. 1992 for discussion and elaborate solutions see Michel et al. 2003 and Aube et al. 1992.

The cyclohexylidene group offers lower volatility and efficient isolation and can be removed rapidly at pH 1.3 1.5 and 20 C. Importantly the cyclohexanone by product from deprotection does not inhibit cell growth at concentrations under 1 M. The monocyclohexylidene derivative 7 of L gulonic acid lactone was prepared in 75 yield as a white solid Vekemans et al. 1985 . Oxidative cleavage with KIOled to aldehyde 8 76 . Following a literature procedure Yoshida et al. 1992 the Corey Fuchs protocol gave rise to the dibromoalkene 9 which was purified 67 yield prior to treatment with nBuLi the intermediate alkyne anion was quenched with methyl iodide to give alkyne 10 in 64 yield after careful chromatography. Alternative quenching with water gave the alkyne 12 79 then methylation proceeded in 98 yield to 10. The critical oxidation process followed the protocol of Seebach Zibuck et al. 1988 with RuO NaIOand produced the diketone 11 in 70 yield as a bright yellow crystalline solid. The yield is ca 20 overall from gulonic acid lactone via 12. Compound II showed a strong tendency to hydrate at the C 3 carbonyl group to give 13 which complicates the characterization. When 11 is placed in HO or DO at pH 1.5 and 20 C. at concentrations up to 30 mM deprotection was 95 complete after 2.0 h with no detectable byproducts H NMR . After adjusting the buffer 0.5 M potassium phosphate pH 7.3 synthetic DPD was observed to be equal in activity to enzymatically prepared DPD at equal concentration in the bioassay. Using this route ent DPD 14 and DPD labeled with C at C 1 15 were synthesized. Ent DPD 14 had only 1 of the activity of DPD 1 in the bioassay.

Synthetically produced DPD was stable under acidic conditions a 30 mM sample of the molecule was monitored for decomposition via H NMR for 5 h at 20 C. and pH 1.5. Under these conditions no decomposition products were observed. A further examination of a 100 mM sample stored at 20 C. and pH 1.3 for 16 h showed no loss in activity as monitored by the bioassay. The purity of the synthetic DPD was further established by reaction with o phenylenediamine to produce S 1 3 methylquioxalin 2 yl ethane 1 2 diol in 98 purity.

Hydration of the carbonyl group at C 3 of the cyclic form 2 of DPD is important for borate binding in the signal 6. Initially it was not known whether hydration and subsequent borate addition were intrinsically favorable or required the presence of the protein receptor. For example Pei and coworkers proposed that the C 3 carbonyl of DPD enzymatically prepared was hydrated in aqueous media Zhu et al. 2003 .

We showed that laurencione which is 4 deoxy DPD hydrates spontaneously and associates strongly with borate in aqueous media at pH 7.8 Semmelhack et al. 2004 . It forms complexes with both 1 1 and 2 1 laurencione borate stoichiometry. For synthetic DPD the appearance of five C NMR signals in the spectrum at pH 1.5 30 mM DPD aq in the region from 90 110 ppm assigned to the hemiacetal and hydrated carbons strongly suggests that the majority of DPD both open and closed isomers is hydrated at C3. It is less stable at pH 8 unless bound to borate. Unlike laurencione which is lacking the C 4 hydromyl group and therefore in the hydrated form contains only one site for borate complexation hydrated DPD 4 has two sites for borate complexation. Since both 2 3 and 3 4 DPD borates are possible for each of the two anomers a complex mixture of borate species is expected.

Borate binding was followed with C labeled DPD 15 by both B and C NMR spectroscopy. As shown in in HO 5 DO and in the absence of borate 15 mM 15 produces three main peaks from the incorporated label assigned to the hydrated open form 16 24.9 ppm and the two hydrated cyclic forms 17 18 19.9 or 20.4 ppm . As borate is added the complexity of the C NMR spectrum increases consistent with the hypothesis that a number of 1 1 and 2 1 DPD borate complexes are present in solution with 15 mM 15 and 45 mM B OH the signals for 16 18 are gone confirming a high affinity of these isomers for boron. When the solution is saturated with boric acid 0.9 M and the concentration of 15 is kept at 15 mM the C NMR spectrum is dominated by a peak at 22.3 ppm to which we assign the 2 1 borate complex 19 . Although 19 appears crowded and possesses two negatively charged groups precedence for this structural type exists in work showing that small polyhydroxylated molecules can complex multiple tetrahedral phenyboranate ions in close proximity Lorand et al. 1959 .

When the identical titration is followed by B NMR no signal was observed initially with 15 mM 1 and no B OH but as the B OH concentration was increased to 40 mM while holding the concentration of 1 constant new peaks appeared two broad peaks at 4.7 and 5.8 ppm and a family of peaks at 8 11 ppm excessborate at 18.3 ppm not shown . The peak at 5.8 ppm is assigned to the natural product 6 and its anomer based on analogy with 6 bound to the receptor LuxP 6.1 ppm Chen et al. 2002 6 released from the LuxP receptor 5.8 ppm Miller et al. 2004 6 5.8 ppm observed when 17 is released into borate from its receptor LsrB from Miller et al. 2004 and the 1 1 borate complex of laurencione 5.9 ppm Semmelhack et al. 2004 .

The peak at 4.7 ppm is at a position typical of 1 1 sugar borate complexes Van Duin et al. 1985 and is tentatively assigned to the 3 4 borate complex 21. The family of peaks from 8 11 ppm have positions consistent with a mixture of 2 1 DPD borate complexes e.g 20 with borate bound at either the 2 3 or 3 4 position Semmelhack et al. 2004 . As the concentration of borate is increased to saturation while keeping the concentration of 1 constant at 15 mM the intensity of the peaks from 8 11 ppm decreases while the peaks at 4.7 and 5.8 ppm increase and become almost equal in intensity .

These data are consistent with the conversion of 2 1 DPD borate complexes to 1 1 DPD borate complexes e.g. 6 followed by further conversion to 1 2 DPD borate complex 19 as the borate concentration is increased. The inherently large number of borated DPD species formed coupled with the difficulties associated with accurately measuring the equilibrium constant for sugar borate binding Springsteen et al. 2002 has not allowed quantitation of the equilibrium constant for the association of DPD with borate.

To explore the binding of DPD with borate under conditions that more closely resemble those in the natural habitat of and to correlate this study with previous work using DPD produced in vivo and released from the receptor protein LuxP the B NMR spectrum of a 100 M DPD solution in 400 M B OH Dickson et al. 1990 at pH 7.5 was recorded. Under these conditions one peak at 5.8 ppm corresponding to 1 1 DPD borate complexes with borate bound at the 2 3 positions 6 and its anomer was observed significantly above noise level. Based on the ratio of integrals for the B OH peak and the DPD borate peak the concentration of DPD borate complex was calculated to be ca 10 M. consistent with ca 10 DPD bound at this dilution. We were unable to observe conclusively the presence of complexes with a 2 1 DPD borate stoichiometry due to sensitivity limitations of the B NMR experiment although a peak with a S N of 2 was recorded at 9.8 ppm.

Yet another aspect of the invention provides compounds useful as intermediates in the synthesis of DPD new borate isomers as well as the isotopically labeled DPD compounds including the isomeric forms of the isotopically labeled DPD . These compounds are those shown as compounds 10 11 12 15 16 17 18 19 20 and 21 in . Where possible the invention includes the pharmaceutically acceptable salts of these compounds.

As used herein pharmaceutically acceptable salts refer to derivatives of the disclosed compounds that are modified by making acid or base salts. Examples include but are not limited to mineral or organic acid salts of basic residues such as amines alkali or organic salts of acidic residues and the like. Pharmaceutically acceptable salts include but are not limited to hydrohalides sulfates methosulfates methanesulfates toluenesulfonates nitrates phosphates maleates acetates lactates and the like.

Pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the compounds of the invention can be prepared by reacting the free acid or base forms of these compounds with a stoichiometric or greater amount of the appropriate base or acid in water or in an organic solvent or in a mixture of the two generally nonaqueous media like ether ethyl acetate ethanol isopropanol or acetonitrile are preferred. The salts of the invention can also be prepared by ion exchange for example. Lists of suitable salts are found in Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences 17th ed. Mack Publishing Company Easton Pa. 1985 p. 1418 the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

It will be appreciated by those skilled in the art that various omissions additions and modifications may be made to the invention described above without departing from the scope of the invention and all such modifications and changes are intended to fall within the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. All references patents patent applications or other documents cited are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety.

A. General. Unless otherwise rioted all reactions were performed under an inert atmosphere with dry reagents solvents and flame dried glassware. Reagents were purchased from Acros Aldrich or Fluka and used without further purification. With the exception of CHI which was distilled before use. Silica flash chromatography was performed using silica gel 230 540 mesh SORBENT Technologies . Analytical thin layer chromatography was performed using Silica G TLC plate w UV254 200 m SORBENT Teclhnologies . The H NMR spectra were recorded using a Varian Mercury 300 MHz Varian Unity 400 MHz or Varian Unity INOVA 500 MHz spectrometer and C NMR spectra were recorded using a Varian Unity INOVA 125.7 MHz spectrometer. Chemical shifts for H and C NMR spectra are reported in parts per million ppm on the scale from an internal standard except for C NMR recorded in DO which were referenced to an external standard. The B NMR spectra were collected at 20 C. using a Varian Unity INOVA spectrometer at 160.5 MHz equipped with a 5 rnm tunable X H probe Nalorac and were referenced indirectly to BF.EtO. A collection of 3072 scans was averaged for each B spectrum with a 0.25 s recycle time using an approximately 30 flip angle pulse. Specific rotations were measured on a PerkinElmer Model 341 Polarimeter using an average of 20 readings for each measurement. High resolution mass spectra were recorded using a Kratos MS 50 RFA.

In the reactions below that indicate preparation of both the L and D forms of the compounds stereoselective synthesis is obtained using the appropriate enantiomer as the starting material or using the stereospecific reaction product from the previous step in the synthesis pathway. For example in Example 2 starting with L gulonic acid lactone yields the final product in its L form and starting with D gulonic acid lactone yields the final product in its D form.

B. Nomenclature. As shown in DPD spontaneously cyclizes to form two epimeric furanoses 2S 4S and 2R 4S 2 4 dihydroxy 2 methyldihydrofuran 3 one S and R DHMF respectively also 2 and 3 respectively . Hydration of S and R DHMF gives rise to 2S 4S and 2R 4S 2 methyl 2 3 3 4 tetrahydroxytetrahydrofuran S and R THMF respectively also 4 and 5 respectively .

The IUPAC carbohydrate nomenclature for the structures in is as follows DPD 1 L glycero 1 dehydro penta 2 3 diulose S DHMF 2 L glycero 1 dehydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanose S THMF 4 L glycero 1 dehydro 3 hydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanose S THMF borate 6 L glycero 1 dehydro 3 hydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanosyl 2 3 cyclicborate R DHMF 3 L glycero 1 dehydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanose and R THMF 5 L glycero 1 dehydro 3 hydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanose.

To a slurry of gulonic acid lactone 20.02 g 112.4 mmol and p toluene sulfonic acid monohydrate 203 mg 1.1 mmol in DMF 100 mL was added 1 1 dimethoxy cyclohexanone 28.1 g 29.6 mL 194.9 mmol in one portion. The resulting mixture was stirred until the reaction was homogeneous 36 48 h . EtN 0.8 mL was added and stirring was continued for 1 h. The reaction was then concentrated at C. in vacuo 0.5 mmHg . Addition of PhMe 250 mL to the warn suspension followed by cooling at 20 C. for 24 h yielded the product as a white precipitate. The precipitate was collected via filtration washed with PhMe and dried in vacuo 0.5 mmHg for 24 h at room temperature to give 7 21.65 g 75 yield . The resulting material contained 5 starting material and 1 solvent and was used in subsequent reactions without further purification. H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 5.59 d J 7.5 Hz 1H 5.46 d J 4.2 Hz 1H 4.42 dd J 4.6 7.5 Hz 1H 4.22 m 3H 4.13 m 1H 3.76 m 1H 1.54 m 8H 1.35 m 2H . Vekerans et al. 1985. 

To a slurry of KIO 10.093 g 43.90 mmol and KHCO 9.053 g 90.50 mmol in HO 28 mL was added 7 5.050 g 19.60 mmol . CHCl 50 mL was added and the resulting two phase mixture was stirred vigorously for 18 h in air. At this time the mixture was diluted with CHCl 50 mL and aqueous NaCl 0.8 g mL HO was added. Stirring was continued until the aqueous layer gelled. The reaction was filtered and the residue was washed with CHCl 2 50 mL . The eluant was collected and washed with HO 50 mL . The aqueous fractions were combined and extracted with CHCl 2 25 mL . The combined organic fractions were dried with MgSOand concentrated in vacuo giving 8 2.525 g in 76 yield and 95 purity. The aldehyde was used without further purification. Due to ABX second order effects the coupling constants are only reported as 1D approximations. H NMR 300 MHz CDCl 9.73 d J 1.9 Hz 1H 4.39 ddd J 1.9 4.7 7.3 Hz 1H 4.18 dd J 7.3 8.8 Hz 1H 4.10 dd J 4.7 8.8 Hz 1H 1.65 m 8H 1.44 m 2H . Previously characterized by Grauert et al. 1985. 

Triphenyl phosphine 9.181 g 35.00 mmol was dissolved in CHCl 85 mL and cooled to 0 C. To the cooled solution was added CBr 5.851 g 17.60 mmol all at once and the mixture was stirred for 1 h. At this time a solution of 8 2.525 g 14.90 mmol in 20 mL CHClwas added in one portion and the mixture was stirred for 1 h. The solution was concentrated in vacuo and the residual solid was purified via column chromatography SiOeluted with 1 9 EtOAc hexanes to give 9 3.268 g 67 yield . R 0.83 1 1 EtOAc hexanes . H NMR 300 MHz CDCl 6.54 d J 7.7 Hz 1H 4.74 ddd J 6.3 6.5 7.7 Hz 1H 4.19 dd J 6.3 8.4 Hz 1H 3.69 dd J 6.5 8.4 Hz 1H 1.63 m 8H 1.42 m 2H .

Dibromoalkene 9 1.019 gm 3.10 mmol was dissolved in THF 20 mL and subsequently cooled to 78 C. To this solution was added a solution of nBuLi 2.5 M in hexanes 3.0 mL 7.5 mmol over 15 min via an addition funnel. The reaction was allowed to proceed at 78 C. for an additional 30 min. At this time the solution was warmed to 23 C. and stirred for 1 h. Then CHI 580 L 1.32 g 9.30 mmol was added and stirring was continued for 3 h. The mixture was cooled to 0 C. quenched with HO 100 L dried with MgSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo. Purification via chromatography SiOeluted with 0.5 9.5 EtO hexanes gave 10 358 mg in 64 yield. R 0.64 0.5 9.5 EtO hexanes . IR NaCl cm 2936 s C H 2862 s C H 2242 w C C 1163 m C O 1105 s C O . 10 39.2 c 0.767 CHCl . H NMR 500 MHz CDCl 4.67 ddd J 7.0 6.1 2.1 Hz 1H 4.10 dd J 7.9 6.1 Hz 1H 3.81 dd J 7.0 7.9 1H 1.84 d J 2.1 Hz 3H 1.77 m 2H 1.61 m 6H 1.39 m 2H . C NMR 125.7 MHz CDCl 110.7 82.5 76.5 69.9 65.7 36.0 35.6 25.2 24.1 25.2 24.1 24.0 3.7. HRMS m z M calcd. For CHO 180.115 found 179.635.

Vinyldibromide 9 1.209 g 3.70 mmol was dissolved in THF 20 mL and subsequently cooled to 78 C. To this solution was added a solution of nBuLi 2.5 mL in hexanes 3.6 mL 9.0 mmol over 15 min via an addition funnel. The reaction was allowed to proceed at 78 C. for 30 min. At this time the solution was warmed to 23 C. and stirred for 1 h. The mixture was then cooled to 0 C. quenched with HO 100 L dried with MgSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo. Purification via chromatography SiOeluted with 0.5 9.5 EtO hexanes gave 12 485 mg 79 yield . R 0.65 0.5 9.5 EtO hexanes . H NMR 500 MHz CDCl 4.71 ddd J 6.5 6.3 2.0 Hz 1H 4.17 dd J 8.0 6.5 Hz 1H 3.95 dd J 8.0 6.3 Hz 1H 2.49 d J 2.0 Hz 1H 1.76 m 2H 1.63 m 6H 1.42 m 2H . Previously characterized by Yoshida et al. 1992. 

To a solution of 12 175 mg 1.10 mmol in THF 1.6 mL at 78 C. was added a solution of nBuLi 2.5 M in hexane 550 L 1.40 mmol in one portion and the mixture was allowed to stir for 30 min. At this time CHI 308 mg 135 L 2.20 mmol was added and the mixture was allowed to warm to 23 C. and be stirred for 4 h. The reaction was then cooled to 0 C. and quenched with HO 20 L . Drying with MgSO followed by concentration in vacuo and filtration through silica using 1 2 EtO hexanes as the eluant afforded pure 10 C 186 mg in 98 yield. H NMR 500 MHz CDCl 4.67 ddd J 7.0 6.1 2.1 Hz 1H 4.10 dd J 7.9 6.1 Hz 1H 3.81 dd J 7.0 7.9 1H 1.84 dd J 131.5 2.1 Hz 3H 1.77 m 2H 1.61 m 6H 1.39 m 2H . C NMR 125.7 MHz CDCl 110.7 82.5 d J67.8 Hz 76.5 d J 11.2 Hz 69.9 65.7 36.0 35.6 25.2 24.1 25.2 24.1 24.0 3.7.

To a solution of 10 330 mg 1.8 mmol in CCl 4 mL and MeCN 4 mL was added NaIO 867 mg 4.1 mmol in HO 6 mL . The mixture was vigorously stirred and RuO.HO 6.0 mg 4.5 10mmol was added. The mixture was vigorously stirred for 15 min in air. At this time it was filtered through silica using CHClas the eluant. The eluant was dried with MgSOand concentrated in vacuo to give a bright yellow oil. Purification via flash chromatography using SiOeluted with 1 9 EtOAc hexanes afforded pure 11 271 mg in 70 yield with varying amounts of C3 hydration i.e. 13 10 30 . IR NaCl mixture of 11 and 13 cm 3447 w br OH 2937 s CH 2863 m CH 1794 w C O hydrated diketone 1733 s C O diketone 1714 s C O diketone 1162 m C O 1145 m C O 1093 s C O . Azeotropic drying of the oil with CHClproduced a yellow solid that contained 95 11. R 0.1 0.3 1 9 EtOAc hexanes . 11.8 c 0.900 CHCl . HRMS m z M calcd. For CHO 212.105 found 212.645.

In aqueous DO solution 13 formed in 95 as evidenced by the presence of a new peak at 95.7 ppm in the C NMR spectrum and the presence of only one peak in the carbonyl region 210.2 ppm . Further evidence for the position of hydration is provided as part of the analytical data for 11 13 C . H NMR 500 MHz DO 13 4.43 dd J 5.3 7.2 Hz 1H 4.14 dd J 7.2 9.0 Hz 1H 4.05 dd J 5.3 9.0 Hz 1H 2.36 s 3H 1.67 1.30 m 10H . C NMR 125.7 MHz DO 13 210.2 112.1 95.7 77.1 63.8 34.9 33.2 25.1 splitting due to D exchange was noted 24.5 23.6 23.3. Due to the long exposure to DO necessary to obtain the C NMR spectrum partial deprotection of the molecule occurred. The weak additional peaks in the C NMR spectrum below of 13 in DO at 42.0 and 27.0 ppm are due to small amounts of cyclohexanone.

If 11 is dissolved in DO and then extracted into CDCl 22 95 13 could be initially characterized in organic solvent as evidenced by H NMR. However 13 converts to 11 with a tof 13 h at 20 C. H NMR 500 MHz CDCl 13 4.26 dd J 5.5 6.7 Hz 1H 4.129 d J 5.5 Hz 1H 4.127 d J 6.7 Hz 1H 2.42 s 3H 1.71 1.56 m 8H 1.41 m 2H . C NMR 125.7 MHz CDCl 13 reporting only peaks corresponding to 13 206.3 111.2 94.6 76.6 64.6 35.8 25.0 24.5 24.1 23.9 23.7. Due to the length of observation necessary to fully develop the C spectrum of 13 considerable dehydration was observed along with deprotection. Therefore the C NMR spectrum in CDClof 13 below also contains peaks attributed to 11 and cyclohexanone.

Protected DPD 11 C labeled at the C1 position 42 mg 44 yield was obtained from 10 C 81 mg 0.4 mmol using the procedure for 11. H NMR 500 MHz CDCl 5.14 dd J 5.2 7.9 Hz 1H 4.35 dd J 7.9 8.9 Hz 1H 4.00 dd J 5.2 8.9 Hz 1H 2.40 d J 129.4 Hz 3H 1.64 m 8H 1.42 m 2H . C NMR 125.7 MHz CDCl 198.2 d J 42.6 Hz 194.9 d J 12.4 111.9 76.5 65.5 35.4 34.7 25.0 24.5 23.82 23.77. H NMR 500 MHz DO 4.43 dd J 5.3 7.2 Hz 1H 4.14 dd J 7.2 9.0 Hz 1H 4.05 dd J 5.3 9.0 Hz 1H 2.36 d J 128.4 Hz 3H 1.67 1.30 m 10H . C NMR 125.7 MHz 0.5 9.5 DO HO 210.2 d J 41.2 112.1 95.7 d J 11.4 77.1 63.8 34.9 33.2 25.1 24.5 23.6 23.3.

The position of hydration in the molecule in aqueous media was confirmed by C NMR analysis. The peak at 95.7 ppm in the C NMR spectrum for 11 C in 5 DO in HO displayed two bond C C coupling 11.4 Hz with the C label at C1. The chemical shift is also in the range noted for hydrated carbonyl groups. Taken together these data are consistent with hydration at C3. Two new peaks at 24.6 and 22.3 ppm were also observed in the C spectrum of 11 C in 5 DO spectrometer lock signal in HO but not in the C spectrum of 11 in DO. These peaks are assigned to the methyl carbon for small amounts of unhydrated and C2 hydrated material that are only detectable with C incorporation. The two new peaks also show splitting due to D exchange if the C spectrum is recorded in 100 DO.

To a suspension of 11 14 mg 6.6 mmol in DO 3.2 mL was added conc. HSO 4 L ca pH 2 . The reaction was allowed to continue for 2.5 h and was monitored by H NMR. Deprotection was determined to be 90 complete after 1.5 h and greater than 97 complete after 2.5 h. At this time excess NaHCOand excess B OH were added to generate a solution of excessborate at pH 7.8. This solution was active in the autoinducer bioassay without further purification. Before addition of NaHCOand B OH a 1 mL aliquot of the material showed an H NMR spectrum consistent with previously reported data. H NMR 500 MHz DO pD 2.0 4.36 dd J 5.6 7.0 Hz 1H 4.17 m 2H 4.03 dd J 3.2 5.9 Hz 1H 3.96 dd J 3.8 7.3 Hz 1H 3.80 m 2H 363 dd J 7.3 12.0 Hz 1H 3.56 dd J 5.6 9.4 Hz 1H The previously reported peak at 2.35 s 3H corresponding to the methyl protons of the ring open isomer was obscured by cyclohexanone. 1.42 s 3H 1.40 s 3H . Previously partially characterized by Meijler et al. 2004. 

To a suspension of 11 9.6 mg 30 mmol in DO 1.5 mL was added conc. DSO 1.5 L final pD1.5 . The reaction was allowed to continue for 5 h and was monitored by H NMR. A H H DQCOSY spectrum was recorded at the 5 h time point to help establish the identity of each H signal. These data are consistent with previous assignments Janda et al. . H NMR 500 MHz DO pD 1.5 5 h 4.36 dd J 5.6 7.0 Hz 1H 4.17 m 2H 4.03 dd J 3.2 5.9 Hz 1H 3.96 dd J 3.8 7.3 Hz 1H 3.80 m 2H 3.63 dd J 7.3 12.0 Hz 1H 3.56 dd J 5.6 9.4 Hz 1H previously reported peak at 2.35 s 3H corresponding to the methyl protons of the ring open isomer obscured by cyclohexanone 1.42 s 3H 1.40 s 3H . The extra signals in the region form 1.35 1.45 ppm and 3.4 4.6 ppm are most likely due to a small amount of 1 that is not hydrated at C3. This hypothesis is supported by the complete disappearance of these peaks upon addition of 1 2 phenylenediamine see Example 13 

To a suspension of 11 4.5 mg 30 mmol in HO 0.665 mL and DO 0.035 mL was added conc. DSO 1.5 mL final pD 1.5 . The reaction was allowed to continue for 2.5 h. At this time the C NMR spectrum was recorded. C NMR 125.7 MHz 95 5 HO DO PH 1.5 ring open isomer C2 carbonyl not observed 24.9 61.8 74.3 97.2 cyclic isomers 19.9 20.4 69.4 71.3 73.8 74.6 99.4 99.7 103.9 104.7. Note peaks at 24.6 27.3 41.9 221.2 correspond to cyclohexanone. The appearance of 4 C NMR signals that can be attributed to the ring closed isomers in the region from 90 110 ppm consistent with signals from hemiacetal and hydrated carbons strongly suggest that the majority of DPD is hydrated at C3 under the above experimental conditions.

To a suspension of 11 9.6 mg 30 mmol in DO 1.5 mL was added conc. DSO 1.5 L final pD 1.5 and the reaction was allowed to continue for 5 h. At this time 400 L of the solution containing 11 was mixed with 100 L of a solution of 1 2 phenylenediamine dihydrochloride 17.9 mg 200 mM in DO 0.5 mL . The resulting solution containing 24 mM DPD and 40 mM phenylenediamine was allowed to stand at room temperature for 40 min. The conversion of DPD to S 1 3 methylquinoxalin 2 yl ethane 1 2 diol was judged to be 97 via H NMR. Of interest is the absence of H NMR signals in the region from 3.4 4.6 ppm that could be attributed to DPD or a large amount of by product. H NMR 500 MHz DO pD 1.5 5 h 8.31 m 1H 8.14 m 1H 5.42 dd J 4.6 6.4 Hz 1H 4.05 dd J 4.6 12.0 Hz 1H 4.00 dd J 6.4 12.0 Hz 1H 3.02 s 3H .

To a suspension of 11 10 mM in HO 5 mL was added conc. HSO 5 L . The reaction was allowed to continue for 2 h. At this time the mixture was diluted with 1 M potassium phosphate buffer 5 mL to adjust the pH to 7.3 yielding 5 mM DPD 1 in 0.5 M potassium phosphate buffer. This material could be used without further purification in the bioassay and displayed an activity equal to that of enzymatically prepared DPD See next Example .

A. Comparative bioactivity of enzymatically produced DPD synthetic DPD and synthetic ent DPD. Each of these three compounds and a blank were assessed in the above bioassay at equal concentrations. The bio assays were conducted with a dilution of 0.53 mM enzymatically produced DPD a dilution of 5.0 mM synthetic DPD or a dilution of 5.0 mM ent DPD. The results are shown in .

B. Effects of low pH on enzmmatically produced DPD bioactivity. Enzymatically produced DPD 0.53 mM stock concentration was mixed with sulfuric or hydrochloric acid at a ratio of 1 L HSOor 5 L HCl to 250 L DPD resulting in solutions with a pH of 1.5 with HSO or 2 with HCl . At times indicated 1 M Tris pH 8.5 was added to restore the pH to neutral and bioactivity was determined. shows the results after exposure to HCl treatment. Similar results were obtained after exposure to HSO not shown . Treatment of enzymatically produced DPD with acid for up to 16 h did not affect the autoinducer activity.

C. Effects of low pH on synthetic DPD bioactivity. Synthetically produced DPD 100 mM stock concentration was mixed with HSOat a ratio of 1 L HSOto 250 L DPD resulting in solutions with a pH of 1.3. After 16 h 1 M Tris pH 8.5 was added at a ratio of 5 L buffer to 20 uL DPD solution to restore the pH to 7.5. This bioassay carried out as before shows that after treatment of synthetic DPD at a concentration of 100 mM and pH 1.3 for up to 16 h did not change the auto inducer activity .

To a suspension of 11 C 5.2 mg 0.025 mmol in 0.5 9.5 DO HO 1.64 mL was added conc. HSO 2 L . The reaction was allowed to continue for 2.0 h and the C NMR shifts for the methyl groups of the equilibrium mixture were recorded. Excess NaHCOand B OH 4.6 mg 0.074 mmol were added to generate a sat. NaHCOand 45 mM B OH solution pH 7.8 and the C NMR spectrum of the resulting mixture was recorded. Excess B OH was added to the mixture to generate a sat. B OH solution and the sample was further analyzed via C NMR spectroscopy. The results are shown in and discussed in the Detailed Description of the Invention.

To a suspension of 11 8.1 mg 0.038 mmol in 0.5 9.5 DO HO 1.53 mL was added conc. HSO 2 L . The deprotection was allowed to continue for 2 h. At this time excess NaHCOwas added to generate a sat. NaHCOsolution pH 7.8 . The material was divided into aliquots and 100 mM B OH in sat NaHCO aq and sat NaHCO aq were added in various proportions to generate 15 mM DPD in 5 mM 15 mM and 40 mM B OH solutions with final volumes of 0.5 mL. These solutions were studied by B NMR. Excess B OH was added to the 45 mM B OH sample to generate a saturated B OH solution and this sample was subjected to further B NMR analysis. The results are shown in and discussed in the Detailed Description of the Invention.

To explore further the ability of DPD to complexborate at more physiologically relevant concentrations a mixture of 10 L of 40 mM B OH 101 L of 10 mM DPD 100 L of 1 M potassium phosphate buffer pH 7 200 L of sat. NaHCOand 680 L of DO was produced to generate a 100 M DPD solution in 400 M B OH at pH 7.5. This solution was then analyzed by B NMR to determine binding as discussed in the Detailed Description of the Invention.

