---

title: Anti-hypercholesterolemic compounds
abstract: 

and the pharmaceutically acceptable salts and esters thereof. The compounds are useful for lowering plasma cholesterol levels, particularly LDL cholesterol, and for treating and preventing atherosclerosis and atherosclerotic disease events.

url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07622449&OS=07622449&RS=07622449
owner: Merck & Co., Inc.
number: 07622449
owner_city: Rahway
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050615
---
This application is a continuation in part of International Application No. PCT US2004 042698 filed Dec. 17 2004 which claims the benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 532096 filed Dec. 23 2003.

The instant invention relates to substituted 2 azetidinones and the pharmaceutically acceptable salts and esters thereof and to their use alone or in combination with other active agents to treat hypercholesterolemia and for preventing halting or slowing the progression of atherosclerosis and related conditions and disease events.

It has been clear for several decades that elevated blood cholesterol is a major risk factor for coronary heart disease and many studies have shown that the risk of CHD events can be reduced by lipid lowering therapy. Prior to 1987 the lipid lowering armamentarium was limited essentially to a low saturated fat and cholesterol diet the bile acid sequestrants cholestyramine and colestipol nicotinic acid niacin the fibrates and probucol. Unfortunately all of these treatments have limited efficacy or tolerability or both. Substantial reductions in LDL low density lipoprotein cholesterol accompanied by increases in HDL high density lipoprotein cholesterol could be achieved by the combination of a lipid lowering diet and a bile acid sequestrant with or without the addition of nicotinic acid. However this therapy is not easy to administer or tolerate and was therefore often unsuccessful except in specialist lipid clinics. The fibrates produce a moderate reduction in LDL cholesterol accompanied by increased HDL cholesterol and a substantial reduction in triglycerides and because they are well tolerated these drugs have been more widely used. Probucol produces only a small reduction in LDL cholesterol and also reduces HDL cholesterol which because of the strong inverse relationship between HDL cholesterol level and CHD risk is generally considered undesirable. With the introduction of lovastatin the first inhibitor of HMG CoA reductase to become available for prescription in 1987 for the first time physicians were able to obtain large reductions in plasma cholesterol with very few adverse effects.

Recent studies have unequivocally demonstrated that lovastatin simvastatin and pravastatin all members of the HMG CoA reductase inhibitor class slow the progression of atherosclerotic lesions in the coronary and carotid arteries. Simvastatin and pravastatin have also been shown to reduce the risk of coronary heart disease events and in the case of simvastatin a highly significant reduction in the risk of coronary death and total mortality has been shown by the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study. This study also provided some evidence for a reduction in cerebrovascular events. Despite the substantial reduction in the risk of coronary morbidity and mortality achieved by simvastatin the risk is still substantial in the treated patients. For example in the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study the 42 reduction in the risk of coronary death still left 5 of the treated patients to die of their disease over the course of this 5 year study. Further reduction of risk is clearly needed.

A more recent class of anti hyperlipidemic agents that has emerged includes inhibitors of cholesterol absorption. Ezetimibe the first compound to receive regulatory approval in this class is currently marketed in the U.S. under the tradename ZETIA . Ezetimibe has the following chemical structure and is described in U.S. Pat. Nos. Re. 37721 and 5 846 966 

Sugar substituted 2 azetidinones including glucuronidated analogs of the following general structure 

Additional cholesterol absorption inhibitors are described in WO2002 066464 A1 applied for by Kotobuki Pharmaceutical Co. and U.S. 2002 0137689 A1 Glombik et al. . WO2002 066464 A1 discloses hypolipidemic compounds of general formula

In the ongoing effort to discover novel treatments for hyperlipidemia and atherosclerotic process the instant invention provides novel cholesterol absorption inhibitors described below.

A second object of the instant invention is to provide a method for inhibiting cholesterol absorption comprising administering a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of Formula I to a patient in need of such treatment. Another object is to provide a method for reducing plasma cholesterol levels especially LDL cholesterol and treating hypercholesterolemia comprising administering a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of Formula I to a patient in need of such treatment.

As a further object methods are provided for preventing or reducing the risk of developing atherosclerosis as well as for halting or slowing the progression of atherosclerotic disease once it has become clinically evident comprising the administration of a prophylactically or therapeutically effective amount as appropriate of a compound of Formula I to a patient who is at risk of developing atherosclerosis or who already has atherosclerotic disease. Another object of the present invention is the use of the compounds of the present invention for the manufacture of a medicament useful in treating preventing or reducing the risk of developing these conditions. Other objects of this invention are to provide processes for making the compounds of Formula I and to provide novel pharmaceutical compositions comprising these compounds.

Additionally the compounds of this invention particularly radioactive isotopes of the compounds of Formula I can be used in screening assays where the assay is designed to identify new cholesterol absorption inhibitors that have the same mechanism of action as ezetimibe. Additional objects will be evident from the following detailed description.

In one embodiment of this invention are compounds of Formula I wherein at least one of q and r is 1 and the sum of m n p q and r is 1 2 3 4 5 or 6. In a class of this embodiment are compounds wherein the sum of m q and n is 1 2 3 4 or 5 when p is 0 and r is 1.

In another embodiment of this invention are compounds of Formula I wherein R is selected from the group consisting of OR O CO R O CO OR O CO NRR a sugar residue a disugar residue a trisugar residue and a tetrasugar residue Ris selected from the group consisting of OR O CO R O CO ORand O CO NRR and t is selected from 0 and 1. In a class of this embodiment are compounds wherein q r and t are each independently selected from 0 and 1 and m n and p are each independently selected from 0 1 2 3 and 4 provided that at least one of q and r is 1 and the sum of m n p q and r is 1 2 3 4 5 or 6 and provided that when p is 0 and r is 1 the sum of m q and n is 1 2 3 4 or 5.

In another embodiment of this invention are compounds of Formula I wherein R is selected from the group consisting of OR O CO R O CO OR O CO NRR a sugar residue a disugar residue a trisugar residue and a tetrasugar residue and Ris selected from the group consisting of OR O CO R O CO Rand O CO NRR. In a class of this embodiment are compounds wherein m n and p are each independently selected from 0 1 2 3 and 4 provided that at least one of q and r is 1 and the sum of m n p q and r is 1 2 3 4 5 or 6. In a sub class of this class are compounds wherein the sum of m q and n is 1 2 3 4 or 5 when p is 0 and r is 1.

As used herein alkyl is intended to include both branched and straight chain saturated aliphatic univalent hydrocarbon groups having the specified number of carbon atoms. Examples of alkyl groups include but are not limited to methyl Me ethyl Et n propyl Pr n butyl Bu n pentyl n hexyl and the isomers thereof such as isopropyl i Pr isobutyl i Bu secbutyl s Bu tertbutyl t Bu isopentyl isohexyl and the like. If there is no specified prefix such as n for normal s for sec t for tert i for iso with a named alkyl group then it is intended that the named alkyl goup is an n alkyl group i.e. propyl is n propyl . As used herein within the definitions of variable groups in Formula I alkyl may also be divalent as for example when Ris aryl substituted Calkyl or when Ris OCalkyl COOR.

As used herein aryl is intended to include phenyl Ph naphthyl indenyl tetrahydronaphthyl or indanyl. Phenyl is preferred.

Suitable protecting groups designated as PG herein for the hydroxyl groups of Rwhen Ris a glucuronide or methyl ester glucuronide include but are not limited to those that are known to be useful as carbohydrate protecting groups such as for example benzyl acetyl benzoyl tert butyldiphenylsilyl trimethylsilyl para methoxybenzyl benzylidine and methoxy methyl. Conditions required to selectively add and remove such protecting groups are found in standard textbooks such as Greene T and Wuts P. G. M. John Wiley Sons Inc. New York N.Y. 1999.

Compounds of Formula I may contain one or more asymmetric centers and can thus occur as racemates and racemic mixtures single enantiomers enantiomeric mixtures diastereomeric mixtures and individual diastereomers. The present invention is meant to comprehend all such isomeric forms of the compounds of Formula I. All such isomeric forms of the compounds of Formula I are included within the scope of this invention. Furthermore some of the crystalline forms for compounds of the present invention may exist as polymorphs and as such are intended to be included in the present invention. In addition some of the compounds of the instant invention may form solvates with water or organic solvents. Such hydrates and solvates are also encompassed within the scope of this invention.

Due to their activity as cholesterol absorption inhibitors the compounds of the present invention can be used in screening assays where the assay is designed to identify new cholesterol absorption inhibitors. Radioactive isotopes of the compounds of Formula I are particularly useful in such assays for example compounds of Formula I wherein sulfur is replaced with hot S and particularly wherein the radioactive sulfur isotope is incorporated within the Rmoiety. All such radioactive isotopes of the compounds of Formula I are included within the scope of this invention.

Herein the term pharmaceutically acceptable salts shall mean non toxic salts of the compounds employed in this invention which are generally prepared by reacting the free acid with a suitable organic or inorganic base particularly those formed from cations such as sodium potassium aluminum calcium lithium magnesium zinc and tetramethylammonium as well as those salts formed from amines such as ammonia ethylenediamine N methylglucamine lysine arginine ornithine choline N N dibenzylethylenediamine chloroprocaine diethanolamine procaine N benzylphenethylamine 1 p chlorobenzyl 2 pyrrolidine 1 yl methylbenzimidazole diethylamine piperazine morpholine 2 4 4 trimethyl 2 pentamine and tris hydroxymethyl aminomethane.

When the compound of the present invention is basic salts may be prepared from pharmaceutically acceptable non toxic acids including inorganic and organic acids. Such acids include acetic benzenesulfonic benzoic camphorsulfonic citric ethanesulfonic fumaric gluconic glutamic hydrobromic hydrochloric isethionic lactic maleic malic mandelic methanesulfonic mucic nitric pamoic pantothenic phosphoric succinic sulfuric tartaric p toluenesulfonic acid and the like. Particularly preferred are citric hydrobromic hydrochloric maleic phosphoric sulfuric and tartaric acids.

Examples of pharmaceutically acceptable esters include but are not limited to Calkyl and Calkyl substituted with phenyl dimethylamino and acetylamino. Calkyl herein includes straight or branched aliphatic chains containing from 1 to 4 carbon atoms for example methyl ethyl n propyl n butyl iso propyl sec butyl and tert butyl.

The term patient includes mammals especially humans who use the instant active agents for the prevention or treatment of a medical condition. Administering of the drug to the patient includes both self administration and administration to the patient by another person. The patient may be in need of treatment for an existing disease or medical condition or may desire prophylactic treatment to prevent or reduce the risk for diseases and medical conditions affected by inhibition of cholesterol absorption.

The term therapeutically effective amount is intended to mean that amount of a drug or pharmaceutical agent that will elicit the biological or medical response of a tissue a system animal or human that is being sought by a researcher veterinarian medical doctor or other clinician. The term prophylactically effective amount is intended to mean that amount of a pharmaceutical drug that will prevent or reduce the risk of occurrence of the biological or medical event that is sought to be prevented in a tissue a system animal or human by a researcher veterinarian medical doctor or other clinician. Particularly the dosage a patient receives can be selected so as to achieve the amount of LDL cholesterol lowering desired the dosage a patient receives may also be titrated over time in order to reach a target LDL level. The dosage regimen utilizing a compound of the instant invention is selected in accordance with a variety of factors including type species age weight sex and medical condition of the patient the severity of the condition to be treated the potency of the compound chosen to be administered the route of administration and the renal and hepatic function of the patient. A consideration of these factors is well within the purview of the ordinarily skilled clinician for the purpose of determining the therapeutically effective or prophylactically effective dosage amount needed to prevent counter or arrest the progress of the condition.

The compounds of the instant invention are cholesterol absorption inhibitors and are useful for reducing plasma cholesterol levels particularly reducing plasma LDL cholesterol levels when used either alone or in combination with another active agent such as an anti atherosclerotic agent and more particularly a cholesterol biosynthesis inhibitor for example an HMG CoA reductase inhibitor. Thus the instant invention provides methods for inhibiting cholesterol absorption and for treating lipid disorders including hypercholesterolemia comprising administering a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of Formula I to a person in need of such treatment. Further provided are methods for preventing or reducing the risk of developing atherosclerosis as well as for halting or slowing the progression of atherosclerotic disease once it has become clinically evident comprising the administration of a prophylactically or therapeutically effective amount as appropriate of a compound of Formula I to a mammal who is at risk of developing atherosclerosis or who already has atherosclerotic disease.

Atherosclerosis encompasses vascular diseases and conditions that are recognized and understood by physicians practicing in the relevant fields of medicine. Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease including restenosis following revascularization procedures coronary heart disease also known as coronary artery disease or ischemic heart disease cerebrovascular disease including multi infarct dementia and peripheral vessel disease including erectile dysfunction are all clinical manifestations of atherosclerosis and are therefore encompassed by the terms atherosclerosis and atherosclerotic disease. 

A compound of Formula I may be administered to prevent or reduce the risk of occurrence or recurrence where the potential exists of a coronary heart disease event a cerebrovascular event and or intermittent claudication. Coronary heart disease events are intended to include CHD death myocardial infarction i.e. a heart attack and coronary revascularization procedures. Cerebrovascular events are intended to include ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke also known as cerebrovascular accidents and transient ischemic attacks. Intermittent claudication is a clinical manifestation of peripheral vessel disease. The term atherosclerotic disease event as used herein is intended to encompass coronary heart disease events cerebrovascular events and intermittent claudication. It is intended that persons who have previously experienced one or more non fatal atherosclerotic disease events are those for whom the potential for recurrence of such an event exists.

Accordingly the instant invention also provides a method for preventing or reducing the risk of a first or subsequent occurrence of an atherosclerotic disease event comprising the administration of a prophylactically effective amount of a compound of Formula I to a patient at risk for such an event. The patient may or may not have atherosclerotic disease at the time of administration or may be at risk for developing it.

Persons to be treated with the instant therapy include those at risk of developing atherosclerotic disease and of having an atherosclerotic disease event. Standard atherosclerotic disease risk factors are known to the average physician practicing in the relevant fields of medicine. Such known risk factors include but are not limited to hypertension smoking diabetes low levels of high density lipoprotein HDL cholesterol and a family history of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Published guidelines for determining those who are at risk of developing atherosclerotic disease can be found in Executive Summary of the Third Report of the National Cholesterol Education Program NCEP Expert Panel on Detection Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults Adult Treatment Panel E JAMA 2001 285 pp. 2486 2497. People who are identified as having one or more of the above noted risk factors are intended to be included in the group of people considered at risk for developing atherosclerotic disease. People identified as having one or more of the above noted risk factors as well as people who already have atherosclerosis are intended to be included within the group of people considered to be at risk for having an atherosclerotic disease event.

The oral dosage amount of the compound of Formula I is from about 0.1 to about 30 mg kg of body weight per day preferably about 0.1 to about 15 mg kg of body weight per day. For an average body weight of 70 kg the dosage level is therefore from about 5 mg to about 1000 mg of drug per day. However dosage amounts will vary depending on factors as noted above including the potency of the particular compound. Although the active drug of the present invention may be administered in divided doses for example from two to four times daily a single daily dose of the active drug is preferred. As examples the daily dosage amount may be selected from but not limited to 5 mg 10 mg 15 mg 20 mg 25 mg 40 mg 50 mg 75 mg 80 mg 100 mg and 200 mg.

The active drug employed in the instant therapy can be administered in such oral forms as tablets capsules pills powders granules elixirs tinctures suspensions syrups and emulsions. Oral formulations are preferred.

For compounds of Formula I administration of the active drug can be via any pharmaceutically acceptable route and in any pharmaceutically acceptable dosage form. This includes the use of oral conventional rapid release time controlled release and delayed release such enteric coated pharmaceutical dosage forms. Additional suitable pharmaceutical compositions for use with the present invention are known to those of ordinary skill in the pharmaceutical arts for example see Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences Mack Publishing Co. Easton Pa.

In the methods of the present invention the active drug is typically administered in admixture with suitable pharmaceutical diluents excipients or carriers collectively referred to herein as carrier materials suitably selected with respect to the intended form of administration that is oral tablets capsules elixirs syrups and the like and consistent with conventional pharmaceutical practices.

For instance for oral administration in the form of a tablet or capsule the active drug component can be combined with a non toxic pharmaceutically acceptable inert carrier such as lactose starch sucrose glucose modified sugars modified starches methyl cellulose and its derivatives dicalcium phosphate calcium sulfate mannitol sorbitol and other reducing and non reducing sugars magnesium stearate steric acid sodium stearyl fumarate glyceryl behenate calcium stearate and the like. For oral administration in liquid form the drug components can be combined with non toxic pharmaceutically acceptable inert carrier such as ethanol glycerol water and the like. Moreover when desired or necessary suitable binders lubricants disintegrating agents and coloring and flavoring agents can also be incorporated into the mixture. Stabilizing agents such as antioxidants for example butylated hydroxyanisole BHA 2 6 di tert butyl 4 methylphenol BHT propyl gallate sodium ascorbate citric acid calcium metabisulphite hydroquinone and 7 hydroxycoumarin particularly BHA propyl gallate and combinations thereof can also be added to stabilize the dosage forms. When a compound of Formula I is formulated together with an HMG CoA reductase inhibitor such as simvastatin the use of at least one stabilizing agent is preferred in the composition. Other suitable components include gelatin sweeteners natural and synthetic gums such as acacia tragacanth or alginates carboxymethylcellulose polyethylene glycol waxes and the like.

The active drug can also be administered in the form of liposome delivery systems such as small unilamellar vesicles large unilamellar vesicles and multilamellar vesicles. Liposomes can be formed from a variety of phospholipids such as cholesterol stearylamine or phosphatidylcholines.

Active drug may also be delivered by the use of monoclonal antibodies as individual carriers to which the compound molecules are coupled. Active drug may also be coupled with soluble polymers as targetable drug carriers. Such polymers can include polyvinyl pyrrolidone pyran copolymer polyhydroxy propyl methacrylamide phenol polyhydroxy ethyl aspartamide phenol or polyethyleneoxide polylysine substituted with palmitoyl residues. Furthermore active drug may be coupled to a class of biodegradable polymers useful in achieving controlled release of a drug for example polylactic acid polyglycolic acid copolymers of polylactic and polyglycolic acid polyepsilon caprolactone polyhydroxy butyric acid polyorthoesters polyacetals polydihydropyrans polycyanoacrylates and cross linked or amphipathic block copolymers of hydrogels.

The instant invention also encompasses a process for preparing a pharmaceutical composition comprising combining a compound of Formula I with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. Also encompassed is the pharmaceutical composition which is made by combining a compound of Formula I with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

One or more additional active agents may be administered in combination with a compound of Formula I and therefore an embodiment of the instant invention encompasses a drug combination. The drug combination encompasses a single dosage formulation comprised of the compound of Formula I and additional active agent or agents as well as administration of each of the compound of Formula I and the additional active agent or agents in separate dosage formulations which allows for concurrent or sequential administration of the active agents. The additional active agent or agents can be lipid modifying agents particularly a cholesterol biosynthesis inhibitor or agents having other pharmaceutical activities or agents that have both lipid modifying effects and other pharmaceutical activities. Examples of additional active agents which may be employed include but are not limited to HMG CoA reductase inhibitors which include statins in their lactonized or dihydroxy open acid forms and pharmaceutically acceptable salts and esters thereof including but not limited to lovastatin see U.S. Pat. No. 4 342 767 simvastatin see U.S. Pat. No. 4 444 784 dihydroxy open acid simvastatin particularly the ammonium or calcium salts thereof pravastatin particularly the sodium salt thereof see U.S. Pat. No. 4 346 227 fluvastatin particularly the sodium salt thereof see U.S. Pat. No. 5 354 772 atorvastatin particularly the calcium salt thereof see U.S. Pat. No. 5 273 995 pitavastatin also referred to as NK 104 see PCT international publication number WO 97 23200 and rosuvastatin CRESTOR see U.S. Pat. No. 5 260 440 and 1999 24 5 pp. 511 513 HMG CoA synthase inhibitors squalene epoxidase inhibitors squalene synthetase inhibitors also known as squalene synthase inhibitors acyl coenzyme A cholesterol acyltransferase ACAT inhibitors including selective inhibitors of ACAT 1 or ACAT 2 as well as dual inhibitors of ACAT 1 and 2 microsomal triglyceride transfer protein MTP inhibitors probucol niacin cholesterol absorption inhibitors such as SCH 58235 which is described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 767 115 and 5 846 966 bile acid sequestrants LDL low density lipoprotein receptor inducers platelet aggregation inhibitors for example glycoprotein IIb IIIa fibrinogen receptor antagonists and aspirin human peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma PPAR agonists including the compounds commonly referred to as glitazones for example troglitazone pioglitazone and rosiglitazone and including those compounds included within the structural class known as thiazolidinediones as well as those PPAR agonists outside the thiazolidinedione structural class PPAR agonists such as clofibrate fenofibrate including micronized fenofibrate and gemfibrozil PPAR dual agonists vitamin B also known as pyridoxine and the pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof such as the HCl salt vitamin B also known as cyanocobalamin folic acid or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt or ester thereof such as the sodium salt and the methylglucamine salt anti oxidant vitamins such as vitamin C and E and beta carotene beta blockers angiotensin II antagonists such as losartan angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors such as enalapril and captopril calcium channel blockers such as nifedipine and diltiazam endothelian antagonists agents that enhance ABC1 gene expression FXR ligands including both inhibitors and agonists and LXR ligands including both inhibitors and agonists of all subtypes of this receptor e.g. LXR and LXR bisphosphonate compounds such as alendronate sodium and cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitors such as rofecoxib and celecoxib. Additionally the compound of Formula Is of this invention for example compound I may be used in combination with anti retroviral therapy in ADDS infected patients to treat lipid abnormalities associated with such treatment for example but not limited to their use in combination with HIV protease inhibitors such as indinavir nelfinavir ritonavir and saquinavir.

A therapeutically or prophylactically effective amount as appropriate of a compound of Formula I can be used for the preparation of a medicament useful for inhibiting cholesterol absorption as well as for treating and or reducing the risk for diseases and conditions affected by inhibition of cholesterol absorption such as treating lipid disorders preventing or reducing the risk of developing atherosclerotic disease halting or slowing the progression of atherosclerotic disease once it has become clinically manifest and preventing or reducing the risk of a first or subsequent occurrence of an atherosclerotic disease event. For example the medicament may be comprised of about 5 mg to about 1000 mg of a compound of Formula I. The medicament comprised of a compound of Formula I may also be prepared with one or more additional active agents such as those described supra.

The compounds of this invention inhibit cholesterol absorption as exemplified by the following. Compound 7b shown in Example 7 was tested for inhibition of cholesterol absorption in mice and its activity was compared to that of ezetimibe. C57BL 6 male mice n 6 group aged 7 8 weeks were dosed orally with 0.1 ml 0.25 methyl cellulose solution with or without test compound ezetimibe or 7b 0.12 10 mg kg . Thirty minutes later all of the mice were dosed orally with 0.2 ml 0.25 methyl cellulose solution containing 1 cholesterol and 2 Ci H cholesterol per mouse. Three hours later the animals were euthanized and liver and blood were collected. Cholesterol counts in liver and plasma were determined and percent inhibition of cholesterol absorption was calculated. Both ezetimibe and 7b inhibited cholesterol absorption by 90 at the lowest dose tested.

Additionally 7b was tested for inhibition of cholesterol absorption in rats and its activity was compared to that of ezetimibe glucuronide. Rats were anesthetized with 100 mg kg Inactin i.p. The intestine was cannulated by passing an 18G Venocatheter through the fundus of the stomach and approximately 1 2 cm into the duodenum. The cannula was ligated in place at the pyloric valve. Rats were given either 1 ml of rat bile or test compound 7b or ezetimibe glucuronide 0.3 30 g kg in 1 ml rat bile. Vehicle or drug remaining in the cannula after delivery was rinsed into the intestine with 1 ml saline. Within 30 minutes of compound or vehicle delivery 3 ml of a solution containing 1 Ci C cholesterol in lipid emulsion was delivered to the intestine via the cannula. After 1.5 hours the rats were euthanized under anesthesia and blood and liver were collected. Cholesterol counts in liver and plasma were determined and percent inhibition of cholesterol absorption was calculated. The two test compounds exhibited similar potency for inhibition of cholesterol absorption in this model.

The compounds of structural Formula I of the present invention can be prepared according to the procedures of the following Scheme and Examples using appropriate materials and are further exemplified by specific examples which follow. Moreover by utilizing the procedures described herein one of ordinary skill in the art can readily prepare additional compounds of the present invention claimed herein. The compounds illustrated in the examples are not however to be construed as forming the only genus that is considered as the invention. The Examples further illustrate details for the preparation of the compounds of the present invention. Those skilled in the art will readily understand that known variations of the conditions and processes of the following preparative procedures can be used to prepare these compounds.

A variety of chromatographic techniques may be employed in the preparation of the compounds. These techniques include but are not limited to High Performance Liquid Chromatography including normal reversed and chiral phase Super Critical Fluid Chromatography preparative Thin Layer Chromatography flash chromatography with silica gel or reversed phase silica gel ion exchange chromatography and radial chromatography. All temperatures are degrees Celsius unless otherwise noted.

The general Scheme below illustrates a method for the syntheses of compounds of the present invention of structural formula I 4. All substituents are as defined above in Formula I unless indicated otherwise. In this method I 1 is treated with a terminal alkyne of type I 2 in the presence of a suitable palladium catalyst such as tetrakistriphenylphosphine palladium 0 or 1 1 bis diphenylphosphino ferrocene dichloropalladium II or the like and copper I iodide. The reaction is usually performed in an inert organic solvent such as DMF between room temperature and 100 C. for a period of 6 48 h and the product is an internal alkyne of structural formula I 3. Alkyne I 2 may contain a radioactive atom such as S to provide the corresponding radiolabeled adduct upon reaction with I 1. Conversion of I 3 to I 4 can be achieved using a variety of hydrolytic methods known to those skilled in the art of organic synthesis. For example a particularly mild hydrolysis protocol involves the treatment of I 3 with a tertiary amine base such as triethylamine or diisopropylethylamine or the like in a mixed solvent system comprising methanol and water. The product of the reaction is a compound of structural formula I 4.

The following examples are provided to illustrate the invention and are not to be construed as limiting the scope of the invention in any matter. The following designations are used in the Examples for certain repetitively used intermediates 

The compounds 3R 4S 3 3S 3 4 fluorophenyl 3 hydroxypropyl 4 4 hydroxyphenyl 1 4 iodophenyl azetidin 2 one i 6 and 4 2S 3R 3 3S 3 4 fluorophenyl 3 hydroxypropyl 1 4 iodophenyl 4 oxoazetidin 2 yl phenyl methyl D glucopyranosiduronate i 7 were prepared according to Burnett D. S. Caplen M. A. Domalski M. S. Browne M. E. Davis H. R. Jr. Clader J. W. 2002 12 311. Compound i 8 is the hydroxy protected analog of i 7 where the protecting group is acyl. Similarly compound i 9 is the hydroxyl protected analog of i 6 where the protecting group is acyl.

Acetyl chloride 0.52 mL 7.3 mmol was added to a stirred solution of propargylamine 0.5 mL 7.3 mmol and dimethylaminopyridine 18 mg 0.14 mmol in pyridine 2.5 mL at 0 C. and the resulting mixture was allowed to warm to ambient temperature. After approximately 15 h the reaction mixture was diluted with ethyl acetate and washed successively with 1N HCl and brine. The organic phase was dried NaSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford the title compound i 1 which was used without further purification.

Benzene sulfonyl chloride 1.16 mL 9.1 mmol was added to stirred solution of propargylamine 0.62 mL 9.1 mmol and dimethylaminopyridine 22 mg 0.18 mmol in pyridine 5 mL at room temperature. The resulting solution was aged at ambient temperature for approximately 15 h. The reaction mixture was diluted with ethyl acetate and washed successively with 1N HCl and brine. The organic phase was dried NaSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo to furnish the title compound i 2 which was used without further purification.

Dimethyl carbamylchloride 0.84 mL 9.1 mmol was added to a stirred solution of propargylamine 0.62 mL 9.1 mmol and dimethylaminopyridine 22 mg 0.18 mmol in pyridine 5 mL at room temperature. The resulting suspension was stirred at ambient temperature for approximately 15 h. The reaction mixture was diluted with ethyl acetate and washed successively with 1N HCl and brine. The organic phase was dried NaSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford the title compound i 3 which was used without further purification.

Methansulfonylchloride 1.12 mL 14.5 mmol was added to a stirred solution of N methylpropargylamine 1.22 mL 14.5 mmol and dimethylaminopyridine 35 mg 0.30 mmol in pyridine 10 mL at room temperature. After aging for approximately 15 h the reaction mixture was poured into ethyl acetate and washed successively with 1N HCl and brine. The organic phase was dried NaSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford the title compound i 4 which was used without further purification.

Methansulfonylchloride 1.40 mL 18.1 mmol was added dropwise to a stirred solution of propargylamine 1.00 g 18.1 mmol and dimethylaminopyridine 44.0 mg 0.36 mmol in pyridine 10 mL at 0 C. After aging for approximately 15 h the reaction mixture was poured into 1N HCl and extracted twice with ethyl acetate. The combined organic extracts were washed with saturated aqueous sodium bicarbonate brine dried MgSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford the title compound i 5. Crude i 5 crystallized on standing and was used without further purification.

Triethylamine 7 equivalents is added to a solution of 3R 4S 3 3S 3 4 fluorophenyl 3 hydroxypropyl 4 4 hydroxyphenyl 1 4 iodophenyl azetidin 2 one i 6 1.00 equivalent N prop 2 yn 1 ylmethanesulfonamide i 5 1.50 equivalents tetrakistriphenylphosphine palladium 0 0.15 equivalents and copper I iodide 0.30 equivalents in DMF 0.1 M concentration with respect to final product under a nitrogen atmosphere and the resulting solution aged at room temperature. After completion of reaction the volatiles are evaporated in vacuo and the crude residue can be purified by flash chromatography on silica gel to afford the title compound.

To a solution of 0.5 g. 0.894 mmol 1 equiv. 3R 4S 3 3S 3 4 fluorophenyl 3 hydroxypropyl 4 4 hydroxyphenyl 1 4 iodophenyl azetidin 2 one i 6 in 5 mL anhydrous methylene chloride under inert atmosphere at 0 C. was added 0.36 mL 1.564 mmol 1.75 equiv. tert butyldimethylsilyl trifluoromethanesulfonate 0.175 mL 0.894 mmol 1 equiv. N tert butyldimethylsilylimidazole and 0.311 mL 2.234 mmol 2.5 equivalents triethylamine. The resulting reaction mixture was stirred at 0 C. for 15 minutes then quenched by the addition of 5 mL of sat. aq. solution of sodium carbonate. The resulting mixture was transferred to a separatory funnel extracted with methylene chloride 3 5 mL . The combined organic extracts were dried over anhydrous NaSOfiltered and the solvent removed under vacuum. The residue was purified by prep. Tlc eluting with EtOAc hexanes 2 1 to afford the title compound. m z ES 696.0 M Na 614.0 M OAc .

A solution of 0.5 g 0.742 mmol 1 equiv 1S 3 2S 3R 2 4 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxyphenyl 1 4 iodophenyl 4 oxoazetidin 3 yl 1 4 fluorophenyl propyl acetate intermediate of step A 0.198 g 1.48 mmol 2 equiv. N prop 2 yn 1 ylmethanesulfonamide i 5 0.086 g 0.074 mmol 0.1 equiv. tetrakistriphenylphosphine palladium 0 and 7 mg 0.04 mmol 0.05 equiv copper I iodide in 8 mL methylene chloride was deoxygenated by a slow stream of anhydrous nitrogen delivered by a needle through a rubber septum. To the resulting solution was added by syringe 1 mL 7.42 mmol 10 equiv. triethylamine. The resulting solution was stirred at room temperature for 4.5 hr at which time the mixture was partitioned 5 mL of a 5 aq. solution of citric acid. The mixture was transferred to a spearatory funnel and extracted with EtOAc 3 5 mL and methylene chloride 2 5 mL The combined organic extracts were dried over anhydrous NaSOfiltered and the solvent removed under vacuum. The residue was purified by prep. Tlc eluting with EtOAc hexanes 4 1 followed by further purification by prep. Tlc eluting with EtOAc hexanes 1 1 to afford the title compound. m z ES 619.0 M HOAc .

To a solution of 40 mg 0.059 mmol 1S 3 2S 3R 2 4 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxyphenyl 1 4 3 methylsulfonyl amino prop 1 yn 1 ylphenyl 4 oxoazetidin 3 yl 1 4 fluorophenyl propyl acetate intermediate of step B in 1 mL anhydrous methanol under nitrogen atmosphere was added 1 mg of sodium cyanide. The reaction mixture was heated at 50 C. for 4 hrs at which time the volatiles were removed by a nitrogen stream. The residue was purified by prep. Tlc eluting with EtOAc hexanes 3 1 to afford the title compound. m z ES 637.2 MH 619.1 M HO .

To a solution of 10 mg of N 3 4 2S 3R 2 4 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxyphenyl 3 3S 3 4 fluorophenyl 3 hydroxypropyl 4 oxoazetidin 1 ylphenyl prop 2 yn 1 yl methanesulfonamide in 0.5 mL THF was added 0.5 mL of 2N aq. HCl. The resulting mixture was stirred at room temperature for 1 hr at which time the volatiles were removed under vacuum. The residue was purified by prep. Tlc eluting with CHCl MeOH 9 1 followed by further purification by prep. Tlc eluting with CHCl MeOH 95 5 afforded the title compound. m z ES 544.9 M Na 523 MH 505 M HO .

Triethylamine 0.07 mL 0.502 mmol was added to a stirred solution of 4 2S 3R 3 3S 3 4 fluorophenyl 3 hydroxypropyl 1 4 iodophenyl 4 oxoazetidin 2 yl phenyl methyl D glucopyranosiduronate i 7 0.050 g 0.071 mmol N prop 2 yn 1 ylmethanesulfonamide i 5 0.014 g 0.105 mmol tetrakistriphenylphosphine palladium 0 0.012 g 0.010 mmol and copper iodide 0.005 g 0.026 mmol in DMF 0.5 mL under a nitrogen atmosphere and the resulting solution aged at room temperature for 18 h. The volatiles were evaporated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by flash chromatography on silica gel gradient elution 0 25 methanol methylene chloride as eluent to afford the title compound m z ES 713 MH 505.

A solution of compound 7a in methanol water triethylamine 1 7 2 1 mL was stirred at room temperature for approximately 1.5 h. The volatiles were evaporated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by preparative reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography on YMC Pack Pro C18 phase gradient elution 10 65 acetonitrile water as eluent 0.1 TFA modifier to give the title compound 7b m z ES 699 MH 505 KRMS ES m z calcd for CHFNOS MH 699.2024 found 699.2016.

The following compounds of Formula Ia have been prepared as indicated by MS data provided or can be prepared using the general synthetic procedures described in Example 6 shown in Table 1 or Example 7 shown in Table 2 .

Triethylamine 69.0 L 0.495 mmol was added to a stirred solution of i 7 50.0 mg 0.071 mmol trimethylsilyacetylene 12.0 L 0.085 mmol tetrakistriphenylphosphine palladium 0 13.0 mg 0.011 mmol and copper iodide 5.10 mg 0.028 mmol in DMF 0.5 mL under a nitrogen atmosphere and the resulting solution aged at room temperature for 18 h. The volatiles were evaporated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by flash chromatography on silica gel gradient elution 0 25 methanol methylene chloride as eluent to afford the title compound 8a m z ES 660 M OH 470.

A solution of 8a in methanol water triethylamine 0.25 mL 1.10 mL 0.40 mL was stirred at room temperature for approximately 6 h. The volatiles were evaporated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by preparative reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography on YMC Pack Pro C18 phase gradient elution 10 65 acetonitrile water as eluent 0.1 TFA modifier to give the title compound fb m z ES 574 M OH 398 HRMS ES m z calc d for CHFNO MH 592.1983 found 592.1985.

A mixture of 7a 40.0 mg 0.056 mmol and palladium 8 mg of 10 wt. dry basis on activated carbon in methanol 2 mL was hydrogenated at atmospheric pressure for approximately 1 h. The reaction mixture was filtered through a short plug of celite eluting copiously with methanol and the filtrate evaporated in vacuo to afford the title compound 9a m z ES 509 M sugar OH . HRMS ES m z calcd. for CHFNO MH 703.2337 found 703.2337.

A solution of 9a in methanol water triethylamine 1 7 2 1 mL was stirred at room temperature for approximately 1 h. The volatiles were evaporated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by preparative reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography on YMC Pack Pro C18 phase gradient elution 10 65 acetonitrile water as eluent 0.1 TFA modifier to give the title compound 2b m z ES 735 M Na 685 M OH 509 M sugar OH HRMS ES m z calc d for CHFNOS MH 703.2337 found 703.2337.

Triethylamine 170 L 1.25 mmol was added to a solution of i 8 156 mg 0.178 mmol tert butyldimethyl 2 propynyloxy silane 43.0 L 0.214 mmol dichlorobistriphenylphosphine palladium II 12.0 mg 0.018 mmol and copper iodide 7.00 mg 0.036 mmol in DMF 1.3 mL under a nitrogen atmosphere and the resulting solution aged at room temperature for approximately 20 h. The reaction mixture was poured into saturated aqueous sodium bicarbonate and extracted twice with diethyl ether. The combined organic extracts were washed with water brine dried MgSO filtered and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. Purification of the crude residue by flash chromatography on silica gel gradient elution 15 40 ethyl acetate hexanes as eluent afforded the title compound 10a.

Tetrabutylammonium fluoride hydrate 39.0 mg 0.148 mmol was added to 10a 136 mg 0.148 mmol in tetrahydrofuran 1.5 mL and the resulting solution aged at room temperature for 1 h. The reaction mixture was poured into saturated aqueous ammonium chloride and extracted twice with ether. The combined organic extracts were washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate brine dried MgSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo. Purification of the crude residue by flash chromatography on silica gel 50 ethyl acetatelhexanes afforded the title compound 10b.

Dess Martin periodinane 33.0 mg 0.077 mmol was added to a solution of 10b 62.0 mg 0.077 mmol and pyridine 31.0 L 0.386 mmol in dichloromethane 1 mL at room temperature. After 30 min the reaction mixture was poured into saturated aqueous sodium bicarbonate and extracted twice with ethyl acetate. The combined organic extracts were washed with water brine dried MgSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo. Purification of the crude residue by flash chromatography on silica gel gradient elution 20 40 ethyl acetate hexanes afforded the title compound 10c.

An aqueous solution 0.1 mL of sodium dihydrogenphosphate 9.00 mg 0.065 mmol and sodium chlorite 5.00 mg 0.055 mmol was added to a solution of 10c 37.0 mg 0.046 mmol in tert butyl alchohol 0.4 mL dioxane 0.2 mL and isobutylene 0.1 mL at room temperature. After 1.5 h the reaction mixture was concentrated in vacuo and the crude residue triturated repeatedly with ethyl acetate. The organic washings were dried NaSO filtered and concentrated in vacuo to afford the title compound 10d.

A solution of 4 2S 3R 3 3S 3 acetyloxy 3 4 fluorophenyl propyl 1 4 carboxyethynyl phenyl 4 oxoazetidin 2 ylphenyl methyl 2 3 4 tri O acetyl D glucopyranosiduronate 10d and sodium cyanide 1 mg 0.020 mmol in methanol 3 mL was heated to 45 C. After 22 h the reaction mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure and dissolved in methanol water triethylamine 1 7 2 1 mL . After stirring at room temperature for approximately 1 h the volatiles were evaporated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by preparative reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography on YMC Pack Pro C18 phase gradient elution 10 60 acetonitrile water as eluent 0.1 TFA modifier to give the title compound 10e m z ES 442.0 M sugar OH 618.0 M OH HRMS ES m z calcd. for CHFNO MH 636.1881 found 636.1889

A 1M solution of ethylamine hydrochloride and diisopropylethylamine in DMF 40.0 L 0.40 mmol was added to 4 2S 3R 3 3S 3 acetyloxy 3 4 fluorophenyl propyl 1 4 carboxyethynyl phenyl 4 oxoazetidin 2 ylphenyl methyl 2 3 4 tri O acetyl D glucopyranosiduronate 10d 27.0 mg 0.033 mmol 1 3 dimethylamino propyl 3 ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride 19.0 mg 0.099 mmol and 1 hydroxybenzotriazole 8.00 mg 0.059 mmol in DMF 0.25 mL . After 4.5 h the reaction mixture was poured into ethyl acetate and washed successively with water and brine. The organic layer was dried filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. Purification of the crude residue by flash chromatography on silica gel gradient elution 50 60 ethyl acetate hexanes afforded the title compound 11a.

A solution of 4 2S 3R 3 3S 3 acetyloxy 3 4 fluorophenyl propyl 1 4 3 ethylamino 3 oxoprop 1 yn 1 yl phenyl 4 oxoazetidin 2 yl phenyl methyl 2 3 4 tri O acetyl D glucopyranosiduronate 11a 22.0 mg 0.026 mmol and sodium cyanide 1 mg 0.020 mmol in methanol 3 mL was heated to 45 C. After 18 h the reaction mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure and dissolved in methanol water triethylamine 1 3 1 2.5 mL . After stirring at room temperature for approximately 1 h the volatiles were evaporated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by preparative reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography on YMC Pack Pro C18 phase gradient elution 10 60 acetonitrile water as eluent 0.1 TFA modifier to give the title compound 11b m z ES 663.0 M H HRMS ES m z calcd. for CHFNO MH 663.2354 found 663.2341.

The appropriate volume of S methane sulfonyl chloride see Dean D. C. et al. 1996 39 1767 totaling 3.5 mCi was removed from a stock solution in methylene chloride and placed in a 5 mL conical flask. It was then distilled at atmospheric pressure until the volume was approximately 50 L. To this solution was immediately added 50 L of propargylamine. After 15 min the reaction mixture was diluted with 10 mL of ethyl acetate washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate solution 3 2 mL and dried over sodium sulfate. After filtration the resulting solution had a count of 3.3 mCi and a radiochemical purity of 99.9 by HPLC Zorbax XDB C8 column 4.6 150 mm 5 acetonitrile HO 0.1 TFA to 100 acetonitrile 15 min linear gradient 1 mL min t 4.4 min .

Dissolved 3.0 mCi of S N prop 2 yn 1 ylmethanesulfonamide 1 mg of compound i 7 and 1 L of triethylamine in 100 L of dimethylformamide inside a plastic microcentrifuge tube. To this solution was added 10 L of a stock solution containing 8.1 mg of tetrakis triphenylphosphine palladium 0 and 1.4 mg of copper iodide in 1 mL of dimethylformamide. Stirred at room temperature for sixty hours at which time HPLC indicated 55 conversion. This reaction mixture which had a radiochemical purity of 44.4 by HPLC Zorbax XDB C8 column 4.6 150 mm 5 acetonitrile HO 0.1 TFA to 100 acetonitrile 15 min linear gradient 1 mL min t 9.3 min was taken on directly to the next step.

The crude reaction mixture containing compound S 7b was treated with 25 L of methanol 90 L of water and 30 L of triethylamine and stirred at room temperature for one hour at which time it was concentrated to near dryness under a slow stream of nitrogen. The residue was dissolved in 1 1 acetonitrile HO and subjected to semi preparative chromatography Zorbax XDB C8 250 9.4 mm column 70 30 acetonitrile HO 0.1 TFA 4 mL min 1 0.2 mL injections . 540 Ci of product was obtained which had a radiochemical purity of 99.9 by HPLC Zorbax XDB C8 column 4.6 150 mm 70 30 acetonitrile HO 0.1 TFA 1 mL min t 10.4 min and coeluted with an authentic sample of compound 7b. LC MS m z 508 product glucuronide HO SA 769 Ci mmol.

The appropriate volume of S methane sulfonyl chloride see Dean D. C. et al. 1996 39 1767 totaling 1.3 mCi was removed from a stock solution in methylene chloride and placed in a 5 mL conical flask. It was then distilled at atmospheric pressure until the volume was approximately 50 L. To this solution was immediately added a solution of 1 mg of 13a in 5 L of pyridine freshly distilled over calcium hydride .

The crude reaction mixture containing S 7a was treated with 25 L of methanol 90 L of water and 30 L of triethylamine and stirred at room temperature for one hour at which time it was concentrated to near dryness under a slow stream of nitrogen. The residue was dissolved in 1 1 acetonitrile HO and subjected to semi preparative chromatography Zorbax XDB C8 250 9.4 mm column 70 30 acetonitrile HO 0.1 TFA 4 mL min 1 0.2 mL injections . 350 Ci of product was obtained which had a radiochemical purity of 98.4 by HPLC Zorbax XDB C8 column 4.6 150 mm 70 30 acetonitrile HO 0.1 TFA 1 mL min t 10.4 min and coeluted with an authentic sample of 7b. LC MS m z 508 product glucuronide HO SA 911 Ci mmol.

To a solution of 15 mg 0.022 mmol 1S 3 2S 3R 2 4 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxyphenyl 1 4 iodophenyl 4 oxoazetidin 3 yl 1 4 fluorophenyl propyl acetate Alternate Example 6 step A in 1 mL anhydrous methanol under nitrogen atmosphere was added 2 mg of sodium cyanide. The reaction mixture was heated at 50 C. for 1.25 hr at which time the volatiles were removed by a nitrogen stream. The residue was purified by prep. Tlc eluting with EtOAc hexanes 1 3 to afford the title compound. m z ES 632.3 MH 614.3 MH HO .

To a solution of 8 mg 0.013 mmol 1 equiv. 3R 4S 4 4 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxyphenyl 3 3S 3 4 fluorophenyl 3 hydroxypropyl 1 4 iodophenyl azetidin 2 one intermediate step A in 0.5 mL DMF was added 2.2 mg 0.002 mmol 0.15 equiv. tetrakistriphenylphosphine palladium 0 and 0.8 mg 0.004 mmol 0.3 equiv copper I iodide. The solution was deoxygenated by a slow stream of anhydrous nitrogen delivered by a needle through a rubber septum. To the resulting solution was added by syringe 0.012 mL 0.177 mmol 14 equiv. propargyl amine and 0.012 mL 0.09 mmol 7 equiv. triethylamine. The resulting solution was stirred at room temperature for 1.25 hr at which time the solvent was removed under vacuum. The residue was purified by prep. Tlc eluting with CHCl MeOH 9 1 to afford the title compound. m z ES 559.3 MH 542.3 MH NH .

To a solution of 8 mg 0.014 mmol 1 equiv 3R 4S 1 4 3 aminoprop 1 yn 1 yl phenyl 4 4 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxyphenyl 3 3S 3 4 fluorophenyl 3 hydroxypropyl azetidin 2 one intermediate step B in 1 mL anhydrous methylene chloride under inert atmosphere at room temperature was added 0.007 mL 0.057 mmol 4 equivalents 2 6 lutidine followed by 0.01 mL 0.043 mmol 3 equiv. tert butyldimethylsilyl trifluoromethanesulfonate. The resulting reaction mixture was stirred for 15 minutes then quenched by the addition of 0.5 mL of sat. aq. solution of sodium bicarbonate. The resulting mixture was transferred to a separatory funnel extracted with methylene chloride 2 5 mL . The combined organic extracts were dried over anhydrous NaSOfiltered and the solvent removed under vacuum. The residue was purified by prep. Tlc eluting with CHCl MeOH 95 5 to afford the title compound. m z ES 674.4 M H 656.4 MH NH 541.4 MH OTBS .

The appropriate volume of S methane sulfonyl chloride see Dean D. C. et al. 1996 39 1767 totaling 145 mCi was removed from a stock solution in methylene chloride and placed in a 5 mL conical flask. It was then distilled at atmospheric pressure until the volume was approximately 25 L. To this solution was immediately added a solution of 10 mg of 3R 4S 1 4 3 aminoprop 1 yn 1 yl phenyl 3 3S 3 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxy 3 4 fluorophenyl propyl 4 4 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxyphenyl azetidin 2 one intermediate step C and 5 L of triethylamine in 25 L of methylene chloride. Stirred at room temperature for 30 minutes at which time it was concentrated to near dryness under a slow stream of nitrogen. This reaction mixture which had a radiochemical purity of 41.4 by HPLC Zorbax XDB C8 column 4.6 150 mm 50 acetonitrile in HO 0.1 TFA to 100 acetonitrile in 10 min hold 100 acetonitrile for 5 min 1 mL min t 12.9 min was taken on directly to the next step.

The crude reaction mixture containing S propargylamine sulfonamide N 4 2S 3R 2 4 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxyphenyl 3 3S 3 tert butyl dimethyl silyl oxy 3 phenylpropyl 4 oxoazetidin 1 yl phenylethynyl methanesulfonamide intermediate of step D was treated with 100 L of a premixed solution containing 95 L of acetonitrile and 5 L of 48 aq. HF and stirred at room temperature for six hours. It was then concentrated to near dryness under a slow stream of nitrogen diluted with 10 mL of HO passed through a 200 mg C8 solid phase extraction cartridge and eluted with methanol. The methanol solution was concentrated under a slow stream of nitrogen and subjected to semi preparative chromatography Zorbax XDB C8 column 9.4 250 mm 25 acetonitrile in HO 0.1 TFA to 45 acetonitrile in 30 min 4 ml min 1 0.5 mL injection . 23.6 mCi of product was obtained which had a radiochemical purity of 99.6 by HPLC Zorbax XDB C8 column 4.6 150 mm 5 acetonitrile in HO 0.1 TFA to 100 acetonitrile in 15 min hold 100 acetonitrile for 5 min 1 mL min t 10.4 min .

In a 12 mL scintillation vial was added 200 L of 0.5 M Bis Tris Buffer pH 7.5 200 L of 0.1 M MgCl 1.5 mL of HO and 50 L of dog liver microsomes. The mixture was agitated gently. To this mixture was added 8 L of a 25 mg mL solution of alamethicin in 1 1 acetonitrile HO 200 L of 20 mM UDPGA 200 L of 0.1 M saccharic acid lactone and 4 mCi of S N 4 2S 3R 2 4 hydroxyphenyl 3 3S 3 phenylpropyl 4 oxoazetidin 1 ylphenyl ethynyl methanesulfonamide in 50 L of acetonitrile. The mixture was incubated at 37 C. for 2.5 hrs with shaking. It was then cooled to 0 C. and quenched with the addition of 3 mL of 1 formic acid in acetonitrile. This resulting slurry was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 min. The supernate was removed from the protein pellet with a pipet. An additional 4 mL of acetonitrile was added to the pellet and the centrifugation was repeated. Both supernates were combined diluted to a total volume of 40 mL with HO passed through a 1 g STRATA X solid phase extraction cartridge and eluted with methanol. The methanol solution was concentrated under a slow stream of nitrogen and subjected to semi preparative chromatography ZORBAX XDB C8 250 9.4 mm column 30 acetonitrile in HO 0.1 TFA 4 mL min 1 200 L injection . 1.4 mCi of product was obtained which had a radiochemical purity of 98.5 by HPLC ZORBAX XDB C8 column 4.6 150 mm 30 acetonitrile in HO 0.1 TFA 1 mL min t 10.4 min and coeluted with an authentic sample of 7b. LC MS m z 508 product glucuronide HO SA 699 Ci mmol.

While the invention has been described and illustrated with reference to certain particular embodiments thereof those skilled in the art will appreciate that various changes modifications and substitutions can be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. For example effective dosages other than the particular dosages as set forth herein above may be applicable as a consequence of variations in the responsiveness of the mammal being treated for any of the indications for the active agents used in the instant invention as indicated above. Likewise the specific pharmacological responses observed may vary according to and depending upon the particular active compound selected or whether there are present pharmaceutical carriers as well as the type of formulation employed and such expected variations or differences in the results are contemplated in accordance with the objects and practices of the present invention. It is intended therefore that the invention be defined by the scope of the claims which follow and that such claims be interpreted as broadly as is reasonable.

