---

title: Communication system with configurable shared line privacy feature
abstract: A PBX system with a shared line connected to a plurality of telephone devices includes one or more processors that control a connection for an incoming call from a caller, the one or more processors being operable to access a listing that includes one or more callers or calling numbers designated as private to a first telephone device. The one or more processors being further operable to send an alert to only the first telephone device in the event that the one or more callers or the calling numbers in the listing includes a caller or calling number associated with the incoming call. It is emphasized that this abstract is provided to comply with the rules requiring an abstract that will allow a searcher or other reader to quickly ascertain the subject matter of the technical disclosure. It is submitted with the understanding that it will not be used to interpret or limit the scope or meaning of the claims.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08243895&OS=08243895&RS=08243895
owner: Cisco Technology, Inc.
number: 08243895
owner_city: Islandia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051213
---
The present invention relates generally to the fields of data networks and communication systems more specifically to a communication networks that support shared lines.

Small businesses home offices and enterprises interested in reducing overhead costs use shared telephone lines. Many business enterprises use shared communication e.g. telephone lines in their private branch exchange PBX system to allow more than one person to answer a call and to achieve cost savings. In a shared telephone line system an incoming call to a single telephone number or extension is directed to a plurality of telephone devices with each device usually being associated with a different person or work environment. In many cases a receptionist or Interactive Voice Response IVR unit answers the calls and then directs each call to an extension or line that is shared by multiple persons. For example a manager may share a line with his assistant or secretary such that an incoming call to the number or extension rings on both of their telephones. In other cases a user may apply a shared line to multiple phones intended to reach that individual such as where an incoming call simultaneously rings to a person s desk phone and their laboratory phone.

Numerous systems and methods exist for handling telephone calls in a shared line environment. For example U.S. Pat. No. 6 870 835 teaches a method of handling incoming calls directed to a virtual communication subscriber who is connected to a communication network via a shared line system. U.S. Pat. No. 5 432 844 teaches an automated telephone line sharing and lockout apparatus that allows only one telephone set or other communication apparatus to be connected to a shared line. A shared telephone line answering system in which extension telephone answering devices can be temporarily disarmed so they do not respond to tone codes that might otherwise activate them is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 805 210.

A number of commercial communication system products are available that combine call processing and IP telephony with many of the functions of a conventional IP PBX system for business enterprises. For instance Cisco s CallManager is a software based call processing component that extends enterprise telephony features and functions to packet telephony network devices such as IP phones media processing devices voice over IP VoIP gateways and multimedia applications. Additional data voice and video services such as unified messaging multimedia conferencing collaborative contact centers and interactive multimedia response systems may interact with the IP telephony solution through the CallManager open telephony application programming interface API .

In an existing version of the CallManager call processing software when an incoming call is received at a telephone device e.g. IP phone the user can make the call private by pressing a Privacy softkey or button on their telephone device. When the Privacy button is pressed i.e. in an on state call information such as the calling number the name of caller etc. that is normally displayed is suppressed for all of the devices on the shared line other than the device answering the call. That is call information is no longer displayed on the other telephone devices connected to the shared line. Instead after the call has been answered and the Privacy button pressed the other devices on the shared line typically display the words In Use or Private . In addition pressing the Privacy button prevents others from listening to the call by cutting off the media stream to all of the other devices on the shared line.

One problem with the Privacy button feature on existing call processing systems is that privacy is provided only after the call has been answered. This means that while the call is ringing the call information is revealed on all of the devices connected to the shared line. In other words until the time that the call is answered persons who may be viewing any telephone device on the shared line can see the call information. Even after the call has been answered until the Privacy button is pressed others may join in the call simply by picking up one of the shared line telephone devices.

What is needed therefore is a call processing system that overcomes the drawbacks of the prior art and which provides enhanced call privacy for both the caller and the called party in a shared line communication system

A system and method that enhances a PBX system with enriched shared line and privacy features is described. In the following description specific details are set forth such as device types system configurations methods etc. in order to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. However persons having ordinary skill in the relevant arts will appreciate that these specific details may not be needed to practice the present invention.

According to one embodiment of the present invention a privacy mechanism is provided that allows a shared communication line user to dynamically configure a list of contacts i.e. callers or calling numbers and mark or designate them as private. Each shared line of the PBX system is proactively configured in this manner such that when a call arrives from a caller or number that is listed as private for a certain user the call rings at the telephone device associated with the intended recipient and not at any of the other telephone devices on the shared line. Moreover call information of the incoming private call is not displayed on the other telephone devices connected to the shared line. In other words if a contact is marked private and tied to a particular shared line then incoming calls received from the contact will only alert e.g. ring and display call information the shared line telephone device associated with a user who has listed the contact as private under his personal configuration settings.

By way of example in a manager secretary scenario where both share the same telephone line the manager may want to maintain privacy from the manager for certain calls from certain contact individuals. The same could be true for the secretary who might desire to keep calls from her friends spouse relatives etc. private and personal so as to avoid disturbing the manager. In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention the manager and secretary can each configure their own personal privacy policies or preferences such that the PBX system only alerts one person s telephone when an incoming call arrives from a person or number in included in that person s privacy list.

In accordance with the example shown in the configuration listing of each individual on the shared line consists of a set of calling numbers or names that are associated with a specific device connected to the shared line. When a call arrives from a number that is included in a person s list it is treated as a private call for the specific device such that no information is shared including ringing or other alerts with the other devices on the shared line.

Practitioners will appreciate that the configuration module of may be programmed to preclude the possibility of multiple devices or persons on a shared line listing the same contact or caller in their privacy settings. For example if a user associated with telephone device attempts to list caller as private in their personal configuration settings and caller is already listed as private in association with telephone device the system may respond with an error message. Alternatively the system may respond by reporting that caller is already listed as being private with respect to another device on the shared line.

In another embodiment certain configuration settings associated with a particular device on a shared line may allow for shared calls to be passed through to a subset of devices connected to the shared line. For example a shared line may be connected with an arbitrary number e.g. seven of separate telephone devices with a predefined configuration setting allowing a subset e.g. three of the devices to be alerted to a call from a particular caller.

By way of specific example shown in if Thomas and Alice share a telephone line an incoming call to the shared line may result in a text message being displayed on a screen of the caller s telephone device notifying the caller that the call will alert both Thomas and Alice unless the caller elects to make the call private to one of the individuals. The notification and selection process may also be implemented via an IVR script audibly played on handset wherein the caller may choose to make the call private to either Thomas or Alice by voice response or by appropriate input response entered on keypad or softkeys . In the case where the caller is presented with the privacy choice via a text message on the display screen of their telephone device the caller may elect to make the call private for either Thomas or Alice by pressing one of the respective softkeys A or B see .

Continuing with the exemplary flowchart of in the event that the caller chooses to make the call private to a particular person or telephone device only the device associated with the chosen or designated person is alerted block . On the other hand if the caller does not elect to make the call private or if the caller fails to make a selection within a predetermined time period the call rings to all of the telephone devices on the shared line block .

In still another embodiment caller control of the privacy policy may be included as a default or backup case in the event that no configuration listings or settings exist with respect to the caller or calling number. For instance if a call arrives and the configuration module contains no listing of the caller or calling number then the caller may be queried as described above before ringing any of the devices on the shared line. On the other hand if the caller is included in a privacy listing of the configuration module then caller control or assertion of privacy policies is overridden by the existing configuration policies of the shared line users. To state it differently a query message is sent back to the caller only in the event that the caller or calling number does not match any listing contained in the configuration module of the PBX system.

In one implementation IVR unit may comprise a telephony script or a navigation menu module that may prompt a caller to choose one of a group of individuals sharing a telephone line associated with the called number. IVR unit is typically embodied in one or more software or firmware modules with code that executes on one or more processors of subsystem . In other embodiments IVR unit may include dedicated processors that perform various tasks such as speech processing verification and recognition. It is appreciated that PBX system may also include a variety of other devices e.g. controllers EEPROMs specialized processors etc. not shown in .

It should be further understood that elements of the present invention may also be provided as a computer program product which may include a machine readable medium having stored thereon instructions which may be used to program a computer e.g. a processor or other electronic device to perform a sequence of operations. Alternatively the operations may be performed by a combination of hardware and software. The machine readable medium may include but is not limited to floppy diskettes optical disks CD ROMs and magneto optical disks ROMs RAMs EPROMs EEPROMs magnet or optical cards or other type of machine readable medium suitable for storing electronic instructions.

Additionally although the present invention has been described in conjunction with specific embodiments numerous modifications and alterations are well within the scope of the present invention. Accordingly the specification and drawings are to be regarded in an illustrative rather than a restrictive sense.

