---

title: System and method for treating cardiac arrest and myocardial infarction
abstract: A closed loop heat exchange catheter can be placed in a patient suffering from cardiac arrest or myocardial infarction to cool the patient. Or, a heat exchange pad can be placed against the patient's skin to cool the patient. Magnesium sulfate is infused into the patient.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07425216&OS=07425216&RS=07425216
owner: Alsius Corporation
number: 07425216
owner_city: Irvine
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050301
---
The present invention relates generally to systems for treating cardiac arrest and myocardial infarction.

Intravascular catheters have been introduced for controlling patient temperature. Typically a coolant such as saline is circulated through an intravascular heat exchange catheter which is positioned in the patient s bloodstream to cool or heat the blood as appropriate for the patient s condition. The coolant is warmed or cooled by a computer controlled heat exchanger that is external to the patient and that is in fluid communication with the catheter.

For example intravascular heat exchange catheters can be used to combat potentially harmful fever in patients suffering from neurological and cardiac conditions such as stroke subarachnoid hemorrhage intracerebral hemorrhage cardiac arrest and acute myocardial infarction or to induce therapeutic hypothermia in such patients. Further such catheters can be used to rewarm patients after e.g. cardiac surgery or for other reasons. Intravascular catheters afford advantages over external methods of cooling and warming including more precise temperature control and more convenience on the part of medical personnel.

The following U.S. patents all of which are incorporated herein by reference disclose various intravascular catheters systems methods U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 419 643 6 416 533 6 409 747 6 405 080 6 393 320 6 368 304 6 338 727 6 299 599 6 290 717 6 287 326 6 165 207 6 149 670 6 146 411 6 126 684 6 306 161 6 264 679 6 231 594 6 149 676 6 149 673 6 110 168 5 989 238 5 879 329 5 837 003 6 383 210 6 379 378 6 364 899 6 325 818 6 312 452 6 261 312 6 254 626 6 251 130 6 251 129 6 245 095 6 238 428 6 235 048 6 231 595 6 224 624 6 149 677 6 096 068 6 042 559.

As critically recognized by the present invention the provision of magnesium sulfate in combination with hypothermia can effectively treat cardiac arrest and AMI.

A system for treating a patient includes a heat exchanger to induce hypothermia in the patient. The heat exchanger may be an external heat exchange pad or a heat exchange catheter configured for placement in a patient when heat exchange fluid is circulated through the catheter. A heat exchange controller supplies heat exchange fluid to the catheter and receives heat exchange fluid from the catheter in a closed circuit. A source of magnesium sulfate is used to deliver magnesium sulfate to the patient.

In one embodiment the catheter has a heat exchange portion that is established by a balloon. In other embodiments the heat exchange portion includes plural heat exchange fluid return tubes communicating with a supply lumen at a distal end of the catheter for carrying heat exchange fluid with each return tube being formed spirally. In yet another embodiment the heat exchange portion includes first and second elongated segments each segment having an irregular exterior surface and a flexible articulating joint connecting the first and second elongated segments.

In another aspect a method for treating a patient includes inducing hypothermia in the patient using a closed loop heat exchange catheter and simultaneously infusing magnesium sulfate to the patient.

In still another aspect a system for treating a patient includes closed circuit heat exchange means and magnesium sulfate infusion means.

The details of the present invention both as to its structure and operation can best be understood in reference to the accompanying drawings in which like reference numerals refer to like parts and in which 

Referring initially to a therapeutic catheter system generally designated is shown for establishing and maintaining hypothermia in a patient or for attenuating a fever spike in a patient and then maintaining normal body temperature in the patient. While shows an exemplary embodiment of one heat exchange catheter it is to be understood that the present invention applies to any of the catheters and accompanying heat exchange controllers disclosed in the above referenced patents including the helical shaped devices disclosed in Alsius U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 451 045 and 6 520 933. Also one of the spiral shaped or convoluted shaped catheters disclosed in Alsius co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 234 084 filed Aug. 30 2002 for an INTRAVASCULAR TEMPERATURE CONTROL CATHETER and in Ser. No. 10 355 776 filed Jan. 31 2003 both of which are incorporated herein by reference can be used.

Commencing the description of the system at the proximal end as shown the exemplary non limiting system includes a heat exchange fluid source that can be a water bath heat exchange system or a TEC based heat exchange system such as any of the systems disclosed in one or more of the above referenced patents. Or the source can be a source of compressed gas. In any case the heat exchange fluid source provides warmed or cooled heat exchange fluid such as saline or compressed gas through a heat exchange fluid supply line and heat exchange fluid is returned to the source via a heat exchange fluid return line . A catheter generally designated includes a source tube terminating in a fitting such as a female Luer fitting . Also the catheter has a return tube terminating in a fitting such a male Luer fitting . The fittings can be selectively engaged with complementary fittings of the lines to establish a closed circuit heat exchange fluid path between the catheter and heat exchange fluid source .

Additionally a non limiting catheter may include a guide wire and primary infusion tube that terminates in a fitting such as a female Luer . A guide wire can be advanced through the tube in accordance with central venous catheter placement principles or medicament or other fluid can be infused through the guide wire and primary infusion tube . Moreover a secondary infusion tube with female Luer fitting can be selectively engaged with a medicament source for infusing fluid from the source through the secondary tube .

The source may be a source of magnesium sulfate source. Thus magnesium sulfate may be infused into the patient through the catheter. The source may be an IV bag. Or the source may be a syringe. Other ways known in the art to deliver magnesium sulfate may also be used that do not necessarily include using the catheter to deliver the magnesium sulfate e.g. a syringe can be used to inject magnesium sulfate directly into the patient through the skin.

As discussed further below the tubes are held in a distally tapered connector manifold . As also set forth further below the connector manifold establishes respective pathways for fluid communication between the tubes and respective lumens in a catheter body .

In any case the connector manifold establishes a pathway for fluid communication between the heat exchange fluid supply tube and the heat exchange fluid supply lumen of the catheter. Likewise the connector manifold establishes a pathway for fluid communication between the heat exchange fluid return tube and the heat exchange fluid return lumen. Further the connector manifold establishes a pathway for fluid communication between the guide wire and primary infusion tube and the guide wire lumen which can terminate at an open distal hole defined by a distally tapered and chamfered distal tip of the catheter body . Also the connector manifold establishes a pathway for fluid communication between the secondary infusion tube and the secondary infusion lumen which can terminate at an infusion port in a distal segment of the catheter body . Additional ports can be provided along the length of the catheter.

An exemplary non limiting catheter has a distally located heat exchange member for effecting heat exchange with the patient when the catheter is positioned in the vasculature or rectum or other orifice of a patient. The heat exchange member can be any of the heat exchange members disclosed in the above referenced patents. By way of example a non limiting catheter shown in can have proximal and distal thin walled heat exchange membranes that are arranged along the last fifteen or so centimeters of the catheter body and that are bonded to the outer surface of the catheter body with the infusion port being located between the heat exchange membranes . Thus each preferred non limiting heat exchange membrane is about six centimeters to seven and one half centimeters in length with the heat exchange membranes being longitudinally spaced from each other along the catheter body in the preferred embodiment shown. Essentially the heat exchange membranes extend along most or all of that portion of the catheter that is intubated within the patient. The heat exchange membranes can be established by a medical balloon material.

The heat exchange membranes can be inflated with heat exchange fluid from the heat exchange fluid source as supplied from the heat exchange fluid supply lumen and heat exchange fluid from the heat exchange membranes is returned via the heat exchange fluid return lumen to the heat exchange fluid source .

If desired a temperature sensor such as a thermistor or other suitable device can be attached to the catheter as shown. The sensor can be mounted on the catheter by solvent bonding at a point that is proximal to the membranes . Or the sensor can be disposed in a lumen of the catheter or attached to a wire that is disposed in a lumen of the catheter with the sensor hanging outside the catheter . Alternatively a separate temperature probe can be used such as the esophageal probe disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 290 717 incorporated herein by reference. As yet another alternative a rectal probe or tympanic temperature sensor can be used. In any case the sensor is electrically connected to the heat exchange fluid source for control of the temperature of the heat exchange fluid as described in various of the above referenced patents.

As envisioned by the present invention the structure set forth above can be used in many medical applications to cool a patient and or to maintain temperature in a normothermic or hypothermic patient for purposes of improving the medical outcomes of e.g. cardiac arrest patients patients suffering from myocardial infarction or stroke etc. As another example head trauma can be treated by and after lowering and maintaining the patient s temperature below normal body temperature. Preferably particularly in the case of myocardial infarction the heat exchange portions are advanced into the vena cava of the patient to cool blood flowing to the heart.

Now referring to an alternate catheter can include plural heat exchange elements . The heat exchange elements can be established by one or more metal preferably gold hollow elongated segments that have external surfaces which have irregular exterior surfaces. Separating adjacent heat exchange elements can be a flexible articulating joint it being understood that the heat exchange elements and joints can be formed from a single piece of material such as plastic or metal e.g. gold. The details of the heat exchange elements and their configuration are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 6 096 068 incorporated herein by reference. In any case heat exchange fluid is circulated in a closed fluid communication loop between the heat exchange elements and a heater chiller to remove heat from the patient to add heat to the patient to rewarm the patient after surgery or after the termination of therapeutic hypothermia treatment. When compressed gas is used as the heat exchange fluid the gas is directed into the catheter where it expands to cool the catheter and thus the patient.

The heat exchange fluid return tubes are spirally formed around the center tube and can be adhered thereto or not. That is the preferred heat exchange elements define spirals. The length L of the heat exchange region of the catheter can be about 250 millimeters with the pitch of the spiral heat exchange elements being about 64 millimeters. In any case the heat exchange fluid supply lumen terminates in a hollow distal tip as do the lumens of the heat exchange elements . Accordingly heat exchange fluid passes from the supply tube to the return tubes at the distal tip .

In operation any one of the above disclosed catheters is advanced by e.g. emergency response personnel into the vasculature preferably the inferior vena cava or superior vena cava or other cavity such as the rectum of a patient diagnosed as requiring temperature control. For example a patient may be diagnosed with cardiac arrest stroke acute MI or other malady for which therapeutic hypothermia may be indicated.

To cool the patient the heat exchange fluid is cooled to below body temperature and circulated through the catheter as needed to reach a desired set point. Or if the heat exchange fluid is gas the gas is directed into the catheter where it expands and cools cooling the catheter body. Magnesium sulfate is infused into the patient.

While the particular SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR TREATING CARDIAC ARREST AND MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION as herein shown and described in detail is fully capable of attaining the above described objects of the invention it is to be understood that it is the presently preferred embodiment of the present invention and is thus representative of the subject matter which is broadly contemplated by the present invention that the scope of the present invention fully encompasses other embodiments which may become obvious to those skilled in the art and that the scope of the present invention is accordingly to be limited by nothing other than the appended claims in which reference to an element in the singular is not intended to mean one and only one unless explicitly so stated but rather one or more . All structural and functional equivalents to the elements of the above described preferred embodiment that are known or later come to be known to those of ordinary skill in the art are expressly incorporated herein by reference and are intended to be encompassed by the present claims. Moreover it is not necessary for a device or method to address each and every problem sought to be solved by the present invention for it to be encompassed by the present claims. Furthermore no element component or method step in the present disclosure is intended to be dedicated to the public regardless of whether the element component or method step is explicitly recited in the claims. No claim element herein is to be construed under the provisions of 35 U.S.C. 112 sixth paragraph unless the element is expressly recited using the phrase means for .

