---

title: User configurable alarms and alarm trending for process control system
abstract: Various graphical displays for plant process operators are provided which combine aspects of alarm priority and alarm age to assist operators in making better choices in responding to alarms. The disclosed graphical displays provide improved contextual information about specific alarms and the relationships with other alarms in the same control module, equipment module, etc. Hierarchically organized presentations of active alarms and alarm age profiles are also provided to assist operators in evaluating causes of “alarm floods” in chain reactions within complex process environments. Various types of alarm or display alerts are also provided for improved monitoring of processed conditions and changes in process controls.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08000814&OS=08000814&RS=08000814
owner: Fisher-Rosemount Systems, Inc.
number: 08000814
owner_city: Austin
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050504
---
This application is a regular filed application of and claims for the purposes of priority the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 567 980 entitled Graphical User Interface for Representing Monitoring and Interacting with Process Control Systems which was filed on May 4 2004 and which this application hereby expressly incorporates by reference herein in its entirety. This application is also related to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 625 481 entitled Integration of Graphic Display Elements Process Modules and Control Modules in Process Plants which was filed on Jul. 21 2003 and which published as U.S. Publication No. 2004 0153804 on Aug. 5 2004 which in turn is a Continuation in Part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 278 469 entitled Smart Process Modules and Objects in Process Plants which was filed on Oct. 22 2002 and which published as U.S. Publication No. 2004 0075689 on Apr. 22 2004 the entire disclosures of which are hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein in their entirety. This application is also related to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 368 151 entitled Module Class Objects in a Process Plant Configuration System which was filed on Feb. 18 2003 and which published as U.S. Publication No. 2004 0199925 on Oct. 7 2004 the entire disclosure of which is hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. This application is also related to the following patent applications which are being filed as International PCT applications on the same date as this application and which this application hereby expressly incorporates by reference herein in their entirety Associated Graphic Displays in a Process Environment 10 589 712 Integration of Process Modules and Expert Systems in Process Plants 10 590 573 A Process Plant User Interface System Having Customized Process Graphic Display Layers in an Integrated Environment 10 574 824 Scripted Graphics in a Process Environment 10 589 845 Graphics Integration into a Process Configuration and Control Environment 10 591 804 Graphic Element with Multiple Visualizations in a Process Environment 10 590 574 System for Configuring Graphic Display Elements and Process Modules in Process Plants 10 575 022 Graphic Display Configuration Framework for Unified Process Control System Interface 10 575 173 Markup Language Based Dynamic Process Graphics in a Process Plant User Interface 10 590 550 Methods and Apparatus for Modifying Process Control Data PCT US05 15596 and 11 556 612 Methods and Apparatus for Accessing Process Control Data PCT US05 15585and 11 556 445 Integrated Graphical Runtime Interface for Process Control Systems PCT US05 15439 and 11 556 347 Service Oriented Architecture for Process Control Systems PCT US05 15394and 11 556 554.

A user interface for a process control system is disclosed. More specifically a user interface for a process control system is disclosed that enables the operator to modify configure and manipulate alarm notifications to show alarm priority alarm age details about a specific alarm including alarm profiles as well as perform alarm trending and superimposing alarm profiles over graphic displays using workstation monitors as well as handheld wireless devices.

Process control systems are widely used in factories and or plants in which products are manufactured or processes are controlled e.g. chemical manufacturing power plant control etc. Process control systems are also used in the harvesting of natural resources such as for example oil and gas drilling and handling processes etc. Virtually any manufacturing process resource harvesting process including agriculture can be automated through the application of one or more process control systems.

The manner in which process control systems are implemented has evolved over the years. Older generations of process control systems were typically implemented using dedicated centralized hardware. However modem process control systems are typically implemented using a highly distributed network of workstations intelligent controllers smart field devices and the like some or all of which may perform a portion of an overall process control strategy or scheme. In particular most modern process control systems include smart field devices and other process control components that are communicatively coupled to each other and or to one or more controllers via one or more digital data busses. Of course many of these modern process control systems may also include non smart field devices such as for example 4 20 milliamp MA devices 0 10 volts direct current VDC devices etc. which are typically directly coupled to controllers as opposed to a shared digital data bus or the like.

In any event field devices include for example input devices e.g. devices such as sensors that provide status signals that are indicative of process control parameters such as for example temperature pressure flow rate etc. as well as control operators or actuators that perform actions in response to commands received from controllers and or other field devices. For example a controller may send signals to a valve to increase pressure or flow to a heater or chiller to change a temperature to a mixer to agitate ingredients in a process control system etc.

Obviously in a complicated process system a large number of different field devices are transmitting data which eventually is presented at an operator s workstation. Further all of the field devices either directly present alarms to an operator s workstation or the signals transmitted by the field devices are interpreted by software which results in an alarm being sent to an operator s workstation. An operator may receive a large number of alarms during a typical shift. Because most process systems are configured so that alarms are sent in advance of the need for a corrective action as opposed to after a serious problem has been created. Therefore because an operator may receive a large number of preemptive alarms during a shift operators are often in need of ways to prioritize the alarms received at their workstations. Thus there is a need for graphical interface software that enables operators to prioritize alarms and make choices in responding to alarms when the number of alarms being received at the operator s workstation is excessive and there are too many to be handled at once.

Another problem associated with currently available user interfaces for process control systems is the lack of contextual information about a specific alarm when the alarm is presented at the user interface or monitor. Specifically typical systems include an alarm banner disposed at the bottom of the screen whereby all of the information about the physical plant component and the alarm including the date and time are presented on a single line. As a result limited information is provided to the operator at a first glance. The operator must then manipulate the screen to receive additional information and make a judgment as to what appropriate action is needed and at what time i.e. now or later . It would be helpful to provide an operator with improved information about a specific alarm that includes which other active alarms are present in the same control module equipment module or operator unit. In short there is a need for improved alarm contextual information which provides operators with additional information regarding other active alarms thereby enabling operators to better understand individual alarms in context of other active alarms.

Another problem associated with alarm signals of process control systems is simply put organization. Specifically due to the large number of field devices sending alarm signals an operator can be overwhelmed with the sheer number of alarm signals. This situation is commonly referred to as a alarm flood. The cause of an alarm flood may be a chain reaction of problems occurring within a system. To better evaluate and take corrective action when an alarm flood is occurring there is a need for improved organization of multiple alarms wherein the alarms are organized hierarchically with age profiles so that an operator can more easily determine the cause of the alarm flood in the leading edge of the alarm flood.

Another problem confronted with operators of complex systems involves the number of alarms received and the ability to anticipate problems before they occur. Specifically there is a need for operators to provide themselves with display alerts that would provide operators with specific information used to augment the alarm systems currently available. Specifically such display alerts could be shift or session specific and could provide tactical alert information enabling an operator to anticipate problems. Such tactical display alerts could also provide one time operational targets or help the operator ensure that the expected control system response is being achieved.

In satisfaction of the aforenoted needs a color display encoding method and software is disclosed that combines an indication of alarm priority and alarm age and allows the operator to manipulate the display of other details regarding an alarm.

In an embodiment a disclosed alarm detail display combines information about a selected alarm with information about other alarms active in the same control module as well as parent control objects equipment modules units etc. and plant areas including a means to navigate displays providing more information about those control objects.

In an embodiment alarm monitoring displays are disclosed that are suitable for wireless and or handheld devices e.g. a Pocket PC or a PDA .

In an embodiment dynamically configurable display alerts are disclosed that supplement the permanent alarms in the process control system to monitor one time conditions or operations progress. Such display alerts include but are not limited to target alerts for control parameters to assist in maintaining a constant target value an acceptable error for a specified period of time range alerts to ensure a control parameter stays within specified limits ramp alerts to ensure a control parameter changes in a linear way to a new target value and within the expected time period and summary displays for display alerts for defining and identifying which alerts are running and the current status of said alerts.

In an embodiment hierarchical alarm profile displays are disclosed which are intended to point out where and when the heaviest alarm activity is taking place. Such alarm profile displays can provide a warning or indication of when operators face alarm floods. In a refinement the alarm profile displays can indicate active alarm counts vs. alarm age. In another refinement the alarm profiles can include a selectable time span for a all or selected alarms b all or selected plant areas c all or selected equipment units and or equipment modules. In another refinement the alarm profile displays can include alarm summaries by alarm age thereby making it easy to identify the still active alarms that occurred on the leading edge of the alarm flood 

In an embodiment various means for automatically superimposing alarm profiles in the form of a temporary display layer on process graphic displays are disclosed which includes means for finding graphical elements associated with control units equipment modules etc. so that alarm profiles can be seen in the spatial context of plant equipment schematics and in process graphical display formats that are familiar to operators.

It should be understood that the figures are not to scale and that various graphical displays are illustrated in partial diagrammatic and fragmentary views. In some figures details may have been omitted which are not necessary for an understanding of this disclosure or which render other details difficult to perceived. It should be understood of course that this disclosure is not limited to the particular embodiments or graphical displays illustrated herein.

Turning to a single monitor workstation graphic display is illustrated wherein the screen includes an alarm panel a system status panel a main display area a tool panel and a selector panel . In the screen shown in the alarm panel indicates a moderate priority alarm for the control valve identified as FIC and with an object shown at in which is a primary inlet to the reactor also shown in . The alarm is indicated at in . In an embodiment the color of background of the alarm panel may indicate when the alarm was activated. For example a white or clear background could be used for very recent alarms while colored backgrounds could be used for alarms that have been active for an excess of one hour and a dark or black background could be used for alarms that have been active for eight or more hours. The summary shown in the alarm banner for FIC is created by clicking the i button next to the indicator in . For additional information the operator can click the i button in to produce the floating display .

The display logic for the button captures the module name FIC for the alarm currently selected in the alarm banner and constructs a calling informational string of Display DvAlarmInfo Module FIC and then passes it on to the workspace function OPEN DISPLAY. The DvAlarmInfo display was configured with a panel category of ALARMINFO. In the framework utilized herein there is a single floating panel configured to be an ALARMINFO category target so that the floating panel is chosen for the DvAlarmInfo display. If another display is currently open it is closed to open the display as shown in when the button is pressed.

The display logic in a DvAlarmInfo display such as that shown at in requires a module name for it s launch information. Finding FIC it uses that name in calls to the data services layers to obtain information about the valve labeled FIC see and it s containing unit and equipment modules. With an understanding of the alarm situation in valve FIC and its related modules the operator closes the DvAlarmInfo floating panel and looks at the primary control display for FIC as shown in by pressing the button in the alarm banner .

Still referring to by way of example only the display logic for the alarm banner buttons captures the module name FIC and constructs a calling info string of Panel MAIN Module FIC Select FIC KeepARScrollOneDim and then passes the string to workspace function OPEN PCD . The OPEN PCD function resolves the primary control display name REACTOR TOP for module FIC . It then asks the workspace to resolve PANEL MAIN and to replace the display currently in that panel with REACTOR TOP. REACTOR TOP originated through an import of a P ID drawing from another system so it s native aspect ratio is much wider than the MAIN panel in the current framework. A KeepARScrollOneDim directive says that the aspect ratio for REACTOR TOP should be maintained while scaling it to fill the MAIN panel with scroll bars for portions of the display that wont fit.

The Select FIC directive is forwarded to REACTOR TOP telling it to resolve the best selectable graphic object associated with FIC and automatically give it selection focus scrolling the display as necessary so the selected object is visible and as centered in the MAIN panel as possible. The presence of the KeepARScrollOneDim and Select directives overrides the default workspace behavior which remembers the scaling and scroll position last used on a display for when it is opened again in the same user session.

After looking at near by alarm conditions and process measurements the operator chooses to make an adjustment to the setpoint on FIC and watch how that control loop reacts. The faceplate display shown in is the ideal interface for what the operator has in mind so he pushes the FIC button which is still in the alarm banner . The display logic for the faceplate button captures the module name FIC associated module constructs a calling info string of Module FIC then passes it to workspace function OPEN FPD .

The OPEN FPD function resolves the faceplate display name PID LOOP FP for module FIC . The PID LOOPFP display was configured with a panel category of FP . In the current framework there are two floating panels configured to be an FP targets both are currently empty so floating panel on the left is chosen as it was placed ahead of the other floating panel in the floating panel use order configuration. An instance of the PID LOOP FP display is opened there passing it the launch information Module FIC .

The display logic in the PID LOOP FP display expects a module name to be in it s launch information. Finding FIC it uses that name in calls to the data services layers identify the parameters in FIC it will be reading. Several parameter field values from the valve FIC see in are used repeatedly in the FIC display most notably the scaling parameter associated with the pressure value PV and system pressure SP parameters. The pre update logic for PID LOOP FP read the EU and EU values engineering units string and decimal places information and stores them in local display variables which can be referenced by any of the graphic elements in PID LOOP FP . In short order a new instance of PID LOOP FP appears in the floating panel initially located at its anchor point.

Turning to if the operator thinks a significant system pressure change is appropriate and using the nudge up or down buttons won t do the operator can push on the button indicating the set point value. The display logic for the system pressure button click is to ask the workspace to provide a standard numeric data dialog. The PID LOOP FP display of is designed to also be used in workspaces running on PDAs so it constructs a parameter info string of InParentDisplay DockBottom Title FIC PID SP.CV and passes it to the workspace function NumericDataEntry . The NumericDataEntry workspace function sees that the workspace was launched with a ShowKBOnScreen preference perhaps running on a hardware where the keyboard is not always present so it chooses an instance of the standard numeric data dialog with an on screen keypad. The workspace resolves the dimensions and location of this instance of the PID LOOP FP display and locates the dialog box at the bottom of the faceplace display.

The operator can enter a new value for the setpoint in the box . The operator then sees the new value for setpoint reflected in the value shown on the setpoint button and is assured that the controller is now using reporting the new setpoint value. The mode shown in is in AUTO so the confirms some changes in the control valve output and shortly thereafter the pressure starts moving in the desired direction.

In the operator can use a three monitor workspace with screens . When a new alarm appears in the alarm banners or the operator can recognizes the tag appearing in the banner and can confirms the module description. To correct a problem upstream of FIC see the operator can push the left faceplate button in to view upstream components. With a three monitor display of the operator can put a copy of the upstream display in one of the empty panes in the left monitor screen . To accomplish this the operator pushes the copy panel content button in the toolbar over the main panel . The display logic behind the copy panel content button prepares a parameter information string of Panel MAN and calls the workspace function CopyPanelContent. The Copy PanelContent function captures the display name currently in the specified panel the launch information used to create that display and the current scaling and scroll position settings.

The operator then pushes a paste button e.g. in the combined information and tool button bar of an empty panel for example the panel of the left monitor or screen . The paste button essentially prepares a parameter information string of Panel UseSourceScale and calls the workspace function that paste copied panel contents to this panel in this case . The new instance of the display with the original launch information is opened in the panel . The scaling of the source display is preserved but since the panel is half the size of the source panel the view is centered on the center point of the source view and horizontal and vertical scroll bars appear.

Turning to an operator or operations supervisor monitor the system using a PDA . As shown in the operator can keep the TOP ALARMS display open in the main panel . The TOP ALARMS display can be closed by pressing the Top button in the toolbar panel as shown in .

In the PDA produces an alarm banner and optionally a warning level alarm sound. The operator can push the i button to check for other alarms in this module equipment module and unit. The display logic for the i button of a PDA is designed to call up the ALARMINFO display for the selected module. Normally the ALARMINFO display would be retrieved from the DEFAULT subtree under the display configuration storage root directory. However this workspace was started with the launch information DisplayPref PDA so it will attempt to find a display definition named ALARMINFO in subtree named PDA before looking for it in the DEFAULT subtree.

Returning a single workstation as shown in as one example the operator has been noticing intermittent deviation alarms on the primary inlet flow control loop for reactor RXTR . Observing the primary control display for reactor an operator could conclude that the deviation alarm occurs when demand peaks for a few minutes as a result of new production rates. To retrieve information on the inlet flow feed pump VSPMP the operator clicks oh the graphic object representing the pump VSPMP to generate the display of . The pump object in the display of may be taken from a standard library of graphic objects and can be configured to be a selection target and when selected to indicate selection with a dashed box around the pump VSPMP as shown in and the pump s tag string and also to make the button visible that opens the runtime object browser application. Clicking on the pump VSPMP or object around the pump VSPMP gives feedback that it is selected in the form of and the object browser button appears.

In the operator can review various information about the pump VSPMP . The first section has information about the specific pump including location ID tag number and physical specifications. A button is available here to open the Operations Journal application for the pump VSPMP . Another button is provided to access the Asset Management Solutions AMS software data for the device VSPMP . The second section contains information about the type and class of pump including buttons to access the manufacturer s operating guidelines documentation drawings or identification pictures and training documents such as standard procedures such as operating and maintenance procedures. The third section provides location information and the fourth section allows the operator change the display to other upstream or downstream objects.

If the operator desires target alert he or she selects tab . The parameter that needs to be set for the alert on is already inserted into the box due to the process change. The operator sets an initial delay of 1 hour by appropriately filling in the box before checking that the target value of 720 has been reached. A different target value may be entered in the box if necessary and an acceptable deviation band 5 degrees is entered into the box . The alert check duration of 1 hour making sure the temperature doesn t drop or overshoot for at least an hour after the target is achieved is entered into the box . If the operator doesn t have anything more to do when this alert is removed the acknowledge box may be cleared. The remaining boxes in the display are self explanatory and will not be described in detail here. When finished with the target alert the operator hits the add display alert button . The display closes and a runtime workspace adds the new display alert. In an hour the controller will start checking that the value for TI AIN.CV is 720 5 degrees and continue for the next hour. After that point the target alert shown in will automatically remove itself.

Turning to a range alert may be desired to check in change in output or throughput. After clicking on the button the dialog appears but operator can switch to the range alert tab as shown in . If a flow rate of 112 gpm is desired the operator can set upper and low range limits in the boxes for the display alert. If a flow rate of 112.2 gpm has already been established so there is no need for an initial delay on the display alert and the boxes are left blank. Also if the product is to be made for an extended period of time exceeding a shift change the boxes can be left blank as well and clicking on the button can institute the range alert.

A ramp alert is illustrated in . If a large tank needs to be filled the operator can pull up the tank farm process display and uses the object browser application to get the link to the product movement procedure checklist. After manually opening and closing the appropriate block valves the operator can start the pump and verify a steady flow measurement as the product is transferred to the tank. In a ramp alert is set for a plan to achieve a level of 360 inches see box in the destination tank that level will be achieved in 12 hours see box based upon a target flow rate.

With no discharges planned operator expects a steady increase of the level of the tank from its present measurement to the target over the next 12 hours. Rather than set a target alert with no checking going on for 12 hours a ramp alert can be chosen instead by clicking on the tab to check for a steady ramped measurement throughout the next 12 hours. Since the next shift operator will need to shut off the transfer pump and close valves the current operator checks the acknowledge before removing box so the completed alert will get the next operator s attention. The operator also adds a comment in box to remind the next operator what needs to be done.

To check the display alerts described in the operator presses a display alerts status button in the tool bar or alarm banner panel or elsewhere . This button replaces the content of the main panel with the display alerts status application shown in where the three display alerts of are summarized. Comparing the target flow rate of 110 115 gpm of is not being achieved at the point in time represented in thereby producing a warning indicator while the target rate was being met in . Also the target temperature of 720 set in was not met in but met in .

As shown in during a subsequent shift the new operator may push the display alerts status button to review what the previous shift had left him. would show a single display alert left over so the operator presses the show details button to get the information shown in indicating a level of 315 inches in the tank still short of the desired 360 inches.

After a couple of hours the operator would notice a display alert indicator in the alarm banner area had turned white and began flashing. After opening the display alert status display the display of would appear to indicate that the ramp alert of has been completed and requires acknowledgment. The operator would then acknowledge the completed display alert and press the button for the primary control display for LI TF PRD so that the transfer pump can be stopped and the transfer valves reset.

In the chart of becomes the upper chart in with the charts for the five most active units equipment modules in the plant area disposed below the chart three of which are shown at . shows that nearly all the new alarms are coming from the reactor unit in chart . By pushing the list alarms button for reactor a list of all active alarms associated with that unit that occurred within profile time window the previous hour appears in the right side of the display in . Using the i buttons the DvAlarmInfo display for the alarms can be opened for full details. To get a another view on the alarm profile for reactor the operator can press the primary control display button for reactor to produce the display of .

The advanced display features button on the toolbar panel enables to operator to select add alarm profiles. This causes the runtime workspace to find the graphic elements associated with unit and equipment modules their location on the screen and creates a temporary display layer for the existing display which shows active alarm profiles for each major equipment grouping. The other layers in the display are subdued or semi transparent to make the alarm profiles easier to see as shown in .

It will be noted that the placement of various buttons displays toolbars alarm banners system status banners etc. are relatively arbitrary and their placement may be modified substantially without departing from the spirit and scope of this disclosure. All of the graphic layouts disclosed in are exemplary and for purposes of illustration and are clearly not intended to limit the spirit and scope of this disclosure or the appended claims.

As a result of the displays shown in the operator is provided with a clear graphical interface that combines an indication of alarm priority and alarm age and allows the operator to manipulate the display of other details regarding a specific alarm or alarms. Information regarding a selected alarm may be combined with information from other alarms and equipment data. Further the graphical displays are applicable to PDA devices for use by supervisors as well as operators. Various types of display alerts and hierarchical alarm profiles are also provided to improve the effectiveness of plant operators.

