---

title: Surface modified adsorbents and use thereof
abstract: A surface-modified adsorbent comprises a reagent on a porous carrier. Preferred porous carriers are adsorbent carbons such as activated carbon, silica gels, aluminas, polyester resins, zeolites or zeolite-like materials, and mixtures thereof. Preferred reagents are 2-hydroxymethylpiperidine (2-HMP) or a 2-HMP analogue. Surface modified adsorbents can be incorporated into cigarettes, preferably in an amount effective to reduce the concentration of one or more constituents of cigarette smoke.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07832412&OS=07832412&RS=07832412
owner: Phillip Morris USA Inc.
number: 07832412
owner_city: Richmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051019
---
This application claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 e to U.S. provisional Application No. 60 621 544 filed on Oct. 25 2004 the entire content of which is incorporated herein by reference.

Porous sorbent materials such as adsorbent carbon activated carbon silica gel alumina polyester resins zeolites or zeolite like materials and mixtures thereof can be effective in removing a wide spectrum of gas phase constituents from mainstream cigarette smoke when incorporated in cigarette filters. However their lack of selectivity between smoke constituents may cause reduced shelf life and poor smoke subjectives. To improve filtration performance in cigarette filters activated carbon silica gel and other porous substrates can be modified with chemical reagents that can target specific smoke constituents.

According to a preferred embodiment a surface modified adsorbent comprises a reagent incorporated in a porous carrier the reagent comprising 2 HMP or an analogue thereof. The porous carrier is preferably an adsorbent carbon activated carbon silica gel alumina polyester resin zeolite or zeolite like material or mixture thereof and more preferably activated carbon comprising at least about 80 micropores and having an average particle size from about 6 mesh to about 300 mesh or an average particle size from about 0.2 mm to about 1 mm. In a preferred embodiment the reagent can comprise 1 to 80 or 3 to 10 by weight of the adsorbent.

The reagent preferably comprises 2 hydroxymethylpiperidine 2 HMP or a 2 HMP analogue such as 2 2 piperidine ethanol 2 PE N piperidineethanol N PE 2 4 piperidine ethanol 4 PE 3 hydroxypiperidine hydrochloride 3 HPH 4 hydroxypiperidine 4 HP 3 N piperidinyl 1 2 propanediol 3 PDP 2 amino 1 phenylethanol 2 APE 2 N anilino ethanol 2 AE or S 2 phenylglycinol 2 PG .

The surface modified adsorbent e.g. adsorbent beads can be incorporated into a cigarette e.g. a cigarette filter in an amount effective to reduce the concentration of mainstream tobacco smoke constituents such as carbon dioxide hydrogen cyanide ethane 1 3 butadiene isoprene cyclohexadiene 1 3 cyclohexadiene methyl cyclopentadiene formaldehyde acetaldehyde acrolein acetone diacetyl methyl ethyl ketone cyclopentanone benzene toluene acrylonitrile methyl furan 2 5 dimethyl furan hydrogen sulfide methyl mecaptan propene propadiene carbonyl sulfide propionaldehyde butyraldehyde methanol and 1 methylpyrrole. For example the reagent can be incorporated in a cigarette in an amount effective to reduce the concentration in mainstream smoke of hydrogen cyanide 1 3 butadiene formaldehyde acetaldehyde acrolein diacetyl acrylonitrile and hydrogen sulfide by at least 90 . A preferred filter comprises a plug space plug configuration having the surface modified adsorbent incorporated in the space between the plugs.

Porous sorbent materials such as adsorbent carbon activated carbon silica gel alumina polyester resins zeolites or zeolite like materials and mixtures thereof can be used to adsorb a wide spectrum of gas phase constituents from mainstream cigarette smoke when incorporated in cigarette filters. However the lack of selectivity of these materials for specific smoke constituents may cause reduced shelf life and poor smoke subjectives. To improve filtration performance in cigarette filters activated carbon can be modified with chemical reagents that can specifically react with targeted smoke constituents.

In an embodiment a porous substrate such as carbon e.g. activated carbon or silica gel is treated with a reagent such as 2 HMP or one or more analogues thereof to form a surface modified adsorbent. Analogues of 2 HMP such as 3 N piperidinyl 1 2 propanediol 3 PDP and S 2 phenylglycinol 2 PG comprise the functional groups NH and O which can react with carbonyl C O or nitrile CN groups of targeted tobacco smoke constituents. Additional 2 HMP analogues include 2 2 piperidine ethanol 2 PE N piperidineethanol N PE 2 4 piperidine ethanol 4 PE 3 hydroxypiperidine hydrochloride 3 HPH 4 hydroxypiperidine 4 HP 2 amino 1 phenylethanol 2 APE and 2 N anilino ethanol 2 AE .

The filtration efficiency of chemically modified porous substrates can depend on the loading level of the reagent. For a porous carbon substrate it has been found that for higher levels of reagent loading e.g. 25 or more of 2 HMP by weight adsorbent selectivity for targeted tobacco smoke constituents i.e. chemisorption can be achieved. At higher levels of loading the pores on the surface of the porous substrate can be flooded by an excess of reagent and the physical adsorption physisorption of non reactive constituents such as 1 3 butadiene can be mostly blocked. Reactive smoke constituents include hydrogen cyanide formaldehyde acrolein and diacetyl.

For lower levels of loading e.g. 5 10 of 2 HMP by weight modified carbons with improved activity for removing a broad range of constituents can be obtained. Surface modified carbon comprising lower levels of chemical loading can adsorb both chemically reactive and non chemically reactive constituents. A hypothesis for this observation is the formation of an intermediate impregnation stage where the physical adsorption surface area of carbon can be increased after the impregnation. Similar effects in filtration performance were also observed in carbons treated with 2 HMP analogues such as 3 N piperidinyl 1 2 propanediol 3 PDP and S 2 phenylglycinol 2 PG the formulas of which are 

Surface modified adsorbents having different loading levels of reagent can be prepared and incorporated into a test cigarette. shows a modified 1R4F reference cigarette used for evaluating surface modified adsorbents. The cigarette includes a tobacco rod and a modified cigarette filter wherein surface modified adsorbents such as surface modified carbon granules are incorporated in a cavity within 8 mm from the free end of the filter. The filter further comprises dilution holes upstream of the adsorbent material.

Porous carriers such as carbon activated carbon silica gel alumina polyester resins zeolites zeolite like materials such as mesoporous silica and the like can be treated with 2 HMP reagent or an analogue thereof to improve tobacco smoke filtration performance. For example granules of the carrier material can be mixed with a liquid containing the reagent and the infiltrated granules can be dried under a flowing gas such as air or nitrogen to obtain an impregnated carrier having a desired loading of reagent.

Commercially available PICA G277 carbon granules or commercially available Grace Davison silica gel particles were used as the porous carrier i.e. substrate to form surface modified adsorbent particles. The particle sizes for both the carbon and silica gel ranged from about 35 60 mesh to 20 50 mesh.

In a typical synthesis 2 g of the porous substrate was mixed thoroughly with an aqueous solution containing 0.1 g of 2 HMP solids or 2 HMP analogue and about 2 g of water. The mixture was then dried overnight at room temperature in a venting oven resulting in about 3.6 g of surface modified adsorbent.

Table 1 sets forth examples of various reagents loaded on G 277 carbon wherein the reagents are identified as follows 2 hydroxymethylpiperidine 2 HMP 2 2 piperidine ethanol 2 PE N piperidineethanol N PE 2 4 piperidine ethanol 4 PE 3 hydroxypiperidine hydrochloride 3 HPH 4 hydroxypiperidine 4 HP 3 N piperidinyl 1 2 propanediol 3 PDP 2 amino 1 phenylethanol 2 APE 2 N anilino ethanol 2 AE and S 2 phenylglycinol 2 PG . Table 4 shows that the preparation of modified carbon can be an efficient process with nearly 100 recovery. The relatively low yield of 89 for 2 APE is believed to be due to loss of sample during handling.

Table 2 sets forth examples of various reagents loaded on silica gel. Table 2 shows that the preparation of modified silica gel can be an efficient process with nearly 100 recovery.

The multiplex puff by puff GC MS method which is described by Thomas et al. Puff by puff Mainstream Smoke Analysis by Multiplex Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry CORESTA 2000 was used to evaluate the filtration performance of the surface modified adsorbent particles in 1R4F cigarettes. Results from the testing are shown in Table 3 wherein the reduction of the various smoke constituents are shown for impregnated carbon 1 wt. 5 wt. and 25 wt. 2 HMP and non impregnated carbon 0 wt. . In Table 3 the absence of data corresponds to filtration activity i.e. reduction in constituent concentration of less than 30 .

As seen in Table 3 improved filtration can be achieved by treating carbon with a desired level of 2 HMP e.g. greater than 1 wt. . show the effects of 2 HMP impregnation of PICA G277 carbon 100 mg of adsorbent per cigarette in tobacco smoke filtration performance. As shown in the overall performance of the carbon in removing cigarette smoke gas phase constituents can be improved by varying the loading of reagent. At 5 wt. loading for example the surface activated carbon can adsorb compounds that are chemically reactive with 2 HMP e.g. formaldehyde acetaldehyde acrolein ketones diacetyl hydrogen sulfide and hydrogen cyanide and compounds that are substantially non chemically reactive e.g. dienes aromatic compounds furans and pyrroles . In formaldehyde is abbreviated CHO acetaldehyde is abbreviated CHCHO and hydrogen cyanide is abbreviated HCN.

In general the filtration performance of porous adsorbent materials i.e. via physisorption and or chemisorption can be improved by incorporating therein an effective amount of reagent. Physisorption is a process whereby a molecule adheres to a surface without the formation of a chemical bond usually by van der Waals forces or electrostatic attraction. The formation of a chemical bond leads to chemisorption.

The improvement achieved using 2 HMP impregnated carbon can be seen in the puff by puff gas delivery data shown in . In each of the respective the total gas delivery of acrolein formaldehyde acetaldehyde hydrogen cyanide and 1 3 butadiene is plotted for untreated carbon 0 and 2 HMP treated carbon at reagent loadings of 1 5 and optionally 25 . As seen in by increasing the loading of 2 HMP up to 5 wt. the percent reduction for each of the aforementioned smoke constituents can be increased. However if targeted reduction in formaldehyde is desired loadings of 25 and above can provide selective removal of formaldehyde.

From the foregoing it can be seen that relatively low levels of impregnation 3 10 provide retained or improved reactivity for a broad range of smoke constituents. On the other hand high loadings 25 and above can provide targeted selectivity for constituents such as formaldehyde acrolein diacetyl and hydrogen cyanide.

The degree of modification depends on the chemical treatment levels. Under a high level of chemical loading e.g. at least 25 of 2 HMP by weight it is believed that the pores of the substrate can be filled with the chemical reagents whereby adsorbent materials with very exclusive high selectivity to hydrogen cyanide formaldehyde acrolein diacetyl can be obtained. Under a lower level of chemical loading e.g. 5 10 of 2 HMP by weight materials with improved overall activity to a broad range of smoke constituents may be obtained. For instance for a 1R4F cigarette comprising 100 mg of modified carbon incorporated in the filter region e.g. 5 10 wt. 2 HMP the concentration of 1 3 butadiene and acrolein in mainstream smoke can be reduce by more than 90 . Replacing the non impregnated carbon in a test cigarette with 10 wt. 2 HMP or analogue thereof results in undetectable acrolein delivery 

The adsorption results for test cigarettes having a filter comprising silica gel or 2 HMP modified silica gel are shown in Table 4. Corresponding data for surface modified carbon are shown in Table 5. Included in Tables 4 5 are the resistance to draw RTD measured in millimeters of mercury and direct dilution index DDI measure in percent data of each test cigarette as well as the composition measured in milligrams of the porous carrier or modified porous carrier that was incorporated into the test cigarette. Also shown in Tables 4 5 is the amount of cellulose acetate CA that was replaced by way of the addition of adsorbent material. S and S stand for repeat tests using commercially available silica gel Grace Davison and C and C stand for repeat tests using commercially available carbon PICA . The absence of data corresponds to filtration activity i.e. reduction in concentration of less than 30 .

In Table 4 for equivalent resistance to draw untreated silica gel S and S showed strong adsorption activity for polar components such as formaldehyde and cyclopentanone and less activity for acrylonitrile and 1 methyl pyrrole. After treatment with 2 HMP the modified silica gel were increasingly selective for hydrogen cyanide formaldehyde and diacetyl. As shown in Tables 4 5 the addition of the modified adsorbent particles to the filter of the test cigarette did not substantially change the resistance to draw or the direct dilution index of the test cigarette.

Table 6 shows the effect of incorporating 200 mg of adsorbent material untreated G 277 carbon or G 277 carbon loaded with 10 wt. 2 HMP in the space of a plug space plug filter. The data show the average amount in micrograms of each smoke constituent along with the standard deviation for 3 replicas 10 samples per replica. The data is presented as average standard deviation. In Table 6 TPM stands for total particulate matter. As seen in Table 6 the 10 wt. 2 HMP carbon achieved a high reduction in acrolein and of the 13 constituents measured all but three were reduced compared to untreated carbon.

Table 7 sets forth adsorption measurements for acetaldehyde AA hydrogen cyanide HCN methanol MEOH and isoprene ISOP . Total particulate matter is abbreviated TPM puff count is abbreviated PUFF burn time in minutes is abbreviated BT direct dilution index is abbreviated DDI stance to draw in millimeters of mercury is abbreviated RTD . The test cigarettes used to obtain the data in Table 7 are illustrated in except the absorbent 80 mg of Grace Davison Grade 646 35 60 mesh silica gel with approximately 50 wt. reagent is incorporated in a cavity between the tobacco rod and the upstream end of the filter. In Table 7 control responds to the data for a control sample and RSTD is the relative standard deviation for the data for each smoke constituent.

All of the above mentioned references are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety to the same extent as if each individual reference was specifically and individually indicated to be incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

While various embodiments have been described it is to be understood that variations and modifications may be resorted to as will be apparent to those skilled in the art. Such variations and modifications are to be considered within the purview and scope of the claims appended hereto.

