---

title: Indirect subscriptions to top N lists of content feeds
abstract: A user may subscribe to a content feed group that includes a set of content feeds. The content feed group includes a first set of content items from the set of included content feeds. The content items are presented in response to a subscription to the content feed group. After a change to a content feed group, such as an addition or a removal of a content feed from the set, a second set of content items, reflecting the changed set of content feeds, are presented.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07590691&OS=07590691&RS=07590691
owner: Google Inc.
number: 07590691
owner_city: Mountain View
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051007
---
This application is related to the following U.S. patent applications which are incorporated by reference herein in their entirety 

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 246 596 titled Personalized Content Feed Suggestions Page filed Oct. 7 2005 

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 246 657 titled Content Feed User Interface with Gallery Display of Same Type Items filed Oct. 7 2005 and

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 246 597 titled Indirect Subscriptions to A User s Selected Content Feed Items filed Oct. 7 2005.

The disclosed embodiments relate generally to content syndication and more particularly to providing indirect subscriptions to feed content.

Content syndication is growing in popularity as a way to distribute frequently updated information such as news and blog postings on the Internet. Using content syndication formats such as Really Simple Syndication RSS content providers can include content and or links to such in a content feed. Users may subscribe to these content feeds using an application known as a reader or aggregator. When the content feed is updated with new content items the new content items are reflected in the user s reader.

A passive user may wish to avoid managing her content feed subscriptions. One way is to adopt another user s content feed subscriptions as her own thus delegating the responsibility of selecting content feeds for subscription to that another user. A second user may export his list of content feed subscriptions to a file. The first user can import the file into her aggregator application and subscribe to the content feeds included in the file. However this still requires some subscription management on the part of the first user since she is still responsible for unsubscribing from content feeds to which she no longer wishes to subscribe.

In accordance with some embodiments a method of subscribing to content includes subscribing a user to a content feed group that includes a set of content feeds presenting to the user a first plurality of content items in accordance with the content feed group and after a change to the content feed group presenting to the user a second plurality of content items in accordance with the changed content feed group.

In accordance with some embodiments the aforementioned operations may be performed by a system having memory one or more processors and one or more modules stored in the memory and configured for execution by the processors.

In accordance with some embodiments instructions for the aforementioned operations may be included in a computer program product for use in conjunction with a computer system.

A content feed aggregation system may provide for indirect subscriptions. Rather than subscribing directly to content feeds or primary feeds a user can subscribe to a group of content items or a group of content feeds selected by another user or according to predefined criteria. The selected items or feeds are repackaged into a secondary content feed to which the user may subscribe. The content items included in the secondary feed may change as the selection of content items or content feeds changes and the content items presented by the user as part of the subscription to the secondary feed changes along in accordance with the changed selection.

The server system accesses content feeds from the feed sources . The server system includes a server and a database . Server serves as a front end for the server system . Server retrieves the content feeds from the feed sources and also provides an interface between the server system and the client systems . In some embodiments the functions of server may be divided or allocated among two or more servers.

The server system stores content items in the content feeds in the database . In some embodiments the database stores both metadata e.g. title description URL date time and possibly other metadata and the content of each content item. However in some other embodiments the database stores the metadata but not the content for each content item. The database also stores user feed information for a plurality of users. The user feed information for a particular user identifies content feed subscriptions as well as sources filters and read states for that particular user. That is user feed information associated with a user identifies the content feeds to which the user has subscribed any filters the user has defined for the feeds any labels the user has associated with individual feed items and an indication of whether each feed item has been marked as read by the user.

It should be appreciated that the server system including the server and the database may be implemented as a distributed system of multiple computers. However for convenience of explanation the server system is described below as being implemented on a single computer which can be considered a single logical system.

A content feed or channel is a resource or service that provides a list of content items that are present recently added or recently updated at a feed source . A content item in a content feed may include the content associated with the item itself the actual content that the content item specifies a title and or a description of the content a locator e.g. URL of the content or any combination thereof. For example if the content item identifies a text article the content item may include the article itself inline along with the title and locator. Alternatively a content item may include the title description and locator but not the article content. Thus some content items may include the content associated with those items while others contain links to the associated content but not the full content of the items. A content item may also include additional metadata that provides additional information about the content. The full version of the content may be any machine readable data including but not limited to web pages images digital audio digital video Portable Document Format PDF documents and so forth.

In some embodiments a content feed is specified using a content syndication format such as RSS. RSS is an acronym that stands for rich site summary RDF site summary or Really Simple Syndication. RSS may refer to any of a family of formats based on the Extensible Markup Language XML for specifying a content feed and content items included in the feed. In some other embodiments other content syndication formats such as the Atom syndication format or the VCALENDAR calendar format may be used to specify content feeds.

Further information regarding the RSS syndication format known as Really Simple Syndication is disclosed in the 2.0 by D. Winer which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. M. Nottingham et al. disclose further information regarding the Atom syndication format in which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

A user interfaces with the server system and views content items at a client system or device hereinafter called the client system for ease of reference . The client system includes a computer or computer controlled device such as a personal digital assistant cellular telephone or the like hereinafter called the client system for ease of reference . The computer typically includes one or more processors not shown memory which may include volatile memory not shown and non volatile memory such as a hard disk drive and a display . The computer may also have input devices such as a keyboard and a mouse not shown .

In some embodiments a user may interact with the server system via a feed reader user interface that may be presented on the display . The user may create a list of feed subscriptions via the feed reader user interface . In some embodiments using the feed reader user interface the user may also create filters or labels to be applied to content feeds and or content items and modify the read states of content feeds and or content items. The feed reader user interface transmits a list of content feed subscriptions or modifications to a list of content feed subscriptions to the server system for storage at the database . The feed reader user interface presents content items stored at the database to the user based on the user s list of content feed subscriptions. That is feed reader user interface presents to the user content items specified in the content feeds to which the user has subscribed. A user may view the full version of the content of a content item in the feed reader user interface by selecting it e.g. by clicking on it with a mouse pointer . In some embodiments a copy of the user s list of content feed subscriptions and copies of the presented content items may be cached locally at the client system .

In some embodiments the feed reader user interface may be a web based user interface. That is the feed reader user interface includes a plurality of web pages. The web pages may be written in the Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML or any other suitable language for preparing web pages and may include one or more scripts for interfacing with the server system . The user may subscribe to content feeds view content items and otherwise interact with the server system by interacting with the web pages of the feed reader user interface . In other words the server system including the feed reader user interface provides a web based content aggregation service. The server system aggregates and stores content items in accordance with the user s content feed subscriptions. In some embodiments the server system can also apply filters or labels or change the read states of content items in accordance with user actions or instructions. When the user accesses the feed reader user interface the content items are presented to the user via the feed reader user interface .

In some other embodiments the feed reader user interface may be a part of a standalone application that is run on the client system . The standalone application may interface with the servers system via an application programming interface API .

For purposes of this description the words tag and label whether used as a noun or as a verb are interchangeable.

At the server the tag is applied to the one or more content items which are stored in the database in accordance with the application of the tag to the content items by User A . In some embodiments the tag is applied at the server by associating the content items with the tag in the database . The tagged content items are associated with a content feed that includes the tagged content items hereafter the secondary feed . In other words the secondary feed is a content feed generated from tagged content items. In some embodiments the tagged content items are aggregated and listed in a content feed document written according to a content syndication format such as RSS or Atom. The content feed document is the secondary feed. In some embodiments the secondary feed is associated with the user who applied the tag User A in this case as well as being associated with the tag.

The secondary feed is made available for subscription by other users . In some embodiments the secondary feed is added to a list which is accessible to other users of available content feed subscriptions. Other users may view the list and select the secondary feed for subscription. In some embodiments the availability of the secondary feed is limited to users selected or approved by Client A. In some embodiments the set of users to whom the secondary feed is available may be limited at Client A s election to users with whom Client A has a mutual presence subscription in an instant messaging application or service.

At a second client hereinafter Client B for convenience a second user hereinafter User B for convenience subscribes to the secondary feed . The content items in the secondary feed i.e. the content items tagged by User A are presented to the user . In some embodiments items already viewed by User B in the past may be hidden from the user and thus the content items actually presented may be a subset of the items in the secondary feed.

After the subscription to the secondary feed by User B User A may choose to apply the tag to additional content items or remove the tag from one or more content items to which the tags were applied. The content items in the secondary feed are changed in accordance with the user s tagging changes. That is the additional items tagged by User A are added to the secondary feed and the content items from which the tag was removed are removed from the secondary feed. In some embodiments the changes to the secondary feed are also reflected in the presentation of content items to User B.

At the server the tag is applied to content items in the set of content feeds tagged by the user in accordance with the application of the tag to the content feeds by User A . In some embodiments the tag is applied at the server by associating the content items with the tag in the database . The tagged content items are associated with a secondary feed similar to operation . In some embodiments the tagged content items are aggregated and listed in a content feed document written according to a content syndication format such as RSS or Atom. The content feed document is the secondary feed. The secondary feed represents the content feed group the secondary feed includes the content items included in the content feeds that belong to the content feed group. In some embodiments the secondary feed is associated with the user who applied the tag User A in this case as well as being associated with the tag.

The secondary feed is made available for subscription by other users . In some embodiments the secondary feed is added to a list which is accessible to other users of available content feed subscriptions. Other users may view the list and select the secondary feed for subscription. In some embodiments as in process the availability of the secondary feed is limited to users selected or approved by Client A. In some embodiments the set of users to whom the secondary feed is available may be limited at Client A s election to users with whom Client A has a mutual presence subscription in an instant messaging application or service.

At Client B User B subscribes to the secondary feed . User B by subscribing to the secondary feed subscribes to the content feed group represented by the secondary feed. The content items in the secondary feed i.e. the content items in the content feeds tagged by User A and belonging to the content feed group are presented to the user . In some embodiments items already viewed by User B in the past may be omitted and thus the content items actually presented may be a subset of the items in the tagged content feed.

Attention is now directed to which illustrates a process of presenting to a user a changed selection of content feeds. After the process User A may apply the same tag to additional content feeds and or remove the tag from one or more content feeds to which the tag has been applied. The content items presented to User B may change in accordance to the tagging changes made by User. A.

User A changes the tagging on the content feeds . User A applies the same tag to additional content feeds and or removes the tag from one or more content feeds to which the tag has been applied. This changes the content feed group by adding and removing content feeds from the set of content feeds included in the content feed group.

At the server the tagging of the content items is changed in accordance with the tagging changes made by User A . The content items that are tagged are associated with the secondary feed as in operation . The tag is applied to content items in the additional content feeds that were newly tagged by User A. In some embodiments the tag is applied only to content items in the additional content feeds dated after the application of the tag to the additional content feeds. In other words only content items from the additional content feeds dated after the secondary feed update are added to the secondary feed. In some other embodiments the tag is applied to all of the content items in the additional content feeds. That is all of the content items in the newly tagged content feeds are added to the secondary feed.

For the content feeds from which the tag was removed in some embodiments content items dated after the removal of the tag from the content feeds are not tagged. In other words the tag is not applied to content items in a content feed from which the tag was removed as of the time of the removal of the tag from the content feed. Thus while content items dated after the content feed was removed from the content feed group are not included in the secondary feed items dated before the removal may remain in the secondary feed. In some other embodiments the tag is removed from all of the content items in the content feed from which the tag was removed. As a result all of the content items in the removed content feed are removed from the secondary feed.

The content items in the secondary feed are presented to User B assuming that the subscription to the tagged content feed is still active since the process The presented content items include content items added to the secondary feed as a result of adding a content feed to the content feed group and may exclude content items removed from the secondary feed as a result of removing a content feed from the content feed group. As described above content items read by the user may be omitted from the presentation.

While the processes and are described as involving two users on distinct clients it should be appreciated that the processes described above may involve two or more users using a multi user computer such as a computer that has user accounts and profiles for each user of the computer but using the content aggregation service at different times.

A tagging criterion rule or filter is identified . A tag is applied to content items in content feeds satisfying the tagging criteria rule filter . For example using the above example of the rule for tagging the top five subscribed feeds content items in the five most subscribed to content feeds are tagged. The tagging criteria rule filter defines a content feed group that includes the content feeds that satisfies the criteria rule filter. The tagged content items are associated with a secondary feed that represents the content feed group defined by the criteria rule filter similar to operations . The secondary feed is made available for subscription by users as in operations .

A user at a client subscribes to the secondary feed . It is noted that subscription operation may occur before or after operations . The content items in the secondary feed are presented to the user . As described above content items already viewed by the user may be omitted from the presentation.

Just as a user can add or remove tags from content feeds the same can be done by the predefined tagging criteria rule or filter. Taking again the example of the rule which tags the five most subscribed content feeds the list of the top five subscribed to content feeds may change over time. As that list changes content feeds are automatically added and removed from the content feed group. As a result content items may be added and removed from the secondary feed similar to the adding and removal of content items from the secondary feed in process .

Furthermore tagging criteria or rules or filters for tagging individual content items from any number of content feeds similar to a user s tagging of content items from any number of content feeds as described in relation to process may be created. For example a rule for tagging content items having a particular keyword may be created. Such a rule may be particularly useful for aggregating content items related to a newsworthy person place or event.

As described above a secondary feed and content items included in the secondary feed may be associated with a tag and with the user who applied the tag. More precisely the secondary feed may be associated with a user tag pair. In some embodiments the content aggregation service may include privacy options that control whether such secondary feeds may be revealed to other users at large e.g. in a list of available subscriptions and thus available to other users for subscription or revealed only to the user with whom the secondary feed is associated. In some embodiments another privacy setting is to limit visibility of a secondary feed to a set of users selected or approved by the user who created the secondary feed. By setting the privacy options a user may control the sharing of her tagged content items or content feeds with other users. In some embodiments the privacy options are set on a per tag basis. In some embodiments the default privacy setting for each tag is a maximum privacy setting. As a result a secondary feed associated with a tag applied by a first user is made available to other users only when the first user has selected less restrictive privacy settings than the default privacy setting.

In some embodiments the predefined criteria or rules or filters for tagging content feeds or content items may be implemented logically at the server as an imaginary user tagging content items or content feeds as if it is a real user of the service. That is an imaginary user representing the criteria rule filter is created and associated data is stored at the server. In some embodiments the privacy options for the imaginary user are always set to share its secondary feed with other users at large. The secondary feed generated as a result of the tagging criteria rule filter is associated with the imaginary user. By implementing the tagging criteria rule filter as an imaginary user data in the content aggregation service may share a uniform structure making data storage more efficient.

By allowing tagging of content items and content feeds and generating secondary feeds from them the content aggregation service enables indirect subscriptions. A user may tag content items or content feeds of interest to her. A user may subscribe to a secondary feed whether generated by another user or by a predefined rule for tagging items or feeds to delegate responsibility of subscribing to content to another user or entity and or to get content that may be of interest or noteworthy for some reason e.g. for being popular in terms of having many subscribers for being on topic with regard to a newsworthy person and so forth .

The feed reader module includes a content tagging module for tagging content items and content feeds in response to user input.

In some embodiments the feed reader module may be a script based module embedded in a web page served from the server system . The web page may be rendered by a client application such as a web browser at the client computer . When the web page is rendered the feed reader module is executed thereby providing a web based interface to the server system . The script based feed reader module may be written in JavaScript ECMAScript or any other suitable scripting language.

In some other embodiments the feed reader module may be a standalone application stored in memory of the client computer . The standalone application may include but is not limited to a feed aggregator application. In further other embodiments the feed reader module may be an add on or a plug in to another application. For example the feed reader module may be a plug in to a web browser application or an email application.

In some embodiments received content items may be cached locally in memory . Similarly a user s list of content feed subscriptions may also be cached locally in memory .

Each of the above identified elements may be stored in one or more of the previously mentioned memory devices. Each of the above identified modules corresponds to a set of instructions for performing a function described above. The above identified modules or programs i.e. sets of instructions need not be implemented as separate software programs procedures or modules and thus various subsets of these modules may be combined or otherwise re arranged in various embodiments. In some embodiments memory may store a subset of the modules and data structures identified above. Furthermore memory may store additional modules and data structures not described above.

The feed content items include content items that are associated with one or more tags. A content item may be associated with one or more tags. In some embodiments the feed content items may be stored as a database of content items and tags.

The user data includes data for users of the service such as login information and user preferences. The user data may include subscription lists not shown which include lists of users feed subscriptions. Each user has a corresponding list of content feed subscriptions.

The feed content provisioning module identifies and sends content items to a user in accordance with the user s feed subscriptions. The feed content provisioning module may update the user data to identify content items viewed by the user so as to avoid sending those same items to the user again. Optionally for instance in accordance with service features selected by the user the feed content provisioning module may also update the user data to record other information such as information identifying content items bookmarked by the user or otherwise marked or selected by the user as being of special interest to the user.

Each of the above identified elements may be stored in one or more of the previously mentioned memory devices. Each of the above identified modules corresponds to a set of instructions for performing a function described above. The above identified modules or programs i.e. sets of instructions need not be implemented as separate software programs procedures or modules and thus various subsets of these modules may be combined or otherwise re arranged in various embodiments. In some embodiments memory may store a subset of the modules and data structures identified above. Furthermore memory may store additional modules and data structures not described above.

Although shows a server computer is intended more as functional description of the various features which may be present in a set of servers than as a structural schematic of the embodiments described herein. In practice and as recognized by those of ordinary skill in the art items shown separately could be combined and some items could be separated. For example some items shown separately in could be implemented on single servers and single items could be implemented by one or more servers.

The user may view the content items in a universal view. The universal view includes a list of content items from all of the user s subscribed feeds that have new content items not yet viewed by the user. The list may be generated for example by the feed content provisioning module of the server computer . In some embodiments various criteria may be used by the feed content provisioning module to limit the items included in the list such as publication date and time and number of items not yet viewed by the user that were published by the same source. For instance items published more than X e.g. 7 days ago may be excluded. In another example when there are more than Y e.g. 10 unviewed items from the same source only the Y most recent unviewed items from the source may be included in the list .

The content items shown in the list are interleaved without regard to source. In some embodiments the list is sorted by publication date and time for example in reverse chronological order. Also in some embodiments the list may show only content items that the user has not viewed. The list presents identifying information for the content items so that the user can identify a content item she wishes to view and select it. Because the UI may have a finite size and the list may include more items than can fit into the U the UI may display a subset of the content items at a given time and the user may scroll through the list to find other content items. The list may also include an indicator of how many content items are in the list in total. Alternatively the indicator may indicate the number of content items yet to be viewed.

From the list the user may select a content item. When the user selects an item from the list in the universal view the UI may display the full version of the content in a viewer region . For example if the selected content item indicated by a box with a thick border includes a link to an article at a news web site or a link to a blog posting the article or the blog posting respectively may be displayed in the viewer region .

The UI may also include a labels button that the user may select to open a labels page that allows the user to create view edit and remove tags hereinafter labels . The UI may include a pull down menu . The user may use the pull down menu to apply a label to the currently selected content item.

The subscriptions page may further include links to view content items associated with the corresponding subscribed to content feed pull down menus to add labels to the subscribed to content feeds and links to unsubscribe from any of the subscribed to content feeds . A cancel button may be selected by the user to cancel out of the subscriptions page .

As described above a user may set privacy options to control disclosure and availability for subscription of her tagged content items and content feeds to other users at large. In some embodiments a content aggregation service may be integrated with user address books or contact lists. As a part of the integration finer privacy options may be made available to the user. The user may use the finer privacy options to control disclosure of tagged content items or feeds to not only other users at large but also to specific contacts or groups of contacts that are in the user s address book or contact list. This provides for a wider spectrum of disclosure ranging to full disclosure limited disclosure to approved contacts or to no users. In some other embodiments the content aggregation service may be further integrated with a social networking service that includes profiles of users interests and affiliations among other things. The privacy controls may be further adapted to control disclosure of tagged content items or feeds to other users that may share common interests affiliations or the like.

The foregoing description for purpose of explanation has been described with reference to specific embodiments. However the illustrative discussions above are not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise forms disclosed. Many modifications and variations are possible in view of the above teachings. The embodiments were chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention and its practical applications to thereby enable others skilled in the art to best utilize the invention and various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

