---

title: System and method for collaborative analysis of data streams
abstract: Embodiments of the present invention combine the flexibility of the computer in segmenting, indexing, and retrieving data with the strengths of people in analyzing scenes. They provide a mechanism that allows a group of analyzers at distributed locations to collaborate in generating pieces of semantic information of a data stream, integrates these pieces into a summary representation that can be used for subsequent computation, and allows related hypotheses and information requests to be presented back to the analyzers. This description is not intended to be a complete description of, or limit the scope of, the invention. Other features, aspects, and objects of the invention can be obtained from a review of the specification, the figures, and the claims.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07904545&OS=07904545&RS=07904545
owner: Fuji Xerox Co., Ltd.
number: 07904545
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20051101
---
A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material which is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

Computers are effective at capturing and processing structured information whereas human beings are more effective at capturing the gist or semantics in ways that are not presently if ever possible computationally. Yet human beings are not good at rote operations and are not effective when forced to work long amounts of time.

Data analysis such as video analysis and categorization is an important problem in a variety of disciplines including surveillance. Data streams such as video audio and sensor data streams often contain semantic information that can be useful in a variety of applications including data mining information retrieval and summarization. Such information is easy for human beings to detect but hard to identify via computational methods. While it is possible to segment video streams to detect potential events against a static background it is difficult to automate such detection activities which can be for a non limiting example identifying individuals in a crowd or to track them between different cameras with poor calibration. It is even more difficult to automate detections of social means and behaviors that have a fuzzy definition such as suspicious behavior and fighting. Human beings on the other hand can be quite good at picking out important invariants in what are to computers quite noisy signals and have a common sense to recognize social means and behaviors.

Various embodiments of the present invention combine the flexibility of the computer in segmenting indexing and retrieving data with the strengths of human being in analyzing scenes. They provide a mechanism that allows a large group of people analysts at distributed locations to collaborate in generating pieces of semantic information metadata of a data stream integrates these pieces into an index a database instance or other suitable data structures that can be used for subsequent computation and allows related hypotheses and information requests e.g. questions to be presented back to the analysts. Each analyst only receives and or processes a small segment of the overall data stream while each segment may be processed by several analysts. This invention is useful for creating high quality semantic indexes of large data streams such as multi camera surveillance video without forcing any individual to process extensive amounts of the data stream. It also allows non skilled or low skilled analysts to perform routine tasks allowing experienced analysts to concentrate on more complex tasks.

The invention is illustrated by way of example and not by way of limitation in the figures of the accompanying drawings in which like references indicate similar elements. It should be noted that references to an or one or some embodiment s in this disclosure are not necessarily to the same embodiment and such references mean at least one.

Referring to each of a plurality of processors can accept a data stream in the form of documents as its input process the data stream separate it into segments or objects referred to collectively as objects in the rest of this document and distribute these objects to a plurality of analyzers at the same or distributed physical locations. Each of the analyzers is operable to collect and analyze a subset of the objects distributed by the processors and generate an analysis report containing metadata of these objects. Here an analyzer is typically a person but can also be an automatic agent program or a combination of the two. Each analyzer can be characterized by several properties privileges what they are allowed to do capabilities what they can do expertise what they are good at performance and history what they have done before . One or more aggregators are each operable to collect the analysis reports of the objects from the distributed analyzers and create a summary representation which can be one or more of an index a statistical aggregation a textual summary a database instance and other derived representations. One or more synthesizers controllers can then analyze the summary representation formulate one or more hypotheses and pose one or more information requests related to some object or a group of objects back to the analyzers. The system can also include an automated registration component that allows a new component which can be but is not limited to a data source a video segmentation algorithm a full text index to be added into the system seamlessly and dynamically. The inherent value of this system lies in the ability to harness human beings common sense in processing information. Thus analysts will not necessarily be required to have much training although it is possible that some instructions on how to phrase descriptions would be useful.

The various components of the system described above can be computing devices each of which can be but is not limited to a laptop or desktop PC a workstation a Tablet PC a Pocket PC and a mainframe computer. These components can communicate with each other through well established software interfaces that can be Application Programming Interfaces APIs and or Web services.

Referring to a stream of data can be accepted at step and processed and or segmented into a plurality of discrete objects at step . At step these objects can be distributed to a plurality of analyzers located at various physical locations. Each analyzer can then collect and process a subset of the objects generated from the data stream at step and create metadata of these objects at step . The created metadata from the analyzers can then be collected and integrated into one or more summary representations at step for subsequent utilization. Finally hypotheses can be formed about the stream of data and one or more information requests related to some object or group of objects can be created and provided back to the analyzers at step and the analyzers will collect and process the one or more information requests accordingly at step .

In some embodiments the objects can be generated by the processors automatically from a continuous data stream such as a video and or audio stream based on one or more segmentation algorithms. Segmentation is not necessary for sources that are inherently discrete such as photographs chunks of text extracted from larger documents or composites created manually by privileged users such as an administrator.

In some embodiments each of the analyzers is operable to process the objects either manually or via software algorithms using one of pattern matching data mining and textual processing. More specifically audio video and sensor data can be segmented manually or automatically into time intervals based on the amount of activity or through some other heuristic methods. It is also possible for an analyzer to use an algorithm that automatically skips or speeds up uninteresting objects e.g. lack of activities in video to avoid spending analysis efforts in vain. In addition textural documents can be segmented into sections paragraphs or other units.

In some embodiments it is also possible for the processors to synthesize new objects by recomposing existing ones e.g. an object consisting of automatically identified images that reportedly contain red cars. Manual analysis of these composite objects will generate more useful or higher level semantic information for the overall data stream.

In some embodiments the metadata can be in one or more of following forms structured semantic semi structured freeform description and statistical. The information contained in the metadata can include at least one or more of the following a categorization a freeform description of a portion of the stream of data and a set of keywords.

In some embodiments social aspects of this present invention may relate to the degree of trust in the analyzers and to the sensitivity of the data being analyzed. If the data is particularly sensitive analyzers will need to be vetted and access controls need to be applied to objects and to analyzers. This will allow the system to determine automatically who is allowed to see which objects. In addition analysts ability to make useful judgments about objects can be tested by randomly adding known objects and comparing the analysts description to accepted descriptions of that object. This information can be used for training purposes or to detect malicious or random input.

In some embodiments the system supports two basic modes of analyzing the objects from a data stream descriptive and hypothesis testing.

One embodiment may be implemented using a conventional general purpose or a specialized digital computer or microprocessor s programmed according to the teachings of the present disclosure as will be apparent to those skilled in the computer art. Appropriate software coding can readily be prepared by skilled programmers based on the teachings of the present disclosure as will be apparent to those skilled in the software art. The invention may also be implemented by the preparation of integrated circuits or by interconnecting an appropriate network of conventional component circuits as will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art.

One embodiment includes a computer program product which is a machine readable medium media having instructions stored thereon in which can be used to program one or more computing devices to perform any of the features presented herein. The machine readable medium can include but is not limited to one or more types of disks including floppy disks optical discs DVD CD ROMs micro drive and magneto optical disks ROMs RAMs EPROMs EEPROMs DRAMs VRAMs flash memory devices magnetic or optical cards nanosystems including molecular memory ICs or any type of media or device suitable for storing instructions and or data. Stored on any one of the computer readable medium media the present invention includes software for controlling both the hardware of the general purpose specialized computer or microprocessor and for enabling the computer or microprocessor to interact with a human user or other mechanism utilizing the results of the present invention. Such software may include but is not limited to device drivers operating systems execution environments containers and applications.

The foregoing description of the preferred embodiments of the present invention has been provided for the purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise forms disclosed. Many modifications and variations will be apparent to the practitioner skilled in the art. Particularly while the concept interface is used in the embodiments of the systems and methods described above it will be evident that such concept can be interchangeably used with equivalent concepts such as bean class method type component object model and other suitable concepts. Embodiments were chosen and described in order to best describe the principles of the invention and its practical application thereby enabling others skilled in the art to understand the invention the various embodiments and with various modifications that are suited to the particular use contemplated. It is intended that the scope of the invention be defined by the following claims and their equivalents.

