---

title: Methods and systems for converged service creation and execution environment applications
abstract: Embodiments of the present invention relate to systems and methods for a converged service creation and execution application. In an embodiment, an application is coupled to an application server. One or more open application programming interfaces are coupled to the application server, and service session management logic is also coupled to the application server.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07458084&OS=07458084&RS=07458084
owner: AT&T Delaware Intellectual Property, Inc.
number: 07458084
owner_city: Wilmington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050812
---
The present application is a continuation of U.S. patent application No. 09 893 437 filed on Jun. 29 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 981 263 entitled METHODS AND SYSTEMS FOR CONVERGED SERVICE CREATION AND EXECUTION ENVIRONMENT APPLICATIONS and is herein incorporated by reference in its entirety.

Embodiments of the present invention relate to integrated data networks. More particularly embodiments of the present invention relate to methods and systems for converged service creation environment applications.

A known communications system architecture is described in the Telecommunications Information Networking Architecture Consortium TINA C document entitled Overall Concepts and Principles of TINA version 1.0 issued Feb. 17 1995 hereinafter the TINA overview . The overall TINA architecture can include a service architecture having a session model a network architecture related to transport networks and a computing architecture having a distributed processing environment DPE architecture.

The TINA overview describes a service session concept where the session is defined as representing a temporal period during which activities are carried out with the purpose of achieving a goal. Four types of sessions are identified i a service session that represents a single activation of a service ii a user session that represents a single user s interaction with a service session iii a communications session that represents the connections associated with a service session and iv an access session that represents a user s attachment to a system and the user s involvement in services.

A service session as described by the TINA overview is a single activation of a service that relates users of the service together so that they can interact. The TINA service session can be controlled at least in part by a TINA service session manager which offers two types of operational interfaces a a generic session control interface that allows users to join and leave a service session and b service specific operations that are dictated by the capabilities offered by service logic of the service session.

Application server can be coupled to softswitches to provide a service creation platform. Examples of services that can be created and managed by application server include Internet call waiting a multimedia conferencing click to dial and so forth. A media server can also be coupled to application server and to network to provide audio announcements with respect to service applications. For example a media server can provide announcements to users in setting up a conference bridge for a conference call. Media server can also send audio and or video streams to one or more users and or IP endpoints. In an embodiment the signaling between softswitch and signaling gateway can be ISUP integrated services digital network user part signaling TALI transport adaptive layer interface signaling SIGTRAN signaling transport signaling and so on. Media gateway can be a Media Gateway Control Protocol MGCP or Megaco compliant gateway and signaling between softswitch and media gateway can be MGCP Megaco signaling. Communications between data network and media server or media gateways can be RTP realtime transport protocol communications. Communications between application server and softswitches can be according to the Session Initiation Protocol SIP .

The AIN SS7 service creation and execution environment SCE illustrated in however is not adequate for broadband and hybrid messaging services. A softswitch is a voice oriented call processing engine. Softswitch can behave as a PSTN IP service creation bridge that allows narrowband service creation e.g. with IP connectivity via the protocol adaption layer . For converged broadband and or hybrid messaging services a softswitch call model is not adequate. Also converged services with flexible billing e.g. bill by the minute bill based on throughput etc. and or user specified Quality of Service QoS can not be adequately provided by the softswitch call model. Moreover a softswitch does not provide session control at the service level and softswitch vendors typically have different architectures and proprietary Application Programming Interfaces APIs . A large base of hybrid services exist in the IP domain currently and that base is increasing. Converged service creation user specified QoS and flexible billing can become key service differentiators for communications service providers e.g. regional communications service providers data communications service providers long distance communications service providers and so on . In view of the foregoing it can be appreciated that a substantial need exists for methods and systems for converged service creation environment applications.

Embodiments of the present invention relate to methods and systems for converged service creation environment applications. According to an embodiment of the present invention a system includes an application server where the application server is coupled to an application. One or more open application programming interfaces are coupled to the application server and service session management logic is also coupled to the application server.

According to an embodiment of the present invention methods and systems provide for a converged service creation environment CSCE applications. The integrated data network can include an ATM network an IP network an MPLS network or a combination thereof. The integrated data network can include and or be coupled to a PSTN network that includes an AIN SS7 signaling network. CSCE processes can provide a vendor independent service creation and execution framework. In an embodiment new network functional components can be easy to add and upgrading technology without a major impact to service creation and execution can be easy. AIN service creation infrastructure can be interfaced with the CSCE infrastructure and a service session control mechanism can facilitate converged service creation and execution. The CSCE system and processes can provide a modular scalable and extensible architecture.

In an embodiment the NGN service control complex can establish a common converged service creation and execution platform. It can provide open APIs to support third party e commerce applications. Support for traditional class 4 5 services and value added narrowband services can also be supported. In an embodiment the NGN service control complex interacts with application service servers e.g. network resource service servers that provide broadband services and can control end user CPEs IADs customer premises equipment integrated access devices that receive network services. The NGN service control complex in an embodiment can coordinate network service components and allow component level service interactions.

AIN SS7 signaling network can be coupled to and or include a Service Control Point SCP . SCP includes a database and supplies the translation and routing data needed to deliver advanced network services. AIN SS7 signaling network can also be coupled to Service Switching Point SSP . In an embodiment SSP is a PSTN switch that can recognize intelligent network IN calls and route and connect the calls under the direction of an SCP. PSTN can also be coupled to Service Node . A plurality of AIN services can be provided via SCP . Examples of AIN services include intelligent call routing privacy management call screening and so on.

A wireless communications device e.g. a wireless phone a cellular phone wireless messaging device and so on can be coupled to PSTN via base station . PSTN can also be coupled to a telephone . A trunking gateway a line gateway and an H.323 gateway can bridge the PSTN to the data network . Communications between data network and gateways can be RTP communications RTCP real time control protocol communications and so forth. Trunking gateway can be coupled to the PSTN via a trunk such as an intermachine trunk IMT . Line gateway can be coupled to the PSTN via an interface such as a primary rate interface PRI and or a plain old telephone service POTS interface. H.323 gateway can be coupled to the PSTN via a PRI.

Data network can be coupled to a subscriber premises via a digital subscriber line access multiplexer DSLAM and a residential gateway . Residential gateway RGW can be a MGCP Megaco compliant gateway. In an embodiment the subscriber premises can include a home networking system e.g. a Home Phoneline Networking Alliance HPNA network an Ethernet network a wireless network etc. coupled to residential gateway . Data network can also be coupled to a subscriber premises via the Internet and an IP telephony system . The IP telephony system can communicate using an H.323 standard or SIP.

Embodiments of the present invention relate to data communications via one or more networks. The data communications can be carried by communications channels of the one or more networks. A network can include wired communication links e.g. coaxial cable copper wires optical fibers and so on wireless communication links e.g. satellite communication links terrestrial wireless communication links wireless LANs and so on or a combination thereof.

Softswitch can include an Application Programming Interface API which can be a Java Telephony API JTAPI a SIP API a Java AIN API JAIN a combination thereof and so on. Softswitch can also include a one or more protocol stacks such as an SS7 protocol stack a MCGP Megaco protocol stack an H.323 protocol stack a SIP protocol stack and so on. Using the one or more protocol stacks the softswitch can perform generalized call processing for each of the protocol stacks and calls and services can be delivered to a POTS telephone using the SS7 protocol stack to an H.323 device using the H.323 protocol stack to a SIP phone using the SIP protocol stack and so on.

In accordance with an embodiment of the present invention a converged service creation environment is provided. Known softswitches typically include a call processing engine that is based largely on a PSTN domain call processing engine and that handles only narrow band services. For example PSTN domain call processing includes sending signaling messages on one or more SSPS circuit creation and determining whether there is a call reject no response busy indication etc. In an embodiment of the present invention signaling for converged services creation is provided. For example to deliver a movie via a broadband network to a home networking environment the signaling involved can include notifying two parties such as the source of the movie and the destination of the movie determining the IP address of the movie source determining the IP address of the movie destination and allocating of resources to stream the movie from the source to the destination.

To provide a converged services creation environment softswitch can be coupled to a service session manager via a converged services creation and execution environment CSCE messaging bus . CSCE messaging bus can be a Common Object Request Broker Architecture CORBA bus Remote Method Invocation RMI bus a JINI bus a combination thereof and so on. The service session manager can be part of a converged service creation and execution platform that includes one or more open APIs and an Application Server . Application Server can be a UNIX based server a Microsoft Windowst NT server and so on. In an embodiment the service session manager is coupled via the CSCE bus to a server farm including one or more service servers. For example the server farm can include one or more of a third party information server a Wireless Application Protocol WAP server a home networking server an e mail server a messaging server a directory server an Operation Administration Maintenance and Provisioning OAMP billing server a voice recognition server a text to speech server a facsimile fax mail server a voice mail server a conference server a media server a Quality of Service QoS Policy server a combination thereof and so forth. The service servers of the server farm can also be coupled to the data network and communicate with the data network using RTP communications RTCP communications and so forth.

In an embodiment a server e.g. an application server a service server an application service server a network resource server includes a processor and a memory. A processor can be for example an Intel Pentium IV processor manufactured by Intel Corp. of Santa Clara Calif. As another example the processor can be an Application Specific Integrated Circuit ASIC . A server can be for example a UNIX server from Sun Microsystems Inc. of Palo Alto Calif. Memory may be a random access memory RAM a dynamic RAM DRAM a static RAM SRAM a volatile memory a non volatile memory a flash RAM a cache memory a hard disk drive a magnetic storage device an optical storage device a magneto optical storage device or a combination thereof. The memory of the server can store a plurality of instructions adapted to be executed by the processor.

Servers of the server farm can be application service provider ASP servers that at least in part can provide services to users e.g. subscribers customers etc. . The servers of the server farm can also include applications that for example manage aspects of delivery of services to the users. Thus a QoS Policy server can include an application that manages providing a quality of service for delivery of an application such as a media application from media server . As another example OAMP billing server can provide a billing application that manages billing related to delivery of an application such as e mail from e mail server messages from messaging server voice mail from voice mail server conference services from conference server and so on.

A customer profile database and a service profile database can also be coupled to the CSCE bus . The customer profile database can store customer profile information such as customer name customer service delivery information e.g. mobile phone number landline phone number IP phone IP address home networking IP address and so forth customer billing information and services to which the customer has subscribed. The service profile database can store service profile information about the various services to which a customer can subscribe. For example the customer profile database can include a data record corresponding to a customer where the data record identifies the customer as a subscriber of a media service and includes the customer s IP address for delivery of media application. The service profile database can include information about the media service to which the customer has subscribed such as information that identifies media applications of media server to which the customer has subscribed.

Each of customer profile database and service profile database can be accessed by application server of the service session manager . Application server can store applications that interface with customers to manage delivery of application services provided at least in part by one or more of the service servers of the server farm. For example application server can include a generic media delivery application that can be accessed by a customer to specify delivery of one or more media services. The generic media delivery application can include specific interfaces that interface with the media applications of media server .

The service session manager of application server thereby provides for a modularized converged services creation and execution environment. A modularized environment can allow a service provider greater latitude in assembling a converged services creation and execution environment. Known providers of applications typically provide a unified application solution i.e. an integrated application solution. For example Cisco Systems of San Jose Calif. can provide service providers with a unified messaging solution. Unified application solutions however are typically a proprietary solution aimed at a broad range of service providers and are not particularly designed for any particular service provider. Thus while a service provider may ultimately select a unified application solution as the best amongst a plurality of unified application solutions that unified application solution may not be optimized for the service provider s environment. Modularizing the delivery of application services in a converged services creation and execution environment can allow a service provider to implement discrete application solutions instead of implementing a service provider s unified application solution.

In an embodiment of the present invention service session manager can also include an open API that can provide one or more open application programming interfaces to one or more web based applications which a customer can access via a portal . Examples of web based applications can include click to dial click to show click to conference and so on. In another example a web based service providing the subscriber services management application can allow a subscriber to select and configure services provided by the service provider. A customer can access the portal via a network e.g. the Internet and can subscribe to a personal call management service that can include fax messaging e mail messaging call messaging and so on. The fax messaging service can allow a customer to indicate that a fax received from a particular fax number should be converted to an e mail attachment and e mailed to a particular e mail address. As another example the subscriber might specify to the call messaging service that a call received during a certain time period and or from a certain telephone number should be blocked or forwarded to a voice mail messaging system or forwarded to a mobile telephone number and so on. A further example can include specifying that an e mail message from a particular sender and or regarding a certain topic should be forwarded to a mobile phone number after a text to speech application has converted the e mail message to a spoken message. In a still further example a voice mail message can be converted to a text message and included in an e mail to be sent to a specified e mail address. These examples are merely illustrative of the types of applications that can be provided via a portal coupled to a CSCE.

In another embodiment of the present invention open API of service session manager can include one or more open application programming interfaces to one or more E center service applications of an e Center . For example an e Center can include a call center that handles customer service calls and data processing. In an embodiment an e Center can handle voice calls voice mail messages messaging video calls and other types of customer service communications.

Service session manager in an embodiment can manage delivery of services to and from network devices e.g. customer data devices coupled to a home networking system . Examples of network devices coupled to home networking system include IP appliances i.e. IP devices such as an IP telephone an IP based refrigerator an IP based audio entertainment system an IP based microwave an IP based home theater IP based home security devices IP based video monitoring e.g. babysitting monitoring nanny monitoring child monitoring etc. and so on. The home networking system can include a residential gateway that can communicate with service session manager for delivery of services. Operation of the IP appliances can be configured directly via the respective IP appliance or indirectly via the residential gateway . For example operation of an IP based alarm system can be configured to notify not only an alarm company e.g. a monitoring center and or a law enforcement authority but also an owner and or resident of the alarmed property via an e mail address a voice mail message a text message and so on. The owner and or resident of the alarmed property can configure operation of the IP based alarm system with respect to delivery of status information e.g. alarms operational status and so on .

According to an embodiment of the present invention the network appliances that can communicate with the service session manager for the delivery of services can include an embedded local agent that communicates with service session manager . The embedded local agent can be a user applet that is downloaded to an IP device. In another embodiment the embedded local agent can be downloaded to a residential gateway that is coupled to an IP device. In a further embodiment the embedded local agent can be downloaded to a PC.

The service session manager in an embodiment can behave as a service broker among application servers client devices e.g. IP appliances and converged services. Traditionally disjointed front end systems e.g. Web call center e mail fax etc. can be integrated by the service session manager . The service session manager can present a unified infrastructure for customer centric service creation and execution. Service session management and control is provided by the service session manager and the service session manager can include a common API to allow converged service creation and execution. The service session manager can also provide capability controls for application servers and client devices e.g. IP devices and provide a portability layer to insulate the converged service creation environment form vendor specific APIs. The softswitch can act as a voice oriented communication server and bridge PSTN and IP domains for call processing. In an embodiment the softswitch can provide connectivity control for IP devices to access network resources and services.

The server farm e.g. one or more servers coupled to the service session manager via the CSCE messaging bus can include network resource servers. For example messaging server can be a network resource server. As another example media server can be a network resource server. The network resource servers can include self contained service modules which register themselves with the service session manager . The network resource servers can make services available to the CSCE via COBRA RMI or JINI technology and can be technologically transparent to the CSCE. In an embodiment of the present invention the AIN service creation and execution platform e.g. SCP is able to interact with the CSCE via TCP IP or other suitable communications protocols.

The service session manager can also communicate with customer IP devices . A customer IP device can be a PC a residential gateway an IP appliance and so forth. A customer IP device can include a user applet and a user agent . A user applet can be downloaded from a web based application server e.g. after delivery of a service has been ordered during a setup of customer IP device etc. . The user applet can interact with an end user to collect the end user s service request pass the service request to the service manager and display the result of the service request processing to the end user.

User agent can manage delivery of an application service to the customer IP device . For example when the IP device is an audio video device the user agent can manage receipt of audio video data and instructions. Examples of other user agents include an instant messaging user agent a unified messaging user agent an always on user agent and so on.

In accordance with embodiments of the present invention a CSCE environment can be a fully distributed architecture which bridges applications network resource servers and end user devices. It can provide a common service control platform to allow an application to control network resource servers and end user integrated access devices IADs e.g. a residential gateway an ADSL modem etc. for converged services delivery through open APIs. Commercial off the shelf COTS server technology can be used to allow growing server farms quickly evolving server technology smoothly and providing converged services in a seamless manner. A plurality of extensible open APIs can be utilized where each extensible open API can target a different service characteristic e.g. broadband narrowband messaging and so forth . In an embodiment an internal API for controlling resource servers and user agents can be embedded in an IAD or a residential gateway. The internal APIs may be Open Services Gateway Initiative OSGi compliant. The CSCE architecture can be compatible with NGN QoS on demand infrastructure and provide support for flexible billing on a per use basis.

An incoming fax call associated with PSTN phone can be received by fax server . Fax server can send a fax notification to service manager and based at least in part on a user profile in an embodiment service manager can generate and send a send fax to e mail request to fax server . The fax server can attach the received fax to an e mail message and send the e mail message to e mail server . The e mail server can send an e mail notification to service manager and in an embodiment based at least in part on a user profile the service manager can send a redirect e mail request to e mail server . For example a user profile can specify that e mail having certain characteristics e.g. subject sender date time be redirected to a different destination e.g. e mail address fax address etc. . The e mail server can redirect the e mail message and send a redirect e mail response to service manager .

In an embodiment CSCE messaging can converge messaging resources and events e.g. voice calls voice mail e mail personal financial messages home security messages and so on into a messaging service. Different types of messaging resources can interact with each other under a pre defined service logic. Service providers and or subscribers can modify services e.g. subscribe unsubscribe via a web interface by specifying messaging resources. For example a service provider and or subscriber can use a web based service logic definition interface to define and or modify a service logic on line for each individual messaging resource. In an embodiment a rule policy based service logic processing engine can be part of the CSCE messaging operations. In another embodiment flexible billing on a per use basis can be provided.

An incoming call associated with a PSTN phone can be processed at least in part by softswitch which can send a call notification to service manager . The service manager can generate and send an authorization request to softswitch . Depending on the capabilities of PSTN phone the softswitch may send an authorization request to and receive an authorization response from PSTN phone . The softswitch can send an authorization response to service manager and service manager can generate and send a conference request to softswitch . The softswitch can then direct the incoming call associated with PSTN phone to conference server to join the conference related to session and send a conference response to the service manager . When the calls associated with the H.323 phone and the PSTN phone leave the conference softswitch can send leave conference notifications to the service manager . Session shown in may be a session related to a different conference being managed according to the present invention.

In an embodiment the CSCE conferencing operations can allow service subscribers to schedule and conduct a web based conference call. It can allow different types of users from the PSTN domain and the IP domain e.g. H.323 phone users PSTN phone users SIP phone users and so forth to participate in the same conference. In an embodiment video capability and or flexible billing mechanisms can be supported.

The CSCE multimedia on demand environment can allow service subscribers to select a multi media content provider on line and direct the multimedia e.g. movie music and so forth to a registered IP device such as IP based television systems IP based sound systems and so on. Embodiments of the present invention can deliver sophisticated applications in addition to movies on demand and music on demand. In an embodiment the CSCE multimedia on demand environment can provide for flexible billing.

According to an embodiment of the present invention a CSCE includes one or more APIs. In an embodiment the APIs are open APIs. Open APIs of the CSCE can have multiple phases and be scalable and extensible. Embodiments of open APIs can be simple lightweight and designed for high performance. Moreover the open APIs can support third party service development and follow industry API trends and standards. In an embodiment the open APIs utilize distributed object computing technology and are vendor platform independent. Open APIs can be compatible with NGN QoS on demand infrastructure. In an embodiment the APIs can be proprietary. In another embodiment the APIs can be non proprietary.

A narrowband service API in an embodiment can provide narrowband voice oriented call processing capability and map the capability into a vendor specific softswitch API. For example a narrowband service API can have the following structure 

In an embodiment a converged messaging service API can provide messaging oriented event interaction and processing capability and converge different types of messaging sources into one common messaging processing platform.

A first user can search the Internet looking for a new house by using a multimedia PC that has IP telephony capabilities. The first user can find an interesting site enter the site and browse listings on one or more web pages. He can find an illustration of an interesting house on a web page and click a Click2Show button associated with the illustration of the house on the web page. A video window pops up on the video display of first user s PC and video clips of the house are shown in the video window. In an embodiment the first user can talk to a live realtor about the house by clicking a Click2Talk button associated with the illustration of the house on the web page. A service request is sent to the application server which can work with softswitch to setup a call between the first user at PC and a realtor at PC . After the call is setup and completed the first user at PC can talk to the realtor at PC . In an embodiment the call can be a video call when PCs and have video call equipment and software. After some discussion the realtor can show some video clips of other houses to the first user by clicking a Click2Show button so that the realtor and the first user can both see the house that the realtor is showing via video clips. The first user may want to invite a second user e.g. a spouse of the first user to join the discussion with the realtor. The first user can click a Click2Conference button and provide the phone number of the second user e.g. a phone number of a PSTN phone a phone number of an IP phone PC After the call is setup and completed into the conference the second user can talk to the first user and the realtor. For example they can have some discussion and decide when to meet over the weekend to view the actual house. The call to the second user may comprise a video call when PCs have video call equipment and software.

In an embodiment the NetMeeing JMF clients can be started when the realtor decides to accept the incoming call. After the request is received the user agent of the realtor s PC can pop up a call notification window that can display the caller s number and name. The notification window can include several options such as Accept Reject VoiceMail and Ignore that the realtor can select. If the realtor selects the Accept option the user agent can notify the service session manager to complete the call. In an embodiment including video telephony the video show JMF logic sends a local face image and waits to receive the face image of the other party to form a multimedia call. In another embodiment in which a softswitch doesn t support a multi media call the video portion of the call can go through a different channel e.g. a JMF channel . When the softswitch can make the third party call the Accept message can be sent back to the service session manager which can notify the softswitch to setup the two parties call.

After receiving accept confirmation from the user agent e.g. from the user agent of the realtor s PC the service manager sends the third party call request to softswitch communication . In an embodiment the softswitch makes calls to the two parties communications and routes the calls to the conference server where the two parties are bridged together. In an embodiment the call can be routed to an IP based conference server. A bearer channel is established between two NetMeeting end points communications . The user agent starts the video streaming of face images and send the stream to each other. Both parties receive the face image of the other party of the call. Now a multi media call session is established between the first user at PC and the realtor at PC communications .

After some discussion the realtor would like to show some other houses to the first user and clicks a Click2Show button. A service request is thereby sent to the service session manager communication . The service session manager sends another request to the user agent in first user s PC and the realtor s PC to start the JMF clients communications . The respective user agents start the respective JMF clients communications . The service session manager sends a request to the media server to send video clip streams to the two parties so that the two parties can view the same video clips communication . The media server sends the video stream to the first user s PC communication and to the realtor s PC communication .

After the request is received the user agent of the realtor s PC can pop up a call notification window that can display the caller s number and name. The notification window can include several options such as Accept Reject VoiceMail and Ignore that the realtor can select. If the realtor selects the Accept option the user agent can launch the NetMeeting and JMF clients and the NetMeeting clients can call the softswitch. In another embodiment in which a softswitch doesn t support a multi media call the video portion of the call can go through a different channel e.g. a JMF channel . When the softswitch can make the third party call the Accept message can be sent back to the service session manager which can notify the softswitch to setup the two parties call.

In an embodiment H.323 call signaling is sent to the softswitch communications and the softswitch routes the call to conference server which can be implemented in a service node in an embodiment. In an embodiment the call can be routed to an IP based conference server. A bearer channel is established between two NetMeeting end points communications . The service session manager can instruct the user agents to start video streaming of face images and send the streams to each other communications . Both parties receive the face image of the other party of the call communications . Now a multi media call session is established between the first user at PC and the realtor at PC .

After some discussion the realtor would like to show some other houses to the first user and clicks a Click2Show button. A service request is thereby sent to the service session manager communication . The service session manager sends another request to the user agent in first user s PC and the realtor s PC to start the JMF clients communications . The respective user agents start the respective JMF clients communications . The service session manager sends a request to the media server to send video clip streams to the two parties so that the two parties can view the same video clips communication . The media server sends the video stream to the first user s PC communication and to the realtor s PC communication .

In accordance with an embodiment of the present invention instructions adapted to be executed by a processor to perform a method are stored on a computer readable medium. The computer readable medium can be a device that stores digital information. For example a computer readable medium includes a compact disc read only memory CD ROM as is known in the art for storing software. The computer readable medium is accessed by a processor suitable for executing instructions adapted to be executed. The terms instructions adapted to be executed and instructions to be executed are meant to encompass any instructions that are ready to be executed in their present form e.g. machine code by a processor or require further manipulation e.g. compilation decryption or provided with an access code etc. to be ready to be executed by a processor.

Systems and methods in accordance with the embodiments of the present invention disclosed herein can advantageously provide a converged service creation and execution environment CSCE for an integrated data network. The integrated data network can include an ATM network an IP network an MPLS network or a combination thereof. The integrated data network can include and or be coupled to a PSTN network that includes an AIN SS7 signaling network. A vendor independent service creation and execution framework can be provided by a CSCE architecture. In an embodiment it can be easy to add new network functional components. A CSCE architecture can provide for upgrading technology without a major impact to service creation and execution. The CSCE infrastructure can be interfaced with an AIN service creation infrastructure and a service session control mechanism can facilitate converged service creation and execution. The CSCE architecture can be modular scalable and extensible.

Embodiments of systems for an integrated data network converged service creation and execution environment have been described. In the foregoing description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. It will be appreciated however by one skilled in the art that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances structures and devices are shown in block diagram form. Furthermore one skilled in the art can readily appreciate that the specific sequences in which methods are presented and performed are illustrative and it is contemplated that the sequences can be varied and still remain within the spirit and scope of the present invention.

In the foregoing detailed description systems and methods in accordance with embodiments of the present invention have been described with reference to specific exemplary embodiments. Accordingly the present specification and figures are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive.

