---

title: Remote selection and installation of auxiliary content
abstract: A system, method, and apparatus are directed to managing auxiliary content through an enhanced content management system (ECMS), for such as a blog, over a network. Auxiliary content may be selected from a networked device over the network for integration with another site, such as the blog. Such auxiliary content may include graphics, advertisements including sponsored advertisements, selectable audio clips, or the like. When the auxiliary content is selected, and a identifier of the other site is provided, data that may include a script, code, or the like, and that enables access to the auxiliary content is provided to the ECMS using the identifier. The ECMS may then use the data to position the auxiliary content within the other site. Once the position is determined, automatic incorporation of the auxiliary content within a webpage may also be performed using the ECMS.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07636766&OS=07636766&RS=07636766
owner: Yahoo! Inc.
number: 07636766
owner_city: Sunnyvale
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051115
---
The present invention relates generally to application software and more particularly but not exclusively to an apparatus and method for managing auxiliary content through a content management system CMS such as a blog over a network.

The amount of readily available content available to a user over a network such as the Internet has increased almost exponentially over the past several decades. Moreover there is little indication that this rate of increase in available content will not continue in the foreseeable future. Providers of such content include blogs news sources sports sources weather sources libraries friends universities businesses and the like. Many of these content providers provide new or changed content almost regularly.

Management of such content has been made easier by using various applications including a content management system CMS . Simply stated a CMS is often a web application that a content provider may employ to manage a website and web content. There exists a wide variety of such CMSs from which a content provider may select. However many of today s CMSs remain limited in scope in what content may be managed or how it may be managed. This may be especially true where the content may be obtained from another source over a network. Moreover many CMSs today may be complex requiring a level of technical knowledge that some content providers would prefer not to have to master. Therefore it is with respect to these considerations and others that the present invention has been made.

The present invention now will be described more fully hereinafter with reference to the accompanying drawings which form a part hereof and which show by way of illustration specific exemplary embodiments by which the invention may be practiced. This invention may however be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art. Among other things the present invention may be embodied as methods or devices. Accordingly the present invention may take the form of an entirely hardware embodiment an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment combining software and hardware aspects. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense.

Throughout the specification and claims the following terms take the meanings explicitly associated herein unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. The phrase in one embodiment as used herein does not necessarily refer to the same embodiment though it may. The phrase in another embodiment as used herein does not necessarily refer to a different embodiment although it may. As used herein the term or is an inclusive or operator and is equivalent to the term and or unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. The term based on is not exclusive and allows for being based on additional factors not described unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. In addition throughout the specification the meaning of a an and the include plural references. The meaning of in includes in and on. 

Additionally as used herein the term API refers to any form of application programming interface or the like. An API may be implemented in any programming language or enabled by hardware. An API may expose objects along with their methods function calls or the like. Such an API may include but is not limited to a web services interface a remote procedure call RPC interface or the like. Several APIs have been written that allow external programs to get and set text and various other attributes of a weblog blog post including MetaWeblog API BLOGGER API and the like. Moreover at least some of the APIs may employ various communication protocols such as RPC eXtensible Markup Language XML RPC RSS or the like.

Briefly stated the present invention is directed towards a system method and apparatus for use in managing auxiliary content through an enhanced content management system ECMS such as a blog over a network. Auxiliary content may be selected from a networked device over the network for integration with another site such as the blog. Selected auxiliary content may include graphics advertisements including sponsored advertisements selectable audio clips photographs banners brands or the like. When the auxiliary content is selected a network address of the other site also may be provided. Data may then be provided to the ECMS through the network address. The data may include a script code applet application HTML or the like that enables access to the auxiliary content by the ECMS. In one embodiment an API is used to provide the data to the ECMS. The ECMS may then be employed to position the auxiliary content within a webpage. In one embodiment the ECMS enables positioning of the auxiliary content within a side bar a top bar a bottom bar or the like. In one embodiment the auxiliary content may also be positioned with respect to other auxiliary content or even within primary content. Once the position is determined automatic incorporation of the auxiliary content within the webpage may also be performed using the ECMS. In one embodiment incorporation of the auxiliary content includes inserting at least a portion of the data and or auxiliary content into a template associated with the side bar top bar bottom bar or the like.

As used herein the term auxiliary content refers to a placement and or a relevance of the content based in part on a theme of a website. Such theme may include any of a variety of topics interests or the like including but not limited to business education gossip dating car repair music movies finance personal technical news or the like. Primary content typically is directed to the theme of the website while in one embodiment auxiliary content may be considered to complement or support the primary content. For example auxiliary content may include advertisements archival content brand calendars photographs or the like. In one embodiment auxiliary content may be displayed and or accessed through side bars top bars bottom bars or frames or a website. described in more detail below provides one embodiment of an example website useable to illustrate positioning of auxiliary content.

As shown in the figure system includes client devices network Enhanced Content Management System ECMS server and Auxiliary Content Provider ACP server . Network enables communication between client devices ECMS server and ACP server .

Generally client devices may include virtually any computing device capable of connecting to another computing device and receiving information. Such devices may also include portable devices such as cellular telephones smart phones display pagers radio frequency RF devices infrared IR devices Personal Digital Assistants PDAs handheld computers wearable computers tablet computers integrated devices combining one or more of the preceding devices and the like. Client devices may also include other computing devices such as personal computers multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network devices and the like. As such client devices may range widely in terms of capabilities and features. For example a client device configured as a cell phone may have a numeric keypad and a few lines of monochrome LCD display on which only text may be displayed.

In another example a web enabled client device may have a touch sensitive screen a stylus and several lines of color LCD display in which both text and graphics may be displayed. Moreover the web enabled client device may include a browser application enabled to receive and to send wireless application protocol messages WAP and or wired application messages and the like. In one embodiment the browser application is enabled to employ HyperText Markup Language HTML Dynamic HTML Handheld Device Markup Language HDML Wireless Markup Language WML WMLScript JavaScript EXtensible HTML xHTML Compact HTML CHTML and the like to display and send a message.

Client devices also may include at least one client application that is configured to communicate with a network device such as ECMS ACP server or the like. The client application may include a capability to provide and receive textual content graphical content audio content alerts messages and the like. Moreover client devices may be further configured to communicate a message such as through a Short Message Service SMS Multimedia Message Service MMS instant messaging IM internet relay chat IRC mIRC JABBER and the like between another computing device.

The client application also may enable client devices to access ACP server to obtain auxiliary content useable for display within a webpage. For example the client application may enable a user to review content available from ACP server and to select at least a portion of the content for use as auxiliary content within the webpage. The selected content may include virtually any of a variety of content including a brand a logo a picture a graphic a movie an advertisement including a sponsored advertisement an audio clip financial information or the like. The client application may then enable the user to indicate a network address for ECMS so that ACP server may communicate with ECMS . In one embodiment the network address is a URL however the invention is not so limited and the network address may also be an IP address or the like. In one embodiment the client application is a browser. However the client application may also be an IM application SMS application an audio driven application or the like.

In one embodiment client devices may be configured such that an end user may operate the computing device to make requests for data such as auxiliary content and or services from other computers on the network. In one embodiment client devices may employ a network interface unit sometimes called a transceiver such as described below to communicate information with another computing device. Often the requested data resides in computing devices such as ACP server . In this specification the term client refers to a computer s general role as a requester of data or services and the term server refers to a computer s role as a provider of data or services. In general it is possible that a computer can act as a client requesting data or services in one transaction and act as a server providing data or services in another transaction thus changing its role from client to server or vice versa.

Network is configured to couple one computing device with another computing device. Network may be enabled to employ any form of computer readable media for communicating information from one electronic device to another. Also network can include the Internet in addition to local area networks LANs wide area networks WANs direct connections such as through a universal serial bus USB port other forms of computer readable media or any combination thereof. On an interconnected set of LANs including those based on differing architectures and protocols a router acts as a link between LANs enabling messages to be sent from one to another. Also communication links within LANs typically include twisted wire pair or coaxial cable while communication links between networks may utilize analog telephone lines full or fractional dedicated digital lines including T1 T2 T3 and T4 Integrated Services Digital Networks ISDNs Digital Subscriber Lines DSLs wireless links including satellite links or other communication links known to those skilled in the art. Furthermore remote computers and other related electronic devices could be remotely connected to either LANs or WANs via a modem and temporary telephone link.

Network may further include any of a variety of wireless sub networks that may further overlay stand alone ad hoc networks and the like to provide an infrastructure oriented connection. Such sub networks may include mesh networks Wireless LAN WLAN networks cellular networks and the like. Network may also include an autonomous system of terminals gateways routers and the like connected by wireless radio links and the like. These connectors may be configured to move freely and randomly and organize themselves arbitrarily such that the topology of network may change rapidly.

Network may further employ a plurality of access technologies including 2nd 2G 2.5 3rd 3G or 4th 4G generation radio access for cellular systems WLAN Wireless Router WR mesh and the like. Access technologies such as 2G 3G and future access networks may enable wide area coverage for mobile devices such as one or more of client devices with various degrees of mobility. For example network may enable a radio connection through a radio network access such as Global System for Mobile communication GSM General Packet Radio Services GPRS Enhanced Data GSM Environment EDGE Wideband Code Division Multiple Access WCDMA CDMA2000 and the like. Network may also be constructed for use with various other wired and wireless communication protocols including TCP IP UDP SIP SMS RTP WAP CDMA TDMA EDGE UMTS GPRS GSM UWB WiMax IEEE 802.11x and the like. In essence network may include virtually any wired and or wireless communication mechanisms by which information may travel between one computing device and another computing device network and the like.

Additionally communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave data signal or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The terms modulated data signal and carrier wave signal include a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information instructions data and the like in the signal. By way of example communication media includes wired media such as twisted pair coaxial cable fiber optics wave guides and other wired media and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media.

ACP server may include any computing device capable of communicating packets with client devices and or ECMS . Each packet may convey a piece of information. A packet may be sent for handshaking i.e. to establish a connection or to acknowledge receipt of data. The packet may include information such as a request a response or the like. In one embodiment the packets may include content such as auxiliary content that may be displayable or otherwise useable within a webpage managed and or hosted by ECMS . In another embodiment the packet may include code a script HTML an applet or the like that is useable to access the auxiliary content by such as ECMS . Generally packets received by ACP server will be formatted according to TCP IP but they could also be formatted using another transport protocol such as User Datagram Protocol UDP Internet Control Message Protocol ICMP NetBEUI IPX SPX token ring and the like. Moreover the packets may be communicated between ACP server and another computing device employing HTTP HTTPS or the like.

In one embodiment ACP server is configured to operate as a website server. However ACP server is not limited to web servers and may also operate a messaging server a File Transfer Protocol FTP server a database server a graphic server and the like. ACP server may include an interface such as a web based interface that enables a user to select auxiliary content for incorporation into a webpage. ACP server may further provide webpages scripts applets applications or the like that receive a network address for ECMS that may be employed to communicate with ECMS . ACP server may send auxiliary content to ECMS . In one embodiment ACP server may enable access to the auxiliary content by sending data such as code a script URL applet application HTML or the like that enables the incorporation of the auxiliary content. In one embodiment ACP server may use an API provided by ECMS or the like to communicate at least some of the data and or auxiliary content to ECMS . In one embodiment ACP server may provide the data and or auxiliary content to ECMS through an HTTP POST operation. However the invention is not so limited and an XML RPC command may be used or any of a variety of other mechanisms that allow an external application to provide and or set text and or other attributes of a website.

One embodiment of ECMS server is described in more detail below in conjunction with . Briefly however ECMS server may include virtually any network device that is configured to host an enhanced content management system ECMS for use in managing content displayable at a website. While typical CMSs may enable a user to manage primary content at the website the ECMS enhances this functionality by enabling management of auxiliary content for the website as well. In one embodiment the website may be hosted on ECMS server although the invention is not so constrained. For example the website may be hosted on a different server device than ECMS server .

ECMS server may receive data and or auxiliary content from another computing device such as ACP or the like. ECMS server may then employ the ECMS to allow a user to incorporate the auxiliary content into the website. In one embodiment ECMS server provides an API for use in receiving the data and or auxiliary content.

Devices that may operate as ACP server and or ECMS server include personal computers desktop computers multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs servers and the like.

As shown in network device includes at least one central processing unit in communication with main memory by way of bus or the like. Main memory generally includes RAM ROM and may include other storage means such as one or more levels of cache not shown . Main memory illustrates a type of processor readable media namely computer storage media. Network device includes cd rom dvd rom drive a form of CD ROM DVD or other optical storage media. Computer storage media may also include volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as processor executable instructions data structures program modules and the like. Other examples of computer storage media include EPROM flash memory or other semiconductor memory technology magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium that can be used to store the desired information and that can be accessed by a computing device.

Network device includes an input output interface for communicating with input output devices such as a keyboard mouse printer and the like. A user such as a system administrator or the like of network device may use input output devices to interact by way of a user interface that may be separate from or integrated with operating system and or programs . Interaction with the user interface may include interaction by way of a visual display using video display adapter .

Network device may include secondary storage for storage of program modules data and the like not in main memory including removable computer readable storage and or non removable computer readable storage . Removable storage may comprise one or more of optical disc media floppy disks and magnetic tape readable by way of an optical disc drive floppy disk drive and tape drive respectively. Secondary storage may also include flash memory or other memory technology and generally includes any medium usable for storage of information and accessible by a computing device.

By way of network interface unit network device may communicate with a WAN such as the Internet a LAN a wired telephone network a wireless communications network or some other communications network such as network of . Network interface unit may comprise a transceiver a network interface card and the like. Network interface unit is sometimes known as a transceiver transceiving device or network interface card NIC .

Main memory typically stores firmware for boot loading and controlling low level operation of network device . Main memory also stores programs for loading and execution by central processing unit such as operating system and other programs which may include for example server applications client applications networking applications messaging applications such as applications for RSS communication web server applications security applications SMS applications IM applications and the like. Main memory may further include ECMS . ECMS includes auxiliary content manager ACM . Although illustrated as a component within ECMS the invention is not so limited. For example ECMS and ACM may operate as distinct applications ACM may operate as a plug in to ECMS or the like without departing from the scope or spirit of the invention.

ECMS includes virtually any web application useable for organizing and facilitating websites and their content. As such ECMS may enable a user to design publish and otherwise mange websites. Typically ECMS may operate on primary content and the overall look and or feel of a website while ACM may provide functionality to design incorporate and otherwise manage auxiliary content of the website.

ACM may operate to provide a user interface for managing the auxiliary content. In one embodiment ACM may provide a separate interface that may pop up overlay or otherwise reside at a separate location within a user s display. Examples of interfaces useable to manage auxiliary content are described in more detail below in conjunction with .

ACM may also provide an API or other communications mechanism that enables another computing device such as ACP server of to provide data and or auxiliary content or the like. As described above in one embodiment the data provides a mechanism that may be useable to access the auxiliary content. For example data and or auxiliary content may be provided to ACM using SMS IM email FTP or any of a variety of other communications mechanisms.

ACM may receive data that includes a script code applet application or the like that automatically enables access and incorporation of the auxiliary content. In one embodiment ACM may receive the data and store it at such as cd rom dvd rom drive non removable computer readable storage or the like. In another embodiment ACM may retrieve the auxiliary content and store the auxiliary content. ACM may also store the data and or auxiliary content remotely. In addition ACM may employ a process substantially similar to process described below in conjunction with .

As shown in the figure webpage includes top bar side bar bottom bar and main . It is important to note that more or less of the bars may be used on a webpage. For example although not shown a side bar substantially similar to side bar may also be located on a right side of main . Each of the components bars and main may be formed using a variety of mechanisms including frames scripts or the like.

To illustrate a typical usage top bar side bar and bottom bar may include auxiliary content while main typically includes primary content. Thus auxiliary content may be viewed as complementary to the theme of a website based at least in part on its position with respect to primary content. However this is not mandatory and in one embodiment auxiliary content may also reside within main without departing from the scope or spirit of the invention.

In one embodiment a template may be used for one or more of the bars or and main . The template may include code such as HTML code a script applet or the like that indicates a layout view or the like for the content. When data and or content are received it may be incorporated within the template using the present invention.

The operation of certain aspects of the invention will now be described with respect to . illustrates a logical flow diagram generally showing one embodiment of a process for managing auxiliary content through an enhanced content management system. Managing the auxiliary content includes managing of the auxiliary for use with a website such as a blog or the like that may use at least one of a side bar top bar or bottom bar for displaying information in addition to a main window or frame.

Process of begins after a start block at block where auxiliary content is selected for addition into a webpage. In one embodiment a user may employ a browser on their client device to access a remote site that may provide auxiliary content. The remote site for example may be ACP server of . The remote site may provide an interface that allows the user to select auxiliary content for incorporation into the webpage.

Processing flows next to block where the remote site is provided a network address for where the auxiliary content is to be provided. In one embodiment the network address is associated with a server that may host the ECMS.

Process continues then to block where data associated with the auxiliary content is received. In one embodiment the data includes code a script or the like that enables the ECMS to access and otherwise incorporate the auxiliary content into the webpage. In one embodiment the auxiliary content may also be received. The data and or auxiliary content may be received using any of a variety of mechanisms including an HTTP POST an SMS message an FTP transfer or the like. Processing continues next to block where the received data and or auxiliary content may be saved. In one embodiment saving the data and or auxiliary content allows for ready modification of the auxiliary content and or data.

Processing flows next to decision block where a determination is made whether an appearance of the auxiliary content on the webpage is to be modified. Modification of the appearance may include but is not limited to positioning the auxiliary content within a bar hiding the auxiliary content editing the auxiliary content or the like. In one embodiment modification of the appearance may further include positioning the auxiliary content within a main screen frame or the like with respect to primary content. If modification of the appearance is to be performed processing flows to block where the appearance of the auxiliary content on a webpage may be modified. As possible embodiments illustrate example interfaces for use in modifying the appearance of the auxiliary content. Processing then loops back to decision block to allow the user to make additional modifications as appropriate.

If at decision block no modifications are to be performed processing flows to block where the auxiliary content may be automatically incorporated into the webpage. In one embodiment the data including code script applet or the like is used at least in part to incorporate the auxiliary content into a template for use in modifying the frame or bar in which the auxiliary content is automatically incorporated. Processing then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

It will be understood that each block of the flowchart illustration and combinations of blocks in the flowchart illustration can be implemented by computer program instructions. These program instructions may be provided to a processor to produce a machine such that the instructions which execute on the processor create means for implementing the actions specified in the flowchart block or blocks. The computer program instructions may be executed by a processor to cause a series of operational steps to be performed by the processor to produce a computer implemented process such that the instructions which execute on the processor provide steps for implementing the actions specified in the flowchart block or blocks.

Accordingly blocks of the flowchart illustration support combinations of means for performing the specified actions combinations of steps for performing the specified actions and program instruction means for performing the specified actions. It will also be understood that each block of the flowchart illustration and combinations of blocks in the flowchart illustration can be implemented by special purpose hardware based systems which perform the specified actions or steps or combinations of special purpose hardware and computer instructions.

As mentioned above show embodiments of an interface for use in managing auxiliary content to a webpage. may for example illustrate possible interfaces useable with ACM of . It will be appreciated that not all components of are illustrated and that they may include more or less components than those shown. The components shown however are sufficient to disclose illustrative interface embodiments for practicing the invention.

As shown in interface includes auxiliary content identifiers location selector action selectors and new item information .

Auxiliary content identifiers include labels names or similar monikers that may be employed to identify various auxiliary content items. In one embodiment auxiliary content identifiers may indicate a position of one auxiliary content item with respect to another auxiliary content item within a bar frame or the like.

Location selector provides a user an ability to locate auxiliary content within different bars. Thus location selector may employ a menu fill in the blank or the like that allows the user to change a bar within which an auxiliary content item may appear. For example location selector may allow the user to change an auxiliary content item from a left side bar a right side bar a top side or a bottom side. In one embodiment location selector may also allow the user to place an auxiliary content item within a main window or frame.

New item information may allow a user to add an auxiliary content item to a bar by entering its identifier and or data associated with the auxiliary content item.

Action selectors enable a user to modify a position or appearance of an auxiliary content item. For example the user may be enabled to move one auxiliary content item up or down in relationship to another auxiliary content item within auxiliary content items. Moreover action selectors may also allow the user to delete an auxiliary content item from display hide an auxiliary content item or even edit other aspects of its appearance.

One embodiment of an interface for use in editing an auxiliary content item is illustrated in . As shown interface includes preview active indicator item name and item data . Preview may illustrate how one or more auxiliary content items may appear on a webpage. Active indicator may be used to indicate which auxiliary content item is being edited while item name indicates the identifier associated with the auxiliary content item and item data includes associated data for the auxiliary content item. As shown the user may edit item data to further modify an appearance of the auxiliary content item including but not limited to its size borders associated with the auxiliary content item a color font sizes or the like.

The above specification examples and data provide a complete description of the manufacture and use of the composition of the invention. Since many embodiments of the invention can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention the invention resides in the claims hereinafter appended.

