---

title: Selective androgen receptor modulators and methods of use thereof
abstract: This invention provides SARM compounds and their use in treating a variety of diseases or conditions in a subject, including, inter-alia, a muscle wasting disease and/or disorder or a bone-related disease and/or disorder.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07622503&OS=07622503&RS=07622503
owner: University of Tennessee Research Foundation
number: 07622503
owner_city: Knoxville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050607
---
This application is a Continuation In Part Application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 961 380 filed Oct. 12 2004 which claims priority from U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 510 138 filed Oct. 14 2003 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 861 923 filed Jun. 7 2004 which is a Continuation In Part Application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 310 150 filed Dec. 5 2002 which claims priority of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 336 185 filed Dec. 6 2001 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 863 524 filed Jun. 9 2004 now abandoned which is a Continuation In Part Application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 371 213 filed Feb. 24 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 026 500 which is a Continuation In Part Application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 270 232 filed Oct. 15 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 838 484 which is a Continuation In Part Application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 935 045 filed Aug. 23 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 569 896 which claims priority of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 300 083 filed Jun. 25 2001 and U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 367 355 filed Aug. 24 2000 which are hereby incorporated by reference.

This invention was made in whole or in part with government support under grant number R29 CA068096 awarded by the National Cancer Institute National Institute of Health and under grant number R15 HD35329 awarded by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development National Institute of Health. The government may have certain rights in the invention.

The androgen receptor AR is a ligand activated transcriptional regulatory protein that mediates induction of male sexual development and function through its activity with endogenous androgens. Androgens are generally known as the male sex hormones. The androgenic hormones are steroids which are produced in the body by the testes and the cortex of the adrenal gland or can be synthesized in the laboratory. Androgenic steroids play an important role in many physiologic processes including the development and maintenance of male sexual characteristics such as muscle and bone mass prostate growth spermatogenesis and the male hair pattern Matsumoto Endocrinol. Met. Clin. N. Am. 23 857 75 1994 . The endogenous steroidal androgens include testosterone and dihydrotestosterone DHT . Testosterone is the principal steroid secreted by the testes and is the primary circulating androgen found in the plasma of males. Testosterone is converted to DHT by the enzyme 5 alpha reductase in many peripheral tissues. DHT is thus thought to serve as the intracellular mediator for most androgen actions Zhou et al. Molec. Endocrinol. 9 208 18 1995 . Other steroidal androgens include esters of testosterone such as the cypionate propionate phenylpropionate cyclopentylpropionate isocarporate enanthate and decanoate esters and other synthetic androgens such as 7 Methyl Nortestosterone MENT and its acetate ester Sundaram et al. 7 Alpha Methyl Nortestosterone MENT The Optimal Androgen For Male Contraception Ann. Med. 25 199 205 1993 Sundaram . Because the AR is involved in male sexual development and function the AR is a likely target for effecting male contraception or other forms of hormone replacement therapy.

BMD bone mineral density decreases with age in both males and females. Decreased amounts of bone mineral content BMC and BMD correlate with decreased bone strength and predispose patients to fracture.

Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disease characterized by low bone mass and deterioration of bone tissue with a consequent increase in bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture. In the U.S. the condition affects more than 25 million people and causes more than 1.3 million fractures each year including 500 000 spine 250 000 hip and 240 000 wrist fractures annually. Hip fractures are the most serious consequence of osteoporosis with 5 20 of patients dying within one year and over 50 of survivors being incapacitated. The elderly are at greatest risk of osteoporosis and the problem is therefore predicted to increase significantly with the aging of the population. Worldwide fracture incidence is forecasted to increase threefold over the next 60 years and one study estimated that there will be 4.5 million hip fractures worldwide in 2050.

Women are at greater risk of osteoporosis than men. Women experience a sharp acceleration of bone loss during the five years following menopause. Other factors that increase the risk include smoking alcohol abuse a sedentary lifestyle and low calcium intake. However osteoporosis also occurs frequently in males. It is well established that the bone mineral density of males decrease with age. Decreased amounts of bone mineral content and density correlates with decreased bone strength and predisposes to fracture. The molecular mechanisms underlying the pleiotropic effects of sex hormones in non reproductive tissues are only beginning to be understood but it is clear that physiologic concentrations of androgens and estrogens play an important role in maintaining bone homeostasis throughout the life cycle. Consequently when androgen or estrogen deprivation occurs there is a resultant increase in the rate of bone remodeling that tilts the balance of resorption and formation to the favor of resorption that contributes to the overall loss of bone mass. In males the natural decline in sex hormones at maturity direct decline in androgens as well as lower levels of estrogens derived from peripheral aromatization of androgens is associated with the frailty of bones. This effect is also observed in males who have been castrated.

Muscle wasting refers to the progressive loss of muscle mass and or to the progressive weakening and degeneration of muscles including the skeletal or voluntary muscles which control movement cardiac muscles which control the heart cardiomyopathics and smooth muscles. Chronic muscle wasting is a chronic condition i.e. persisting over a long period of time characterized by progressive loss of muscle mass weakening and degeneration of muscle.

The loss of muscle mass that occurs during muscle wasting can be characterized by a muscle protein degradation by catabolism. Protein catabolism occurs because of an unusually high rate of protein degradation an unusually low rate of protein synthesis or a combination of both. Muscle protein catabolism whether caused by a high degree of protein degradation or a low degree of protein synthesis leads to a decrease in muscle mass and to muscle wasting.

Muscle wasting is associated with chronic neurological genetic or infectious pathologies diseases illnesses or conditions. These include Muscular Dystrophies such as Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy and Myotonic Dystrophy Muscle Atrophies such as Post Polio Muscle Atrophy PPMA Cachexias such as Cardiac Cachexia AIDS Cachexia and Cancer Cachexia malnutrition Leprosy Diabetes Renal Disease Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease COPD Cancer end stage Renal failure Sarcopenia Emphysema Osteomalacia HIV Infection AIDS and Cardiomyopathy.

In addition other circumstances and conditions are linked to and can cause muscle wasting. These include chronic lower back pain advanced age central nervous system CNS injury peripheral nerve injury spinal cord injury chemical injury central nervous system CNS damage peripheral nerve damage spinal cord damage chemical damage burns disuse deconditioning that occurs when a limb is immobilized long term hospitalization due to illness or injury and alcoholism.

An intact androgen receptor AR signaling pathway is crucial for appropriate development of skeletal muscles. Furthermore an intact AR signaling pathway increases lean muscle mass muscle strength and muscle protein synthesis.

Muscle wasting if left unabated can have dire health consequences. For example the changes that occur during muscle wasting can lead to a weakened physical state that is detrimental to an individual s health resulting in increased susceptibility to infraction and poor performance status. In addition muscle wasting is a strong predictor of morbidity and mortality in patients suffering from cachexia and AIDS.

Innovative approaches are urgently needed at both the basic science and clinical levels to prevent and treat osteoporosis and other bone related disorders and muscle wasting in particular chronic muscle wasting. The present invention is directed to satisfying this need.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof represented by a structure of formula I 

In another embodiment the present invention provides a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof represented by a structure of formula III 

In another embodiment this invention provides a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof represented by a structure of formula IV 

In one embodiment according to this aspect of the invention X is O or in another embodiment T is OH or in another embodiment R1 is CH3 or in another embodiment Z is NOor in another embodiment Z is CN or in another embodiment R2 R3 R5 R6 are hydrogens and R4 is NHCOCF3 or in another embodiment R2 R3 R5 R6 are hydrogens and R4 is F or in another embodiment R2 R3 R5 R6 are hydrogens or in another embodiment Z is in the para position or in another embodiment Y is in the meta position or in another embodiment any combination thereof

In another embodiment the invention provides a pharmaceutical composition comprising the SARM compounds of formula I III or IV and a suitable carrier or diluent.

In another embodiment the invention provides a use of the compound of formula I III or IV or a composition comprising the same in treating a subject having a bone related disorder.

In another embodiment the invention provides a use of the compound of formula I III or IV or a composition comprising the same in increasing the strength of or mass of a bone of a subject or in promoting bone formation in a subject.

In another embodiment the invention provides a use of the compound of formula I III or IV for treating preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing the incidence of a muscle wasting disorder in a subject.

In another embodiment the invention provides a use of the compound of formula I III or IV in increasing muscle performance muscle size muscle strength or any combination thereof in a subject.

In another embodiment the invention provides a use of the compound of formula I III or IV or a composition comprising the same in treating obesity or diabetes associated with a metabolic syndrome in a subject

In another embodiment the invention provides a use of the compound of formula I III or IV or a composition comprising the same in promoting or speeding recovery following a surgical procedure.

In another embodiment the invention provides a use of the compound of formula I III or IV or a composition comprising the same in promoting or suppressing spermatogenesis in a male subject

In the following detailed description numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the invention. However it will be understood by those skilled in the art that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known methods procedures and components have not been described in detail so as not to obscure the present invention

In one embodiment the present invention provides a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof represented by a structure of formula I 

In another embodiment the present invention provides a SARM represented by a structure of formula II 

In one embodiment the invention provides a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof represented by a structure of formula III 

In another embodiment this invention provides a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof represented by a structure of formula IV 

In one embodiment according to this aspect of the invention X is O or in another embodiment T is OH or in another embodiment R1 is CH or in another embodiment Z is NOor in another embodiment Z is CN or in another embodiment R2 R3 R5 R6 are hydrogens and R4 is NHCOCF3 or in another embodiment R2 R3 R5 R6 we hydrogens and R4 is F or in another embodiment R2 R3 R5 R6 are hydrogens or in another embodiment Z is in the para position or in another embodiment Y is in the meta position or in another embodiment any combination thereof.

In one embodiment the invention provides a pharmaceutical composition including compounds of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof and a suitable carrier or diluent.

An alkyl group refers in one embodiment to a saturated aliphatic hydrocarbon including straight chain branched chain aid cyclic alkyl groups. In one embodiment the alkyl group has 1 12 carbons. In another embodiment the alkyl group has 1 7 carbons. In another embodiment the alkyl group has 1 6 carbons. In another embodiment the alkyl group has 1 4 carbons. The alkyl group may be unsubstituted or substituted by one or more groups selected from halogen hydroxy alkoxy carbonyl amido alkylamido dialkylamido nitro amino alkylamino dialkylamino carboxyl thio and thioalkyl.

An alkenyl group refers in another embodiment to an unsaturated hydrocarbon including straight chain branched chain and cyclic groups having one or more double bond. The alkenyl group may have one double bond two double bonds three double bonds etc. Examples of alkenyl groups are ethenyl propenyl butenyl cyclohexenyl etc. The alkenyl group may be unsubstituted or substituted by one or more groups selected from halogen hydroxy alkoxy carbonyl amido alkylamido dialkylamido nitro amino alkylamino dialkylamino carboxyl thio and thioalkyl.

A haloalkyl group refers to an alkyl group as defined above which is substituted by one or more halogen atoms in one embodiment by F in another embodiment by Cl in another embodiment by Br in another embodiment by 1.

An aryl group refers to an aromatic group having at least one carbocyclic aromatic group or heterocyclic aromatic group which may be unsubstituted or substituted by one or more groups selected from halogen haloalkyl hydroxy alkoxy carbonyl amido alkylamido dialkylamido nitro amino alkylamino dialkylamino carboxy or thio or thioalkyl. Nonlimiting examples of aryl rings are phenyl naphthyl pyranyl pyrrolyl pyrazinyl pyrimidinyl pyrazolyl pyridinyl furanyl thiophenyl thiazolyl imidazolyl isoxazolyl and the like.

A hydroxyl group refers to an OH group. It is understood by a person skilled in the art that when T in die compounds of the present invention is OR R is not OH.

In one embodiment the term halo or halogen refers to in one embodiment to F in another embodiment to Cl in another embodiment to Br in another embodiment to I.

An arylalkyl group refers in another embodiment to an alkyl bound to an aryl wherein alkyl and aryl are as defined above. An example of an arylalkyl group is a benzyl group.

In one embodiment this invention provides a SARM compound and or analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph impurity or crystal or combinations thereof. In one embodiment this invention provides an analog of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides a derivative of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides an isomer of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides a metabolite of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides a pharmaceutical product of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides a hydrate of the SARM compound. In another embodiment tills invention provides an N oxide of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides a prodrug of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides a polymorph of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides a crystal of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides an impurity of the SARM compound. In another embodiment this invention provides composition comprising a SARM compound as described herein or in another embodiment a combination of an analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph impurity or crystal of the SARM compounds of the present invention.

In one embodiment the term isomer includes but is not limited to optical isomers and analogs structural isomers and analogs conformational isomers and analogs and the like.

In one embodiment the term isomer is meant to encompass optical isomers of the SARM compound. It will be appreciated by those skilled in the art that the SARMs of the present invention contain at least one chiral center. Accordingly the SARMs used in the methods of the present invention may exist in and be isolated in optically active or racemic forms. Some compounds may also exhibit polymorphism. It is to be understood that the present invention encompasses any racemic optically active polymorphic or stereoisomeric form or mixtures thereof which form possesses properties useful in the treatment of androgen related conditions described herein. In one embodiment the SARMs are the pure R isomers. In another embodiment the SARMs are the pure S isomers. In another embodiment the SARMs are a mixture of the R and die S isomers. In another embodiment the SARMs are a racemic mixture comprising an equal amount of the R and the S isomers. It is well known in the art how to prepare optically active forms for example by resolution of the racemic form by recrystallization techniques by synthesis from optically active starting materials by chiral synthesis or by chromatographic separation using a chiral stationary phase .

The invention includes pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the SARMs of this invention which may be produced in one embodiment using an amino substituted SARM and an organic and inorganic acids for example citric acid and hydrochloric acid. Pharmaceutically acceptable salts can be prepared from the phenolic compounds in other embodiments by treatment with inorganic bases for example sodium hydroxide. In another embodiment esters of the phenolic compounds can be made with aliphatic and aromatic carboxylic acids for example acetic acid and benzoic acid esters.

This invention provides derivatives of the SARM compounds. In one embodiment derivatives includes but is not limited to ether derivatives acid derivatives amide derivatives ester derivatives and the like. In another embodiment this invention further includes hydrates of the SARM compounds. In one embodiment hydrate includes but is not limited to hemihydrate monohydrate dihydrate trihydrate and the like.

This invention provides in other embodiments metabolites of the SARM compounds. In one embodiment metabolite means any substance produced from another substance by metabolism or a metabolic process.

This invention provides in other embodiments pharmaceutical products of the SARM compounds. The term pharmaceutical product refers in other embodiments to a composition suitable for pharmaceutical use pharmaceutical composition for example as described herein.

Selective androgen receptor modulators SARMs are a class of androgen receptor targeting agents ARTA which demonstrate androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor. These novel agents are useful in males for the treatment of a variety of hormone related conditions such as sexual dysfunction decreased sexual libido erectile dysfunction hypogonadism sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis alterations in cognition and mood depression anemia hair loss obesity benign prostate hyperplasia and or prostate cancer. Further SARMs are useful for oral testosterone replacement therapy and imaging prostate cancer. In addition SARMs are useful in females for the treatment of a variety of hormone related conditions including such as sexual dysfunction decreased sexual libido hypogonadism sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis alterations in cognition and mood depression anemia hair loss obesity endometriosis breast cancer uterine cancer and ovarian cancer.

As contemplated herein this invention provides a class of compounds which are Selective Androgen Receptor Modulator SARM compounds. These compounds which are useful in preventing and treating muscle wasting disorders and bone related disorders are classified as androgen receptor agonists AR agonists partial agonists or androgen receptor antagonists AR antagonists 

A receptor agonist is a substance which binds receptors and activates them. A receptor partial agonist is a substance which binds receptor and partially activate them. A receptor antagonist is a substance which binds receptors and inactivates them. As demonstrated herein the SARM compounds of the present invention may in some embodiments have a tissue selective effect wherein for example a single agent is an agonist partial agonist and or antagonist depending on the tissue in which the receptor is expressed. For example the SARM compound may stimulate muscle tissue and concurrently inhibit prostate tissue. In one embodiment the SARMs which are useful in treating and preventing muscle wasting disorders are AR agonists and are therefore useful in binding to and activating the AR. In another embodiment the SARMs are AR antagonists and are therefore useful in binding to and inactivating the AR. Assays to determine whether the compounds of the present invention are AR agonists or antagonists are well known to a person skilled in the art. For example AR agonistic activity can be determined by monitoring the ability of the SARM compounds to maintain and or stimulate the growth of AR containing tissue such as prostate and seminal vesicles as measured by weight. AR antagonistic activity can be determined by monitoring the ability of the SARM compounds inhibit the growth of AR containing tissue.

In yet another embodiment die SARM compounds of the present invention can be classified as partial AR agonist antagonists. The SARMs are AR agonists in some tissues to cause increased transcription of AR responsive genes e.g. muscle anabolic effect . In other tissues these compounds serve as competitive inhibitors of testosterone DHT on the AR to prevent agonistic effects of the native androgens. The term SARM or selective androgen receptor modulator refers in one embodiment to a compound which modulates androgen receptor activity. In one embodiment the SARM is an agonist or in another embodiment an antagonist.

In one embodiment the SARM will have antagonist activity in a gonad of a subject and agonist activity peripherally such as for example in muscle. Such activity was demonstrated herein in terms of effects on prostate tissue versus that of levator ani muscle tissue as exemplified in or .

In one embodiment the SARM compounds of the present invention bind reversibly or in another embodiment irreversibly to the androgen receptor. In one embodiment the SARM compounds bind reversibly to the androgen receptor. In another embodiment the SARM compounds bind irreversibly to the androgen receptor. The compounds of the present invention may contain a functional group affinity label that allows alkylation of the androgen receptor i.e. covalent bond formation . Thus in this case the compounds bind irreversibly to the receptor and accordingly cannot be displaced by a steroid such as the endogenous ligands DHT and testosterone.

In one embodiment modulation of the androgen receptor refers to the ability of the compound to stimulate or enhance signaling through the receptor and any or in another embodiment all downstream effects of receptor signal transduction.

In another embodiment modulation of the androgen receptor refers to the ability of the compound to diminish or abrogate signaling through the receptor and any or in another embodiment all downstream effects of receptor signal transduction.

In another embodiment a SARM of this invention may interact with a homologue of an androgen receptor. In one embodiment the term homologue of an androgen receptor refers to structurally or in another embodiment functionally related receptors whose regulation is desired. In one embodiment the SARMs of this invention may interact with estrogen receptors or in another embodiment other cell surface molecules which are involved in anabolic pathways or in another embodiment steroidogenic pathways or in another embodiment metabolic pathways.

In one embodiment this invention also provides for a composition comprising a SARM or in another embodiment SARMs of this invention.

In one embodiment the composition is a pharmaceutical composition which in another embodiment is a pellet a tablet a capsule micronized and non micronized capsule a solution a suspension an emulsion an elixir a gel a cream a suppository or a parenteral formulation.

In one embodiment the micronized capsules comprise particles containing a SARM of this invention wherein the term micronized used herein refers to particles having a particle size is of less than 100 microns or in another embodiment less than 50 microns or in another embodiment less than 35 microns or in another embodiment less than 15 microns or in another embodiment less than 10 microns or in another embodiment less than 5 microns.

The pharmaceutical compositions may be administered in any effective convenient manner including for instance administration by intravascular i.v. intramuscular i.m. intranasal i.n. subcutaneous s.c. sublingual oral rectal intravaginal delivery or by any means in which the recombinant virus composition can be delivered to tissue e.g. needle or catheter . Alternatively topical administration may be desired for application to mucosal cells for skin or ocular application. Another method of administration is via aspiration or aerosol formulation.

For administration to mammals and particularly humans it is expected that the physician will determine the actual dosage and duration of treatment which will be most suitable for an individual and can vary with the age weight and response of the particular individual.

In one embodiment the compositions for administration may be sterile solutions or in other embodiments aqueous or non aqueous suspensions or emulsions. In one embodiment the compositions may comprise propylene glycol polyethylene glycol injectable organic esters for example ethyl oleate or cyclodextrins. In another embodiment compositions may also comprise wetting emulsifying and or dispersing agents. In another embodiment the compositions may also comprise sterile water or any other sterile injectable medium.

In one embodiment the compositions of this invention may include a SARM of this invention or any combination thereof together with one or more pharmaceutically acceptable excipients.

In one embodiment pharmaceutical composition can mean a therapeutically effective amount of one or more compounds of the present invention together with suitable excipients and or carriers useful in the methods of this invention. In one embodiment the compositions will comprise a therapeutically effective amount of a SARM of this invention. In one embodiment the term therapeutically effective amount may refer to that amount that provides a therapeutic effect for a given condition and administration regimen. In one embodiment such compositions can be administered by any method known in the art.

In one embodiment the compositions of the present invention are formulated as oral or parenteral dosage forms such as uncoated tablets coated tablets pills capsules powders granulates dispersions or suspensions. In another embodiment the compositions of the present invention are formulated for intravenous administration. In another embodiment the compounds of the present invention are formulated in ointment cream or gel form for transdermal administration. In another embodiment the compounds of the present invention are formulated as an aerosol or spray for nasal application. In another embodiment the compositions of the present invention are formulated in a liquid dosage form. Examples of suitable liquid dosage forms include solutions or suspensions in water pharmaceutically acceptable fats and oils alcohols or other organic solvents including esters emulsions syrups or elixirs solutions and or suspensions.

Suitable excipients and carriers may be according to embodiments of the invention solid or liquid and the type is generally chosen based on the type of administration being used. Liposomes may also be used to deliver the composition. Examples of suitable solid carriers include lactose sucrose gelatin and agar. Oral dosage forms may contain suitable binders lubricants diluents disintegrating agents coloring agents flavoring agents flow inducing agents and melting agents. Liquid dosage forms may contain for example suitable solvents preservatives emulsifying agents suspending agents diluents sweeteners thickeners and melting agents. Parenteral and intravenous forms should also include minerals and other materials to make them compatible with the type of injection or delivery system chosen. Of course other excipients may also be used.

The SARMs of this invention may be administered at various dosages. In one embodiment the SARM is administered at a dosage of 0.1 200 mg per day. In one embodiment the SARM is administered at a dose of 0.1 10 mg or in another embodiment 0.1 25 mg or in another embodiment 0.1 50 mg or in another embodiment 0.3 15 mg or in another embodiment 0.3 30 mg or in another embodiment 0.5 25 mg or in another embodiment 0.5 50 mg or in another embodiment 0.75 15 mg or in another embodiment 0.75 60 mg or in another embodiment 1 5 mg or in another embodiment 1 20 mg or in another embodiment 3 15 mg or in another embodiment 30 50 mg or in another embodiment 30 75 mg or in another embodiment 100 2000 mg.

The SARMs of this invention may be administered at various dosages. In one embodiment the SARM is administered at a dosage of 1 mg. In another embodiment the SARM is administered at a dosage of 5 mg 10 mg 15 mg 20 mg 25 mg 30 mg 35 mg 40 mg 45 mg 50 mg 55 mg 60 mg 65 mg 70 mg 75 mg 80 mg 85 mg 90 mg 95 mg or 100 mg 

In one embodiment the compounds and compositions of this invention may be used for any of the methods of this invention as described herein. In one embodiment use of a SARM or a composition comprising the same will have utility in inhibiting suppressing enhancing or stimulating a desired response in a subject as will be understood by one skilled in the art. In another embodiment the compositions may further comprise additional active ingredients whose activity is useful for the particular application for which the SARM compound is being administered.

In one embodiment this invention provides for the use of a SARM compound of this invention or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof for 1 treating a bone related disorder 2 preventing a bone related disorder 3 suppressing a bone related disorder 4 inhibiting a bone related disorder 5 increasing a strength of a bone of a subject 5 increasing a bone mass in a subject 6 use for t osteoclastogenesis inhibition. In one embodiment the SARM compound is a compound of formula I II III or IV as described herein.

In one embodiment the bone related disorder is a genetic disorder or in another embodiment is induced as a result of a treatment regimen for a given disease. For example and in one embodiment the SARMs of this invention are useful in treating a bone related disorder that arises as a result of androgen deprivation therapy given in response to prostate carcinogenesis in a subject.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a use of SARM compound for preventing a bone related disorder in a subject. In another embodiment the present invention provides a use of SARM compound for suppressing a bone related disorder in a subject. In another embodiment the present invention provides a use of SARM compound for inhibiting a bone related disorder in a subject. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof.

In one embodiment the bone related disorder is osteoporosis. In another embodiment the bone related disorder is osteopenia. In another embodiment the bone related disorder is increased bone resorption. In another embodiment the bone related disorder is bone fracture. In another embodiment the bone related disorder is bone frailty. In another embodiment the bone related disorder is a loss of BMD. In another embodiment the bone related disorder is any combination of osteoporosis osteopenia increased bone resorption bone fracture bone frailty and loss of BMD. Each disorder represents a separate embodiment of the present invention.

 Osteoporosis refers in one embodiment to a thinning of the bones with reduction in bone mass due to depletion of calcium and bone protein. In another embodiment osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disease characterized by low bone mass and deterioration of bone tissue with a consequent increase in bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture. In osteoporotic patients bone strength is abnormal in one embodiment with a resulting increase in the risk of fracture. In another embodiment osteoporosis depletes both the calcium and the protein collagen normally found in the bone in one embodiment resulting in either abnormal bone quality or decreased bone density. In another embodiment bones that are affected by osteoporosis can fracture with only a minor fall or injury that normally would not cause a bone fracture. The fracture can be in one embodiment either in the form of cracking as in a hip fracture or collapsing as in a compression fracture of the spine . The spine hips and wrists are common areas of osteoporosis induced bone fractures although fractures call also occur in other skeletal areas. Unchecked osteoporosis can lead in another embodiment to changes in posture physical abnormality and decreased mobility.

In one embodiment the osteoporosis results from androgen deprivation. In another embodiment the osteoporosis follows androgen deprivation. In another embodiment the osteoporosis is primary osteoporosis. In another embodiment the osteoporosis is secondary osteoporosis. In another embodiment the osteoporosis is postmenopausal osteoporosis. In another embodiment the osteoporosis is juvenile osteoporosis. In another embodiment the osteoporosis is idiopathic osteoporosis. In another embodiment the osteoporosis is senile osteoporosis.

In another embodiment the primary osteoporosis is Type I primary osteoporosis. In another embodiment the primary osteoporosis is Type II primary osteoporosis. Each type of osteoporosis represents a separate embodiment of the present invention.

Osteoporosis and osteopenia are in another embodiment systemic skeletal diseases characterized by low bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue Microarchitectural deterioration refers in one embodiment to thinning of the trabeculae defined below and the loss of inter trabecular connections in bone. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMD 2.5 standard deviations SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMC 2.5 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMD 2.0 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMC 2.0 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMD 3.0 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMC 3.0 SD or more below the young adult mean. Each definition of osteoporosis or osteopenia represents a separate embodiment of the present invention.

In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMD 2.5 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMC 2.5 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMD 2.0 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMC 2.0 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMD 3.0 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a BMC 3.0 SD below the young adult mean. Each definition of osteoporosis represents a separate embodiment of the present invention.

Methods for assessing osteoporosis and osteopenia are well known in the art. For example in one embodiment a patients BMD measured by densitometry and expressed in g cm is compared with a normal value which is the mean BMD of sex matched young adults at their peak bone mass yielding a T score. In another embodiment Z score the amount of bone loss in a patient is compared with the expected loss for individuals of the same age and sex. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a T score 2.5 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a Z score 2.5 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a T score 2.0 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a Z score 2.0 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a T score 3.0 SD or more below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a Z score 3.0 SD or more below the young adult mean.

In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a T score 2.5 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a Z score 2.5 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a T score 2.0 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a Z score 2.0 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a T score 3.0 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteoporosis is defined as having a Z score 3.0 SD below the young adult mean. Each definition of osteoporosis represents a separate embodiment of the present invention.

The term BMD is in one embodiment a measured calculation of the true mass of bone. The absolute amount of bone as measured by BMD generally correlates with bone strength and its ability to bear weight. By measuring BMD it is possible to predict fracture risk in the same manner that measuring blood pressure can help predict the risk of stroke.

BMD in one embodiment can be measured by known BMD mapping techniques. In one embodiment bone density of the hip spine wrist or calcaneus may be measured by a variety of techniques. The preferred method of BMD measurement is dual energy x ray densitometry DEXA . BMD of the hip antero posterior AP spine lateral spine and wrist can be measured using this technology. Measurement at any site predicts overall risk of fracture but information from a specific site is the best predictor of fracture at that site. Quantitative computerized tomography QCT is also used to measure BMD of the spine. See for example Nuclear Medicine Quantitative Procedures by Wahner H W et al published by Toronto Little Brown Co. 1983 pages 107 132 Assessment of Bone Mineral Part 1 J Nucl Medicine pp 1134 1141 1984 and Bone Mineral Density of The Radius J Nucl Medicine 26 13 39 1985 . Each method of measuring BMD represents a separate embodiment of the present invention.

 Osteopenia refers in one embodiment to having a BMD or BMC between 1 and 2.5 SD below the young adult mean. In another embodiment osteopenia refers to decreased calcification or density of bone. This term encompasses in one embodiment all skeletal systems in which such a condition is noted. Each definition or means of diagnosis of the disorders disclosed in the present invention represents a separate embodiment of die present invention.

In one embodiment the term bone fracture refers to a breaking of bones and encompasses both vertebral and non vertebral bone fractures. The term bone frailty refers in one embodiment to a weakened state of the bones that predisposes them to fractures.

In one embodiment the bone related disorder is treated with a SARM compound of this invention or a combination thereof. In another embodiment other bone stimulating compounds can be provided to a subject prior to concurrent with or following administration of a SARM or SARMs of this invention. In one embodiment such a bone stimulating compound may comprise natural or synthetic materials.

In one embodiment the bone stimulating compound may comprise a bone morphogenetic protein BMP a growth factor such as epidermal growth factor EGF a fibroblast growth factor FGF a transforming growth factor TGF or TGF an insulin growth factor IGF a platelet derived growth factor PDGF hedgehog proteins such as sonic indian and desert hedgehog a hormone such as follicle stimulating hormone parathyroid hormone parathyroid hormone related peptide activins inhibins frizzled frzb or frazzled proteins BMP binding proteins such as chordin and fetuin a cytokine such as IL 3 IL 7 GM CS F a chemokine such as eotaxin a collagen osteocalcin osteonectin and others as will be appreciated by one skilled in the art.

In another embodiment the compositions for use in treating a bone disorder of this invention may comprise a SARM or SARMs of this invention an additional bone stimulating compound or compounds and osteogenic cells. In one embodiment an osteogenic cell may be a stem cell or progenitor cell which may be induced to differentiate into an osteoblast. In another embodiment the cell may be an osteoblast.

In another embodiment nucleic acids which encode bone stimulating compounds may be administered to the subject which is to be considered as part of this invention.

In one embodiment the osteoporosis osteopenia increased bone resorption bone fracture bone frailty loss of BMD and other diseases or disorders of the present invention are caused by a hormonal disorder disruption or imbalance. In another embodiment these conditions occur independently of a hormonal disorder disruption or imbalance. Each possibility represents a separate embodiment of the present invention.

In one embodiment the hormonal disorder disruption or imbalance comprises an excess of a hormone. In another embodiment the hormonal disorder disruption or imbalance comprises a deficiency of a hormone. In one embodiment the hormone is a steroid hormone. In another embodiment the hormone is an estrogen. In another embodiment the hormone is an androgen. In another embodiment the hormone is a glucocorticoid. In another embodiment the hormone is a cortico steroid. In another embodiment the hormone is Luteinizing Hormone LH . In another embodiment the hormone is Follicle Stimulating Hormone FSH . In another embodiment the hormone is any other hormone known in the art. In another embodiment the hormonal disorder disruption or imbalance is associated with menopause. In another embodiment hormone deficiency is a result of specific manipulation as a byproduct of treating a disease or disorder in the subject. For example the hormone deficiency may be a result of androgen depletion in a subject as a therapy for prostate cancer in the subject.

In one embodiment the invention provides a use of SARM compounds for increasing a strength of a bone of a subject. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof. Thus increasing a strength of a bone of a subject.

In another embodiment the subject has an osteoporosis. In another embodiment the osteoporosis is hormonally induced.

In one embodiment the invention provides a use of SARM compounds for increasing a bone mass of a subject. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same.

In another embodiment the subject has osteoporosis. In another embodiment the osteoporosis is hormonally induced. In another embodiment the subject has sarcopenia or cachexia. In another embodiment the methods of this invention provide for increasing a bone mass in the subject which is a cortical bone mass. In another embodiment the bone mass is trabecular bone mass. In another embodiment the bone mass is a cancellous bone mass.

In one embodiment the invention provides a use of SARM compounds for promoting bone formation. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same.

In another embodiment the SARM compound stimulates or enhances osteoblastogenesis. In another embodiment the said SARM compound inhibits osteoclast prolification.

In one embodiment the invention provides for bone formation via osteoblast stimulation or enhanced proliferation. In one embodiment die term osteoblast refers to cell which participates in bone formation. In one embodiment osteoblast involvement in bone formation may form the tissue and deposit minerals therein giving bone its strength. In another embodiment the invention provides for bone formation via suppression of osteoclast induction or in another embodiment activity. In one embodiment the term osteoclast refers to a cell which participates in bone remodeling and in particular in bone resorption.

In one embodiment bone diseases or disorders are treated by the methods of this invention via stimulation of bone formation. In another embodiment the treatments of this invention provide for maintenance of bone mass. Bone mass is maintained by a balance between the activity of osteoblasts that form bone and osteoclasts that break it down. In one embodiment the compounds and methods of this invention provide a means whereby such a balance is maintained.

In one embodiment this invention provides use of a SARM compound of this invention or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof for 1 treating a muscle wasting disorder 2 preventing a muscle wasting disorder 3 treating preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing muscle loss due to a muscle wasting disorder 4 treating preventing inhibiting reducing or suppressing muscle wasting due to a muscle wasting disorder and or 5 treating preventing inhibiting reducing or suppressing muscle protein catabolism due to a muscle wasting disorder. In one embodiment the SARM compound is a compound of formula I II III or IV as described herein. In another embodiment the invention provides a composition comprising a SARM of this invention for use in the methods as described herein.

In one embodiment the invention provides a use of SARM compounds for treating a subject suffering from a muscle wasting disorder. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same. Thus treating a subject suffering from a muscle wasting disorder.

In another embodiment the use of a SARM compound for treating a subject suffering from a muscle wasting disorder includes administering a pharmaceutical composition including the SARM compound. In another embodiment the administering step includes intravenously intraarterially or intramuscularly injecting to said subject said pharmaceutical composition in liquid form subcutaneously implanting in said subject a pellet containing said pharmaceutical composition orally administering to said subject said pharmaceutical composition in a liquid or solid form or topically applying to the skin surface of said subject said pharmaceutical composition.

A muscle is a tissue of die body that primarily functions as a source of power. There are three types of muscles in the body a skeletal muscle the muscle responsible for moving extremities and external areas of the bodies b cardiac muscle the heart muscle and c smooth muscle the muscle that is in the walls of arteries and bowel.

A wasting condition or disorder is defined herein as a condition or disorder that is characterized at least in part by an abnormal progressive loss of body organ or tissue mass. A wasting condition can occur as a result of a pathology such as for example cancer or an infection or it can be due to a physiologic or metabolic state such as disuse deconditioning that can occur for example due to prolonged bed rest or when a limb is immobilized such as in a cast. A wasting condition can also be age associated. The loss of body mass that occurs during a wasting condition can be characterized by a loss of total body weight or a loss of organ weight such as a loss of bone or muscle mass due to a decrease in tissue protein.

In one embodiment muscle wasting or muscular wasting used herein interchangeably refer to the progressive loss of muscle mass and or to the progressive weakening and degeneration of muscles including the skeletal or voluntary muscles which control movement cardiac muscles which control the heart and smooth muscles. In one embodiment the muscle wasting condition or disorder is a chronic muscle wasting condition or disorder. Chronic muscle wasting is defined herein as the chronic i.e. persisting over a long period of time progressive loss of muscle mass and or to the chronic progressive weakening and degeneration of muscle.

The loss of muscle mass that occurs during muscle wasting can be characterized by a muscle protein breakdown or degradation by muscle protein catabolism. Protein catabolism occurs because of an unusually high rate of protein degradation an unusually low rate of protein synthesis or a combination of both. Protein catabolism or depletion whether caused by a high degree of protein degradation or a low degree of protein synthesis leads to a decrease in muscle mass aid to muscle wasting. The term catabolism has its commonly known meaning in the art specifically ail energy burning form of metabolism.

Muscle wasting can occur as a result of a pathology disease condition or disorder. In one embodiment the pathology illness disease or condition is chronic. In another embodiment the pathology illness disease or condition is genetic. In another embodiment the pathology illness disease or condition is neurological. In another embodiment the pathology illness disease or condition is infectious. As described herein the pathologies diseases conditions or disorders for which the compounds and compositions of the present invention are administered are those that directly or indirectly produce a wasting i.e. loss of muscle mass that is a muscle wasting disorder.

In one embodiment muscle wasting in a subject is a result of the subject having a muscular dystrophie muscle atrophy X linked spinal bulbar muscular atrophy SBMA cachexia malnutrition tuberculosis leprosy diabetes renal disease chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD cancer end stage renal failure sarcopenia emphysema osteomalacia or cardiomyopathy.

In another embodiment the muscle wasting disorder is due to infection with enterovirus Epstein Barr virus herpes zoster HIV trypanosomes influenze coxsackie rickettsia trichinella schistosoma or mycobacteria.

The muscular dystrophies are genetic diseases characterized by progressive weakness and degeneration of the skeletal or voluntary muscles that control movement. The muscles of the heart and some other involuntary muscles are also affected in some forms of muscular dystrophy. The major forms of muscular dystrophy MD are duchenne muscular dystrophy myotonic dystrophy duchenne muscular dystrophy becker muscular dystrophy limb girdle muscular dystrophy facioscapulhumeral muscular dystrophy congenital muscular dystrophy oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy distal muscular dystrophy and emery dreifuss muscular dystrophy.

Muscular dystrophy can affect people of all ages. Although some forms first become apparent in infancy or childhood others may not appear until middle age or later. Duchenne MD is the most common form typically affecting children. Myotonic dystrophy is the most common of these diseases in adults.

Muscle atrophy MA is characterized by wasting away or diminution of muscle and a decrease in muscle mass. For example Post Polio MA is a muscle wasting that occurs as part of the post polio syndrome PPS . The atrophy includes weakness muscle fatigue and pain.

Another type of MA is X linked spinal bulbar muscular atrophy SBMA also known as Kennedy s Disease . This disease arises from a defect in the androgen receptor gene on the X chromosome affects only males and its onset is in adulthood. Because the primary disease cause is an androgen receptor mutation androgen replacement is not a current therapeutic strategy. There are some investigational studies where exogenous testosterone propionate is being given to boost the levels of androgen with hopes of overcoming androgen insensitivity and perhaps provide an anabolic effect. Still use of supraphysiological levels of testosterone for supplementation will have limitations and other potentially serious complications.

Cachexia is weakness and a loss of weight caused by a disease or as a side effect of illness. Cardiac cachexia i.e. a muscle protein wasting of both the cardiac and skeletal muscle is a characteristic of congestive heart failure. Cancer cachexia is a syndrome that occurs in patients with solid tumors and hematological malignancies and is manifested by weight loss with massive depletion of both adipose tissue and lean muscle mass.

Cachexia is also seen in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome AIDS human immunodeficiency virus HIV associated myopathy and or muscle weakness wasting is a relatively common clinical manifestation of AIDS. Individuals with HIV associated myopathy or muscle weakness or wasting typically experience significant weight loss generalized or proximal muscle weakness tenderness and muscle atrophy.

Sarcopenia is a debilitating disease that afflicts the elderly and chronically ill patients and is characterized by loss of muscle mass and function. Further increased lean body mass is associated with decreased morbidity and mortality for certain muscle wasting disorders. In addition other circumstances and conditions are linked to and can cause muscle wasting disorders. For example studies have shown that in severe cases of chronic lower back pain there is paraspinal muscle wasting.

Muscle wasting is also associated with advanced age. It is believed that general weakness in old age is due to muscle wasting. As the body ages an increasing proportion of skeletal muscle is replaced by fibrous tissue. The result is a significant reduction in muscle power performance and endurance.

Long term hospitalization due to illness or injury or disuse deconditioning that occurs for example when a limb is immobilized can also lead to muscle wasting. Studies have shown that in patients suffering injuries chronic illnesses burns trauma or cancer who are hospitalized for long periods of time there is a long lasting unilateral muscle wasting with a consequent decrease in body mass.

Injuries or damage to the central nervous system CNS are also associated with muscle wasting disorders. Injuries or damage to the CNS can be for example caused by diseases trauma or chemicals. Examples are central nerve injury or damage peripheral nerve injury or damage and spinal cord injury or damage.

In another embodiment muscle wasting may be a result of alcoholism and may be treated with the compounds and compositions of the invention representing embodiments thereof.

In one embodiment the invention provides a use of SARM compounds for preventing a muscle wasting disorder in a subject. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof. In another embodiment the administering comprises administering a pharmaceutical composition comprising said SARM and or its prodrug analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide or any combination thereof and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. Thus preventing a muscle wasting disorder in a subject.

In one embodiment the invention provides a use of SARM compounds for treating a muscle wasting conditions associated with chronic illness. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same. In another embodiment the use of the SARM compounds is orally administered to said subject.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a use of a SARM compound for preventing a muscle wasting disorder in a subject in another embodiment suppressing a muscle wasting disorder in a subject in another embodiment inhibiting a muscle wasting disorder in a subject in another embodiment reducing the incidence of a muscle wasting in a subject. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same.

In another embodiment this invention provides for the use of a SARM compound of this invention or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same in treating preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing the incidence of a muscle wasting disorder in a subject.

In another embodiment this invention provides for the use of a SARM of this invention or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same in increasing muscle performance muscle size muscle strength or any combination thereof in a subject.

In another embodiment the SARMs and compositions of this invention are useful in promoting or speeding recovery following a surgical procedure.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a use of a SARM compound for reducing a fat mass in a subject. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same.

In another embodiment this invention provides for the use of a SARM compound of this invention such as one having the structure of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same in treating obesity or diabetes associated with a metabolic syndrome in a subject

In another embodiment the subject has a hormonal imbalance disorder or disease. In another embodiment the subject has menopause

In one embodiment the present invention provides a use of a SARM compound for increasing a lean mass in a subject. In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV . In another embodiment the SARM compound is of formula I II III or IV or its prodrug analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product polymorph crystal impurity N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof. Thus increasing a lean mass in a subject.

In another embodiment the subject has a hormonal imbalance disorder or disease. In another embodiment the subject has menopause.

In one embodiment the SARMs of this invention are administered intravenously via injecting the pharmaceutical composition in liquid form to the subject. In another embodiment the SARMs of this invention are administered intra arterially via injecting the pharmaceutical composition in liquid form to the subject. In another embodiment the SARMs of this invention are administered intramuscularly via injecting the pharmaceutical composition in liquid form to the subject. In another embodiment the SARMs of this invention are administered subcutaneously via implanting a pellet containing the pharmaceutical composition in the subject. In another embodiment the SARMs of this invention are administered orally via administering the pharmaceutical composition in a liquid or solid form to the subject. In another embodiment the SARMs of this invention are administered topically via applying the pharmaceutical composition to the skin surface of the subject.

The present invention provides in one embodiment a safe and effective method for treating preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing loss of muscle and or muscle protein catabolism due to muscle wasting. The invention is useful in another embodiment in treating a subject suffering from a muscle wasting disorder or in another embodiment in treating a bone related disorder. In one embodiment the subject is a mammalian subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing the incidence of obesity in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to prevent suppress inhibit or reduce the incidence of obesity in the subject.

In one embodiment the SARM compounds of the present invention alter the levels of leptin in a subject. In another embodiment the SARM compounds decrease the levels of leptin. In another embodiment the SARM compounds of the present invention increase the levels of leptin in a subject. Leptin is known to have an effect on appetite on weight loss in obese mice and thus has been implicated in obesity.

The SARMs of this invention in one embodiment affect circulating or in another embodiment tissue levels of leptin. In one embodiment the term level s of leptin refers to the serum level of leptin. As contemplated herein the SARM compounds of the present invention have an effect on leptin in vitro and in vitro. Leptin levels can be measured by methods known to one skilled in the art for example by commercially available ELISA kits. In addition Leptin levels may be determined in in vitro assays or in in vivo assays by any method known to a person skilled in the art.

Since leptin is implicated in controlling appetite weight loss food intake and energy expenditure modulating and or controlling the levels of leptin is a useful therapeutic approach in treating preventing inhibiting or reducing the incidence of obesity in subjects suffering from obesity. Modulating the level of leptin can result in a loss of appetite a reduction of food intake and an increase in energy expenditure in the subject and thus may contribute to the control and treatment of obesity.

The term obesity is defined in one embodiment as an increase in body weight beyond the limitation of skeletal and physical requirement as the result of excessive accumulation of fat in the body.

The term obesity associated metabolic disorder refers in one embodiment to a disorder which results from is a consequence of is exacerbated by or is secondary to obesity. Non limiting examples of such a disorder are osteoarthritis Type II diabetes mellitus increased blood pressure stroke and heart disease.

The term osteoarthritis refers in another embodiment to a non inflammatory degenerative joint disease occurring chiefly in older people characterized by degeneration of the articular cartilage hypertrophy of bones and the margins and changes in the synovial membrane. It is accompanied in other embodiments by pain and stiffness particularly after prolonged activity.

The term diabetes in one embodiment refers to a relative or absolute lack of insulin leading to uncontrolled carbohydrate metabolism. Most patients can be clinically classified as having either insulin dependent diabetes mellitus IDDM or Type I diabetes or non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus NIDDM or Type II diabetes .

The term increased blood pressure or hypertension refers in other embodiments to a repeatedly high blood pressure above 140 over 90 mmHg. Chronically elevated blood pressure can cause blood vessel changes in the back of the eye thickening of the heart muscle kidney failure and brain damage.

The term stroke refers in other embodiments to damage to nerve cells in the brain due to insufficient blood supply often caused by a bursting blood vessel or a blood clot. The term heart disease in other embodiments refers to a malfunction in the heart normal function and activity including heart failure.

In addition androgens have recently been shown to be involved in commitment of mesenchymal pluripotent cells into myogenic lineage and to block differentiation into adipogenic lineage Singh et al. Endocrinology 2003 Jul. 24 . Accordingly selective androgen receptor modulator compounds can be useful in methods of blocking adipogenesis and or altering stem cell differentiation as described herein.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of promoting increasing or facilitating weight loss in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to promote increase or facilitate weight loss in the subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of decreasing suppressing inhibiting or reducing appetite of a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to decrease suppress inhibit or reduce the appetite of the subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of altering the body composition of a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to alter the body composition of the subject. In one embodiment altering the body composition comprises altering the lean body mass the fat free body mass of the subject or a combination thereof.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of altering lean body mass or fat free body mass of a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to alter the lean body mass or fat flee body mass of the subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of converting fat to lean muscle in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to convert fat to lean muscle in the subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of treating an obesity associated metabolic disorder in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in all amount effective to treat the obesity associated metabolic disorder in the subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing an obesity associated metabolic disorder in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to prevent suppress inhibit or reduce the obesity associated metabolic disorder in the subject.

In one embodiment the obesity associated metabolic disorder is hypertension. In another embodiment the disorder is osteoarthritis. In another embodiment the disorder is Type II diabetes mellitus. In another embodiment the disorder is increased blood pressure. In another embodiment the disorder is stroke. In another embodiment the disorder is heart disease.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of decreasing suppressing inhibiting or reducing adipogenesis in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to decrease suppress inhibit or reduce adipogenesis in the subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of altering stem cell differentiation in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to alter stem cell differentiation in the subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of altering the level of leptin in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to alter the level of leptin in the subject. In one embodiment altering the level of leptin comprises decreasing the level of leptin in the subject.

In another embodiment this invention relates to a method of decreasing suppressing inhibiting or reducing the level of leptin in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof in an amount effective to decrease suppress inhibit or reduce the level of leptin in the subject.

In one embodiment the SARM that is useful in a treating preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing obesity b promoting increasing or facilitating weight loss c decreasing suppressing inhibiting or reducing appetite d altering the body composition e altering lean body mass or fat free body mass f converting fat to lean muscle g treating preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing an obesity associated metabolic disorder for example hypertension osteoarthritis Type II diabetes mellitus increased blood pressure stroke or heart disease h decreasing suppressing inhibiting or reducing adipogenesis i altering stem cell differentiation and or j altering the level of leptin is a compound represented by the structure of formula I II III or IV .

In one embodiment the SARMs of this invention find utility in treating or halting the progression of or treating symptoms of diabetes. In another embodiment the SARMs of this invention are useful in treating co morbidities related to diabetes. These conditions include hypertension cerebrovascular disease atherosclerotic coronary artery disease macular degeneration diabetic retinopathy eye disease and blindness cataracts systemic inflammation characterized by elevation of inflammatory markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C reactive protein birth defects pregnancy related diabetes pre ecclampsia and hypertension in pregnancy kidney disease renal insufficiency renal failure etc. nerve disease diabetic neuropathy superficial and systemic fungal infections congestive heart failure gout hyperuricemia obesity hypertriglyceridemia hypercholesterolemia fatty liver disease non alcoholic steatohepatitis or NASH and diabetes related skin diseases such as Necrobiosis Lipoidica Diabeticorum NLD Blisters of diabetes Bullosis Diabeticorum Eruptive Xanthomatosis Digital Sclerosis Disseminated Granuloma Annulare and Acanthosis Nigricans.

In one embodiment this invention provides a method for a treating preventing suppressing inhibiting atherosclerosis b treating preventing suppressing inhibiting liver damage due to fat deposits comprising the step of administering to the subject a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM of this invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate N oxide prodrug polymorph crystal or any combination thereof or a composition comprising the same in an amount effective to treat prevent or inhibit atherosclerosis and liver damage due to fat deposit.

In one embodiment the SARM that is useful in a treating preventing suppressing inhibiting or reducing atherosclerosis b treating preventing suppressing inhibiting liver damage due to fat deposits.

In one embodiment atherosclerosis refers to a slow complex disease that may begin with damage to the innermost layer of the artery. In another embodiment the causes of damage to the arterial wall may include a elevated levels of cholesterol and in the blood b high blood pressure c tobacco smoke d diabetes. In another embodiment the condition is treatable in a smoker despite the fact that tobacco smoke may greatly worsen atherosclerosis and speed its growth in the coronary arteries the aorta and arteries in the legs. Similarly in another embodiment the methods of this invention may be useful in treating subjects with a family history of premature cardiovascular disease who have an increased risk of atherosclerosis.

In one embodiment liver damage due to fat deposits refer to the build up of fat in the liver cells forming a Fatty Liver which may be associated with or may lead to inflammation of the liver. This can cause scarring and hardening of the liver. When scarring becomes extensive it is called cirrhosis. In another embodiment the fat accumulates in the liver as obesity. In another embodiment fatty liver is also associated with diabetes mellitus high blood triglycerides and the heavy use of alcohol. In another embodiment fatty Liver may occur with certain illnesses such as tuberculosis and malnutrition intestinal bypass surgery for obesity excess vitamin A in the body or the use of certain drugs such as valproic acid trade names Depakene Depakote and corticosteroids cortisone prednisone . Sometimes fatty liver occurs as a complication of pregnancy

In one embodiment the methods of use in treating a subject are where the subject is a human and in another embodiment where the subject is male or in another embodiment where the subject is female.

In another embodiment this invention provides for the use of a SARM of this invention or a composition comprising the same in promoting or suppressing spermatogenesis in a male subject. Some of the SARMs of the present invention exhibit inter alia androgenic activity which in turn stimulates spermatogenesis. In other embodiments the SARMs of this invention exhibit antagonist activity in the gonads of a subject which in turn may suppress spermatogenesis. In one embodiment the SARMs may therefore be used as a contraceptive.

It is to be understood that any use of the SARMs of this invention including inter alia uses in applications regarding diseases or conditions which pertain to muscle fat cardiac liver gonadal or bone tissue whereby administration of the SARM compounds of this invention or a composition comprising the same alter the course of such diseases or conditions favorably for a subject ale to be considered as part of this invention.

The following examples are presented in order to more fully illustrate the preferred embodiments of the invention. They should in no way however be construed as limiting the broad scope of the invention.

Four month old female rats were sacrificed by euthanasia and the femurs were excised from the animals. The femurs were cleaned off any muscle and connective tissues and were stored on ice in Minimum Essential Medium MEM with penicillin Streptomycin and Fungizone until the cells were cultured.

All cell culture materials were obtained from Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . The femurs were first rinsed in 70 ethanol and were washed three times with 5 ml each of penicillin and streptomycin. Both the ends of the femurs were snapped and the bone marrow cells were flushed with 15 ml of MEM with penicillin Streptomycin and Fungizone into a 50 ml conical tube and stored on ice. The same procedure was performed with all the femurs. The bone marrow cells and were pooled were centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min in a clinical centrifuge. The cells were resuspended in MEM without phenol red supplemented with 10 charcoal stripped serum penicillin streptomycin and fungizone. The cells were triturated through a 22 g needle counted under microscope and were plated at 1.5 million cells per well of a 6 well plate in MEM without phenol red supplemented with 15 charcoal stripped serum penicillin streptomycin 300 ng ml fungizone 0.28 mM Ascorbic acid and 10 mM glycerophosphate to differentiate towards fibroblast osteoblast lineage and at 2.5 million cells per well of a 24 well plate in MEM without phenol red supplemented with 10 charcoal stripped serum penicillin streptomycin and 300 ng ml fungizone to differentiate towards osteoclast lineage. The medium was changed on day 2 and the cells were treated with the indicated hormone. Osteoclast cultures were carried out in the presence of 50 ng RANK Ligand and 10 ng GM CSF to induce osteoclastogenesis. Medium was completely changed every third day for osteoclast cultures. For fibroblast cultures half the culture medium was changed every third day to leave the growth factors secreted by the cells.

At the end of 12 days the cells were fixed in 10 buffered formalin for fibroblast cultured and in 4 formaldehyde in PBS for osteoclast cultures. The fibroblasts were stained for alkaline phosphatase activity and the O.D. at 405 nm was measured using a spectrophotometer as described earlier. Osteoclasts were stained for Tartarate Resistant Acid Phosphatase Activity TRAP and cells having 2 or more nuclei were counted under the microscope and plotted as indicated earlier.

Androgens exert anabolic effects on bone and lack of androgens under conditions such as androgen deprivation therapy in prostate cancer and in old age have clearly indicated the benefits of androgens as a bone protective hormone. However the use of ectopic androgen is limited due to its side effects and also due to the risk of conversion of androgens to estrogens.

In order to determine whether a SARM could be therapeutic yet obviate the above side effects various selective androgen receptor modulators SARMs were evaluated in terms of their ability to have bone protective effects with fewer side effects as seen with the parent hormone. The efficacy of Di hydro testosterone DHT and Parathyroid hormone PTH were compared to a SARM Compound III in terms of their ability to differentiate primary rat bone marrow cells towards the osteoblast and the osteoclast lineage . Bone marrow cells from rats were cultured in the presence or absence of the above indicated hormones for 12 days in culture medium and were evaluated in terms of their differentiation towards osteoblast or osteoclast lineage.

DHT and Compound III all increased differentiation of primary bone marrow cells toward the osteoblast lineage as measured by alkaline phosphatase ALP activity of the cells . At 1 M concentration DHT and the SARM induced the ALP activity comparably whereas at lower concentrations of 100 nM and 10 nM Compound III showed better induction than the DHT. PTH another bone anabolic hormone induced the ALP staining only at higher concentration but not at lower concentrations.

Sixty female virgin intact Sprague Dawley rats were obtained from Charles River Laboratories Wilmington Mass. and aged to 23 wks. The animals were housed 2 3 per cage and acclimated to a 12 h light dark cycle. Food 7012C LM 485 Mouse Rat Sterilizable Diet Harlan Teklad Madison Wis. and water were provided ad libitum. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Tennessee reviewed and approved the animal protocol for this study.

Sham surgeries or ovariectomies were performed on Day 0. The study was comprised of six treatment groups as follows 1 intact vehicle 2 intact COMPOUND III 3 OVX vehicle 4 OVX COMPOUND III 5 OVX alendronate 6 OVX alendronate COMPOUND III. Doses 200 L were administered daily via oral gavage in a vehicle of DMSO PEG300 10 90 beginning on Day 1. Animals were sacrificed on Day 45 of the study. Femurs were removed cleared of soft tissue and stored in saline soaked gauze at 20 C. until analysis. Nine animals died during the course of the study. These deaths were attributed to surgical complications arising from the ovariectomies and technical errors during oral dosing i.e. dosing solution delivered into the lungs . Dose groups are listed in Table 1.

The left femurs were sent to SkeleTech Inc. Bothell Wash. for biomechanical strength three point bending and pQCT analysis. A Stratec XCT RM and associated software Stratec Medizintechnik GmbH Pforzheim Germany. Software version 5.40 C were used for the pQCT analysis. The femur was analyzed at both the mid shaft and distal regions. The mid shaft analysis was performed on the region at 50 of the length of the femur. The distal analysis was performed on the region at 20 of the length of the femur starting at the distal end. One 0.5 mm slice perpendicular to the long axis of the femur was used for analysis. Total bone mineral content total bone area total bone mineral density cortical bone mineral content cortical bone area cortical bone mineral density cortical thickness periosteal perimeter circumference and endosteal perimeter were determined at the mid shaft of the femur. At the distal femur total bone mineral content total bone area total bone mineral density trabecular bone mineral content trabecular bone area and trabecular bone mineral density were determined. Following pQCT analysis the femoral strength was determined by a three point bending test. The anterior to posterior diameter APD unit mm at the midpoint of the femoral shaft was measured with an electronic caliper. The femur was placed on the lower supports of a three point bending fixture with the anterior side of the femur facing downward in an Instron Mechanical Testing Machine Instron 4465 retrofitted to 5500 Canton Mass. . The length L between the lower supports was set to 14 mm. The upper loading device was aligned to the center of the femoral shaft. The load was applied at a constant displacement rate of 6 mm min until the femur broke. The mechanical testing machine directly measured the maximum load F unit N stiffness S units N mm and energy absorbed W unit mJ . The axial area moment of inertia I unit mm was calculated by the software during the pQCT analysis of the femoral mid shaft. Stress units N mm elastic modulus E unit Mpa and toughness T units mJ m were calculated by the following formulas stress F L a 2 4 I elastic modulus E S L 48 I and toughness T 3 W APD 2 L I .

Statistical analysis was performed by Student s T test. P values of less than 0.05 were considered as statistically significant differences.

Femoral maximum load was determined by 3 point bending of the femur. Results are shown in . No differences were observed between the intact vehicle 210 N and the OVX vehicle 212 N control groups. We observed trends in the COMPOUND III treated groups with maximum load increasing to 224 and 233 newtons in the intact and OVX groups respectively. The alendronate 213 N and alendronate COMPOUND III 207N groups were not different from controls.

Trabecular bone mineral density was analyzed by pQCT at the distal femur. Results are shown in . We observed significant trabecular bone loss following OVX. Trabecular bone density decreased from 379 to 215 mg mmin the intact and OVX vehicle control groups respectively. In intact animals treated with COMPOUND III we observed a slight increase in trabecular bone density to 398 mg mm. In OVX animals treated with COMPOUND III we observed a significant increase over the OVX vehicle control group to 406 mg mm. Alendronate increased trabecular bone density to 480 mg mm. The combination therapy of Alendronate and COMPOUND III showed additive effects increasing trabecular bone density to 552 mg mm.

Male Sprague Dawley rats weighing approximately 200 g were purchased from Harlan Bioproducts for Science Indianapolis Ind. . The animals were maintained on a 12 h light dark cycle with food 7012C LM 485 Mouse Rat Sterilizable Diet Harlan Teklad Madison Wis. and water available ad libitum. The animal protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Tennessee. Anabolic and androgenic activity of Compound III in intact animals was evaluated and the dose response in acutely orchidectomized ORX animals was evaluated as well. Regenerative effects of Compound III in chronically 9 days ORX rats was also assessed.

The compound was weighed and dissolved in 10 DMSO Fisher diluted with PEG 300 Acros Organics NJ for preparation of the appropriate dosage concentrations. The animals were housed in groups of 2 to 3 animals per cage. Intact and ORX animals were randomly assigned to one of seven groups consisting of 4 to 5 animals per group. Control groups intact and ORX were administered vehicle daily. Compound III was administered via oral gavage at doses of 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1 mg day to both intact and ORX groups.

Castrated animals on day one of the study were randomly assigned to dose groups 4 5 animals group of 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1 mg day for dose response evaluation. Dosing began nine days post ORX and was administered daily via oral gavage for fourteen days. The animals were sacrificed under anesthesia ketamine xyalzine 87 13 mg kg after a 14 day dosing regimen and body weights were recorded. In addition ventral prostate seminal vesicles and levator ani muscle were removed individually weighed normalized to body weight and expressed as a percentage of intact control. Student s T test was used to compare individual dose groups to the intact control group. Significance was defined a priori as a P value

Prostate weights following Compound III treatment were 111 21 88 15 77 17 71 16 71 10 and 87 13 of intact controls following doses of 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1 mg day respectively . Similarly seminal vesicle weights decreased to 94 9 77 11 80 9 73 12 77 10 and 88 14 of intact controls following doses of 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1 mg day respectively. Significant increases were seen in levator ani muscle weights of sham animals however in all dose groups when compared to intact controls. The levator ani muscle weights were 120 12 116 7 128 7 134 7 125 9 and 146 17 of intact controls corresponding to 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1.0 mg day dose groups respectively. The results are presented graphically in .

Compound III partially maintained prostate weight following orchidectomy. Prostate weight in vehicle treated ORX controls decreased to 5 1 of intact controls. At doses of 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1.0 mg day Compound III maintained prostate weights at 8 2 20 5 51 19 56 9 80 28 and 74 12.5 of intact controls respectively. In castrated controls seminal vesicle weight decreased to 13 2 of intact controls. Compound III partially maintained seminal vesicle weights in ORX animals. Seminal vesicle weights from drug treated animals were 12 4 17 5 35 10 61 15 70 14 and 80 6 of intact controls following doses of 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1.0 mg day respectively. In ORX controls the levator ani muscle weight decreased to 55 7 of intact controls. We observed an anabolic effect in the levator ani muscle of Compound III treated animals. Compound III fully maintained levator ani muscle weights at doses 0.1 mg day. Doses 0.1 mg day resulted in significant increases in levator ani weight compared to that observed in intact controls. Levator ani muscle weights as a percentage of intact controls were 59 6 85 9 112 10 122 16 127 12 and 129.66 2 for the 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1.0 mg day dose groups respectively. Results are graphically presented in . Eand EDvalues were determined in each tissue by nonlinear regression analysis in WinNonlin and presented in . Evalues were 83 25 85 11 and 131 2 for prostate seminal vesicles and levator ani respectively. The EDin prostate seminal vesicles and levator ani was 0.09 0.07 0.17 0.05 and 0.02 0.01 mg day respectively.

Serum LH and FSH data for the animals are presented in Table 1. LH decreased in a dose dependent manner in both intact and castrated animals. Following doses 0.1 mg day LH levels were below the limit of quantitation 0.07 ng mL . The 0.1 mg day dose in ORX animals returned LH levels back to those seen in intact controls. Similar effects were observed with FSH. In intact animals a significant decrease in FSH levels was observed with the 0.75 and 1 mg day doses. In ORX animals a dose dependent decrease in FSH levels was observed. Doses of Compound III 0.1 mg day in ORX animals returned FSH levels to those of intact controls.

Compound III partially restored both prostate and seminal vesicle weight in ORX animals. Prostates were restored to 9 3 11 3 23 5 50 13 62 12 and 71 5 while seminal vesicles were restored 7 1 9 1 23 8 49 5 67 12 and 67 11 of intact controls for the 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1.0 mg day dose groups respectively. Compound III fully restored levator ani muscle weight at doses 0.1 mg day. Levator ani muscle weights were restored to 56 7 82 9 103 11 113 11 121 7 and 120 7 corresponding to doses of 0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3 0.75 and 1.0 mg day respectively. Results are presented graphically in . Eand EDvalues were determined in each tissue by nonlinear regression analysis in WinNonlin and presented in . Evalues were 75 8 73 3 and 126 4 for prostate seminal vesicles and levator ani respectively. The EDin prostate seminal vesicles and levator ani was 0.22 0.05 0.21 0.02 and 0.013 0.01 mg day respectively.

Cohorts of a maximum of 12 healthy male volunteers were dosed at each dose level 9 active 3 placebo in a randomized double blind study design. Eight cohorts were recruited aged 18 45 years and each cohort received one single oral dose corresponding to either 1 3 10 30 or 100 mg compound III or placebo of equal volume of PE G300 in solution or 3 or 30 mg in experimental capsules. The effect of micronization i.e. particle size reduction was investigated on the pharmacokinetics of compound III in the 30 mg solid oral dosage form. Samples for pharmacokinetic assessment of parent drug were taken for up to 72 hours following dosing.

Doses of compound III in PEG300 based solutions at 1 3 10 30 and 100 mg were rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. All dose levels resulted in plasma compound III concentrations that were quantifiable through the last time point collected 72 hours . Exposure Cmax and AUC to compound III increased with increasing dose and was linear for solutions over the dose range 1 to 100 mg. Twas achieved between 0.8 and 2.3 hours median value 1.0 hours for compound III in solution and between 3.2 and 3.9 hours following the solid oral formulations . The terminal elimination half life ranged from 19 to 22 hours median value 20 hours for 1 100 mg solutions and the 3 mg capsule and was increased with the 30 mg capsules to 27 and 31 hours for micronized and non micronized although not significantly p 0.1 . Oral clearance was inversely associated with half life with the 30 mg non micronized capsule exhibiting the longest half life and the lowest clearance compared to the other dosage forms and amounts. The 3 mg non micronized capsule and solution were equally bioavailable but at the higher dose 30 mg micronization improved oral bioavailability p

The SARMs are synthesized essentially in accordance with methods as described in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 2004 0014975 A1 Alzet osmotic pumps model 2002 are purchased from Alza Corp. Palo Alto Calif. .

Study Design. Immature male Sprague Dawley rats weighing 90 to 100 g are randomly distributed into groups with at least 5 animals per group. One day prior to the start of drug treatment animals are individually removed from the cage weighed and anesthetized with an intraperitoneal dose of ketamine xylazine 87 13 mg kg approximately 1 mL per kg . When appropriately anesthetized i.e. no response to toe pinch the animals ears are marked for identification purposes. Animals are then placed on a sterile pad and their abdomen and scrotum washed with betadine and 70 alcohol. The testes ale removed via a midline scrotal incision with sterile suture being used to ligate supra testicular tissue prior to surgical removal of each testis. The surgical wound site is closed with sterile stainless steel wound clips and the site cleaned with betadine. The animals are allowed to recover on a sterile pad until able to stand and then returned to their cage.

Twenty four hours later animals are re anesthetized with ketamine xylazine and an Alzet osmotic pump s model 2002 containing the SARM compound is placed subcutaneouly in the scapular region. Osmotic pumps contain the appropriate treatment as described in Example 3 dissolved in polyethylene glycol 300 PEG300 . Osmotic pumps are filled with the appropriate solution one day prior to implantation. Animals are monitored daily for signs of acute toxicity to drug treatment erg. lethargy rough coat .

After 14 days of drug treatment rats are anesthetized with ketamine xylazine. Animals are sacrificed by exsanguination under anesthesia. A blood sample is collected by venipuncture of the abdominal aorta and submitted for complete blood cell analysis. A portion of the blood is placed in a separate tube centrifuged at 12 000 g for 1 minute and the plasma layer removed and frozen at 20 C. The ventral prostates seminal vesicles levator ani muscle liver kidneys spleen lungs and heart are removed cleared of extraneous tissue weighed and placed in vials containing 10 neutral buffered formalin. Preserved tissues are subjected to histopathological analysis.

For data analysis the weights of all organs are normalized to body weight and analyzed for any statistical significant difference by single factor ANOVA. The weights of prostate and seminal vesicle are used as indexes for evaluation of androgenic activity and the levator ani muscle weight is used to evaluate the anabolic activity 

Testosterone propionate TP at increasing doses is used as the positive control of anabolic and androgenic effects. Effects of particular compounds may thus be compared to that of TP.

The weights of prostate seminal vesicle and levator ani muscle in castrated vehicle treated rats are expected to decrease significantly due to the ablation of endogenous androgen production. Exogenous administration of testosterone propionate an androgenic and anabolic steroid are expected to increase the weights of prostate seminal vesicle and levator ani muscle in castrated rats in a dose dependent manner. The SARMs will be comparatively evaluated for their effect on the weights of prostate seminal vesicle and levator ani muscle in castrated animals. Compounds which show lower potency and intrinsic activity in increasing the weights of prostate and seminal vesicle but a greater potency and intrinsic activity in increasing the weight of levator ani muscle will be considered to be poorly androgenic yet anabolic and represent compounds which would be useful in therapy of for example prostate cancer or for treating side effects associated with current therapies for prostate cancer such as for example androgen deprivation therapy.

One hundred Sprague Dawley rats 50 male and 50 female were divided into five groups n 10 per gender per group representing vehicle only PEG300 40 Cavasol 75 25 v v and four dose groups of Compound III. Animals were administered Compound III once daily by oral gavage according to their most recent body weight with doses of either 0 3 10 30 or 100 mg kg. During the study period rats had access to water and a standard laboratory diet of Harlan Taklad Rodent Chow ad libitum. After 28 consecutive days of dosing animals were fasted overnight blood samples were collected and processed to yield serum. Serum levels of total cholesterol were determined using an automated laboratory assay method.

The male and female rats in the vehicle only group 0 mg kg had serum total cholesterol values of 92 13.5 and 102 13 mg dL respectively. These values are considered within the normal historical range for the testing laboratory. Daily oral doses of Compound III at or above 3 mg kg caused a significant reduction in total cholesterol levels in both male and female rats. At 3 mg kg compared to vehicle control animals al approximate 30 reduction in total cholesterol was noted where males and females had 63 17.4 and 74 14.2 mg dL respectively. Although a slightly greater effect was noted at the highest dose group 100 mg kg per day in general a dose response relationship was not observed in the reduction of total cholesterol levels in the Sprague Dawley rat. Results are presented graphically in .

The effect of SARMs in causing acute toxicity as gauged by diagnostic hematology tests and visual examination of animals receiving treatments will be assessed as will suppression of luteinizing hormone LH or follicle stimulating hormone FSH as described in Example 4 hereinabove.

While certain features of the invention have been illustrated and described herein many modifications substitutions changes and equivalents will now occur to those of ordinary skill in the art. It is therefore to be understood that the appended claims are intended to cover all such modifications and changes as fall within the true spirit of the invention.

