---

title: Synthesis of selective androgen receptor modulators
abstract: The present invention relates to a synthetic process for the preparation of a novel class of androgen receptor targeting agents (ARTA) which demonstrate androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor. The agents define a new subclass of compounds which are selective androgen receptor modulators (SARM) which are useful for a) male contraception; b) treatment of a variety of hormone-related conditions, for example conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Aging Male (ADAM), such as fatigue, depression, decreased libido, sexual dysfunction, erectile dysfunction, hypogonadism, osteoporosis, hair loss, anemia, obesity, sarcopenia, osteopenia, osteoporosis, benign prostate hyperplasia, alterations in mood and cognition and prostate cancer; c) treatment of conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Female (ADIF), such as sexual dysfunction, decreased sexual libido, hypogonadism, sarcopenia, osteopenia, osteoporosis, alterations in cognition and mood, depression, anemia, hair loss, obesity, endometriosis, breast cancer, uterine cancer and ovarian cancer; d) treatment and/or prevention of chronic muscular wasting; e) decreasing the incidence of, halting or causing a regression of prostate cancer; f) oral androgen relacement and/or other clinical therpauetic and/or diagnostic areas. The process of the present invention is suitable for large-scale preparation, since all of the steps give rise to highly pure compounds, thus avoiding complicated purification procedures which ultimately lower the yield. Thus the present invention provides methods for the synthesis of non-steroidal agonist compounds, that can be used for industrial large-scale synthesis, and that provide highly pure products in high yield.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07759520&OS=07759520&RS=07759520
owner: University of Tennessee Research Foundation
number: 07759520
owner_city: Knoxville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050223
---
This application is a Continuation in Part Application of U.S. Ser. No. 10 863 524 filed Jun. 9 2004 and U.S. Ser. No. 10 277 108 filed Oct. 22 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 995 284 which is a Continuation in Part Application of U.S. Ser. No. 09 935 044 filed Aug. 23 2001 not U.S. Pat. No. 6 492 554 and of U.S. Ser. No. 09 935 045 filed Aug. 23 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 569 896 which are Continuation in Part Applications of U.S. Ser. No. 09 644 970 filed Aug. 24 2000 and claims priority of U.S. Ser. No. 60 300 083 filed Jun. 25 2001 which are hereby incorporated by reference. This Application is also a Continuation in Part Application of U.S. Ser. No. 10 298 229 filed Nov. 18 2002 which is a Continuation Application of U.S. Ser. No. 09 510 108 filed Feb. 22 2000 which is a Continuation Application of U.S. Ser. No. 08 978 511 filed on Nov. 25 1997 which claims priority of U.S. Ser. No. 60 031 861 filed on Nov. 27 1996 which are hereby incorporated by reference.

This invention was made in whole or in part with government support under grant number R29 CA068096 awarded by the National Cancer Institute National Institute of Health and under grant number R15 HD35329 awarded by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development National Institute of Health. The government may have certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to a synthetic process for the preparation of a novel class of androgen receptor targeting agents ARTA which demonstrate androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor. The agents define a new subclass of compounds which are selective androgen receptor modulators SARMs useful for a male contraception b treatment of a variety of hormone related conditions for example conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Aging Male ADAM such as fatigue depression decreased libido sexual dysfunction erectile dysfunction hypogonadism osteoporosis hair loss anemia obesity sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis benign prostate hyperplasia alterations in mood and cognition and prostate cancer c treatment of conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Female ADIF such as sexual dysfunction decreased sexual libido hypogonadism sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis alterations in cognition and mood depression anemia hair loss obesity endometriosis breast cancer uterine cancer and ovarian cancer d treatment and or prevention of chronic muscular wasting e decreasing the incidence of halting or causing a regression of prostate cancer f oral androgen relacement and or other clinical therpauetic and or diagnostic areas.

The androgen receptor AR is a ligand activated transcriptional regulatory protein that mediates induction of male sexual development and function through its activity with endogenous androgens. Androgens are generally known as the male sex hormones. The androgenic hormones are steroids which are produced in the body by the testes and the cortex of the adrenal gland or can be synthesized in the laboratory. Androgenic steroids play an important role in many physiologic processes including the development and maintenance of male sexual characteristics such as muscle and bone mass prostate growth spermatogenesis and the male hair pattern Matsumoto Endocrinol. Met. Clin. N. Am. 23 857 75 1994 . The endogenous steroidal androgens include testosterone and dihydrotestosterone DHT . Testosterone is the principal steroid secreted by the testes and is the primary circulating androgen found in the plasma of males. Testosterone is converted to DHT by the enzyme 5 alpha reductase in many peripheral tissues. DHT is thus thought to serve as the intracellular mediator for most androgen actions Zhou et al. Molec. Endocrinol. 9 208 18 1995 . Other steroidal androgens include esters of testosterone such as the cypionate propionate phenylpropionate cyclopentylpropionate isocarporate enanthate and decanoate esters and other synthetic androgens such as 7 Methyl Nortestosterone MENT and its acetate ester Sundaram et al. 7 Alpha Methyl Nortestosterone MENT The Optimal Androgen For Male Contraception Ann. Med. 25 199 205 1993 Sundaram . Because the AR is involved in male sexual development and function the AR is a likely target for effecting male contraception or other forms of hormone replacement therapy.

Worldwide population growth and social awareness of family planning have stimulated a great deal of research in contraception. Contraception is a difficult subject under any circumstance. It is fraught with cultural and social stigma religious implications and most certainly significant health concerns. This situation is only exacerbated when the subject focuses on male contraception. Despite the availability of suitable contraceptive devices historically society has looked to women to be responsible for contraceptive decisions and their consequences. Although concern over sexually transmitted diseases has made men more aware of the need to develop safe and responsible sexual habits women still often bear the brunt of contraceptive choice. Women have a number of choices from temporary mechanical devices such as sponges and diaphragms to temporary chemical devices such as spermicides. Women also have at their disposal more permanent options such as physical devices including IUDs and cervical caps as well as more permanent chemical treatments such as birth control pills and subcutaneous implants. However to date the only options available for men include the use of condoms and vasectomy. Condom use however is not favored by many men because of the reduced sexual sensitivity the interruption in sexual spontaneity and the significant possibility of pregnancy caused by breakage or misuse. Vasectomies are also not favored. If more convenient methods of birth control were available to men particularly long term methods which require no preparative activity immediately prior to a sexual act such methods could significantly increase the likelihood that men would take more responsibility for contraception.

Administration of the male sex steroids e.g. testosterone and its derivatives has shown particular promise in this regard due to the combined gonadotropin suppressing and androgen substituting properties of these compounds Steinberger et al. Effect of Chronic Administration of Testosterone Enanthate on Sperm Production and Plasma Testosterone Follicle Stimulating Hormone and Luteinizing Hormone Levels A Preliminary Evaluation of a Possible Male Contraceptive Fertility and Sterility 28 1320 28 1977 . Chronic administration of high doses of testosterone completely abolishes sperm production azoospermia or reduces it to a very low level oligospermia . The degree of spermatogenic suppression necessary to produce infertility is not precisely known. However a recent report by the World Health Organization showed that weekly intramuscular injections of testosterone enanthate result in azoospermia or severe oligospermia i.e. less than 3 million sperm per ml and infertility in 98 of men receiving therapy World Health Organization Task Force on Methods And Regulation of Male Fertility Contraceptive Efficacy of Testosterone Induced Azoospermia and Oligospermia in Normal Men Fertility and Sterility 65 821 29 1996 .

A variety of testosterone esters have been developed which are more slowly absorbed after intramuscular injection and thus result in greater androgenic effect. Testosterone enanthate is the most widely used of these esters. While testosterone enanthate has been valuable in terms of establishing the feasibility of hormonal agents for male contraception it has several drawbacks including the need for weekly injections and the presence of supraphysiologic peak levels of testosterone immediately following intramuscular injection Wu Effects of Testosterone Enanthate in Normal Men Experience From a Multicenter Contraceptive Efficacy Study Fertility and Sterility 65 626 36 1996 .

Steroidal ligands which bind the AR and act as androgens e.g. testosterone enanthate or as antiandrogens e.g. cyproterone acetate have been known for many years and are used clinically Wu 1988 . Although nonsteroidal antiandrogens are in clinical use for hormone dependent prostate cancer nonsteroidal androgens have not been reported. For this reason research on androgens useful for male contraception and hormone replacement has focused solely on steroidal compounds.

Prostate cancer is one of the most frequently occurring cancers among men in the United States with hundreds of thousands of new cases diagnosed each year. Unfortunately over sixty percent of newly diagnosed cases of prostate cancer are found to be pathologically advanced with no cure and a dismal prognosis. One approach to this problem is to find prostate cancer earlier through screening programs and thereby reduce the number of advanced prostate cancer patients. Another strategy however is to develop drugs to prevent prostate cancer. One third of all men over 50 years of age have a latent form of prostate cancer that may be activated into the life threatening clinical prostate cancer form. The frequency of latent prostatic tumors has been shown to increase substantially with each decade of life from the 50 s 5.3 14 to the 90 s 40 80 . The number of people with latent prostate cancer is the same across all cultures ethnic groups and races yet the frequency of clinically aggressive cancer is markedly different. This suggests that environmental factors may play a role in activating latent prostate cancer. Thus the development of treatment and preventative strategies against prostate cancer may have the greatest overall impact both medically and economically against prostate cancer.

Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disease characterized by low bone mass and deterioration of bone tissue with a consequent increase in bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture. In the U.S. the condition affects more than 25 million people and causes more than 1.3 million fractures each year including 500 000 spine 250 000 hip and 240 000 wrist fractures annually. Hip fractures are the most serious consequence of osteoporosis with 5 20 of patients dying within one year and over 50 of survivors being incapacitated. The elderly are at greatest risk of osteoporosis and the problem is therefore predicted to increase significantly with the aging of the population. Worldwide fracture incidence is forecasted to increase three fold over the next 60 years and one study estimated that there will be 4.5 million hip fractures worldwide in 2050.

Women are at greater risk of osteoporosis than men. Women experience a sharp acceleration of bone loss during the five years following menopause. Other factors that increase the risk include smoking alcohol abuse a sedentary lifestyle and low calcium intake. However osteoporosis also occurs frequently in males. It is well established that the bone mineral density of males decrease with age. Decreased amounts of bone mineral content and density correlates with decreased bone strength and predisposes to fracture. The molecular mechanisms underlying the pleiotropic effects of sex hormones in non reproductive tissues are only beginning to be understood but it is clear that physiologic concentrations of androgens and estrogens play an important role in maintaining bone homeostasis throughout the life cycle. Consequently when androgen or estrogen deprivation occurs there is a resultant increase in the rate of bone remodeling that tilts the balance of resorption and formation to the favor of resorption that contributes to the overall loss of bone mass. In males the natural decline in sex hormones at maturity direct decline in androgens as well as lower levels of estrogens derived from peripheral aromatization of androgens is associated with the frailty of bones. This effect is also observed in males who have been castrated.

Androgen decline in the aging male ADAM refers to a progressive decrease in androgen production common in males after middle age. The syndrome is characterized by alterations in the physical and intellectual domains that correlate with and can be corrected by manipulation of the androgen milieu. ADAM is characterized biochemically by a decrease not only in serum androgen but also in other hormones such as growth hormone melatonin and dehydroepiandrosterone. Clinical manifestations include fatigue depression decreased libido sexual dysfunction erectile dysfunction hypogonadism osteoporosis hair loss obesity sarcopenia osteopenia benign prostate hyperplasia anemia alterations in mood and cognition and prostate cancer.

Androgen Deficiency in Female ADIF refers to a variety of hormone related conditions including common in females after middle agest. The syndrome is characterized by sexual dysfunction decreased sexual libido hypogonadism sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis alterations in cognition and mood anemia depression anemia hair loss obesity endometriosis breast cancer uterine cancer and ovarian cancer.

Muscle wasting refers to the progressive loss of muscle mass and or to the progressive weakening and degeneration of muscles including the skeletal or voluntary muscles which control movement cardiac muscles which control the heart cardiomyopathics and smooth muscles. Chronic muscle wasting is a chronic condition i.e. persisting over a long period of time characterized by progressive loss of muscle mass weakening and degeneration of muscle. The loss of muscle mass that occurs during muscle wasting can be characterized by a muscle protein breakdown or degradation. Protein degradation occurs because of an unusually high rate of protein degradation an unusually low rate of protein synthesis or a combination of both. Protein degradation whether caused by a high degree of protein degradation or a low degree of protein synthesis leads to a decrease in muscle mass and to muscle wasting. Muscle wasting is associated with chronic neurological genetic or infectious pathologies diseases illnesses or conditions. These include Muscular Dystrophies such as Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy and Myotonic Dystrophy Muscle Atrophies such as Post Polio Muscle Atrophy PPMA Cachexias such as Cardiac Cachexia AIDS Cachexia and Cancer Cachexia malnutrition Leprosy Diabetes Renal Disease Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease COPD Cancer end stage Renal failure Emphysema Osteomalacia HIV Infection AIDS and Cardiomyopathy In addition other circumstances and conditions are linked to and can cause muscle wasting. These include chronic lower back pain advanced age central nervous system CNS injury peripheral nerve injury spinal cord injury chemical injury central nervous system CNS damage peripheral nerve damage spinal cord damage chemical damage burns disuse deconditioning that occurs when a limb is immobilized long term hospitalization due to illness or injury and alcoholism. Muscle wasting if left unabated can have dire health consequences. For example the changes that occur during muscle wasting can lead to a weakened physical state that is detrimental to an individual s health resulting in increased susceptibility to infection poor performance status and susceptibility to injury.

New innovative approaches are urgently needed at both the basic science and clinical levels to develop compounds which are useful for a male contraception b treatment of a variety of hormone related conditions for example conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Aging Male ADAM such as fatigue depression decreased libido sexual dysfunction erectile dysfunction hypogonadism osteoporosis hair loss anemia obesity sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis benign prostate hyperplasia alterations in mood and cognition and prostate cancer c treatment of conditions associated with ADIF such as sexual dysfunction decreased sexual libido hypogonadism sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis alterations in cognition and mood depression anemia hair loss obesity endometriosis breast cancer uterine cancer and ovarian cancer d treatment and or prevention of chronic muscular wasting e decreasing the incidence of halting or causing a regression of prostate cancer f oral androgen relacement and or other clinical therpauetic and or diagnostic areas.

Tucker et al 1988 31 885 887 and 1988 31 954 959 discloses the synthesis and resolution of 4 cyano 3 4 fluorophenyl sulphonyl 2 hydroxy 2 methyl 3 trifluoro methyl propionamide bicalutamide a non steroidal antiandrogen useful in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Tucker U.S. Pat. No. 4 636 505 discloses N substituted phenyl 3 alkyl aryl and heteroarylsulfonyl 2 hydroxy 2 alkyl and haloalkylpropanamide compounds methods for their preparation and their utility in the treatment of malignant or benign prostatic disease or of androgen dependent disease conditions. Kirkovsky et al 2000 43 581 590 discloses the synthesis of chiral nonsteroidal affinity ligands which are bicalutamide analogues bearing electrophillic groups in the B aromatic ring. Miller et al U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 160 011 and 6 071 957 discloses the non steroidal agonist compounds their preparation and their use in male hormone therapy and in the treatment of prostate cancer. These references all teach methods of preparing non steroidal agonist compounds having a thio sulfoxide or sulfone linkeage. In addition the processes disclosed in these references are not suitable for large scale preparation since one or more of the steps result in mixtures of products and thus involve purification procedures which ultimately result in a lower yield. There is a need in the art to develop synthetic methods for the synthesis of non steroidal agonist compounds that can be used for large scale synthesis and that provide highly pure products in high yield.

In one embodiment present invention relates to a synthetic process for the preparation of a novel class of androgen receptor targeting agents ARTA which demonstrate androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor. The agents define a new subclass of compounds which are selective androgen receptor modulators SARMs useful for a male contraception b treatment of a variety of hormone related conditions for example conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Aging Male ADAM c treatment of conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Female ADIF d treatment and or prevention of chronic muscular wasting and or e decreasing the incidence of halting or causing a regression of prostate cancer f oral androgen relacement and or other clinical therpauetic and or diagnostic areas.

The process of the present invention is suitable for large scale preparation since all of the steps give rise to highly pure compounds thus avoiding complicated purification procedures which ultimately lower the yield. Thus the present invention provides methods for the synthesis of non steroidal agonist compounds that can be used for industrial large scale synthesis and that provide highly pure products in high yield.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor said compound represented by the structure of formula XVI 

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor said compound represented by the structure of formula XVI 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula XX in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce an amide of formula XVII

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having iiz vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor said compound represented by the structure of formula XVI 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula XX in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce an amide of formula XVII

In one embodiment the coupling step is carried out in the presence of a base. In another embodiment the leaving group L is Br.

In another embodiment the process further comprises the step of converting the selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound to its analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof.

The novel selective androgen receptor modulator compounds of the present invention either alone or as a pharmaceutical composition are useful for a male contraception b treatment of a variety of hormone related conditions for example conditions associated with ADAM such as fatigue depression decreased libido sexual dysfunction erectile dysfunction hypogonadism osteoporosis hair loss obesity sarcopenia osteopenia benign prostate hyperplasia and alterations in mood and cognition c treatment of conditions associated with ADIF such as sexual dysfunction decreased sexual libido hypogonadism sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis alterations in cognition and mood depression anemia hair loss obesity endometriosis breast cancer uterine cancer and ovarian cancer d treatment and or prevention of chronic muscular wasting e decreasing the incidence of halting or causing a regression of prostate cancer f oral androgen relacement and or other clinical therpauetic and or diagnostic areas.

The selective androgen receptor modulator compounds of the present invention offer a significant advancement over steroidal androgen treatment because the selective androgen receptor modulator compounds of the present invention have been shown in vivo to have an androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor. Thus the selective androgen receptor modulator compounds have an androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor and will not be accompanied by serious side effects inconvenient modes of administration or high costs and still have the advantages of oral bioavailability lack of cross reactivity with other steroid receptors and long biological half lives.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a synthetic process for the preparation of a novel class of androgen receptor targeting agents ARTA which demonstrate androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor. The agents define a new subclass of compounds which are selective androgen receptor modulators SARM which are useful for a male contraception b treatment of a variety of hormone related conditions for example conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Aging Male ADAM such as fatigue depression decreased libido sexual dysfunction erectile dysfunction hypogonadism osteoporosis hair loss anemia obesity sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis benign prostate hyperplasia alterations in mood and cognition and prostate cancer c treatment of conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Female ADIF such as sexual dysfunction decreased sexual libido hypogonadism sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis alterations in cognition and mood depression anemia hair loss obesity endometriosis breast cancer uterine cancer and ovarian cancer d treatment and or prevention of chronic muscular wasting e decreasing the incidence of halting or causing a regression of prostate cancer f oral androgen relacement and or other clinical therpauetic and or diagnostic areas.

The process of the present invention is suitable for large scale preparation since all of the steps give rise to highly pure compounds thus avoiding complicated purification procedures which ultimately lower the yield. Thus the present invention provides methods for the synthesis of non steroidal agonist compounds that can be used for industrial large scale synthesis and that provide highly pure products in high yield.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor the compound represented by the structure of formula I 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula VIII in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce the amide of formula II.

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor the compound represented by the structure of formula I 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula VIII in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce an amide of formula II

The prior art Tucker et al 1988 U.S. Pat. No. 4 636 505 Kirkovsky et al 2000 U.S. Pat. No. 6 160 011 and U.S. Pat. No. 6 071 957 teaches a process for the preparation of a carboxylic acid of formula VIII wherein Ris CH T is OH and L is Br which involves ring opening in the presence of acidic conditions specifically HCl. The disclosed processes give rise to a mixture of compounds including mixtures of chlorinated and brominated compounds. Applicants have surprisingly and unexpectedly found that when Step a i.e. the ring opening to produce a carboxylic acid of formula VIII is carried out in the presence of HBr the reaction gives rise to a pure product without the production of mixtures and by products. Thus in one embodiment the process can be used for industrial large scale synthesis providing highly pure products in high yields. Accordingly in one embodiment the carboxylic acid of formula VIII is prepared by ring opening of the cyclic compound IX in the presence of HBr.

It is understood to a person skilled in the art that when Tis O or NH T is compound VIII is O or NH. Thus when T in compound I is OR the reaction will involve a further step of converting the OH to OR by a reaction with for example an alkyl halide R X. When T in compound I is NHCOR NHCOCH the reaction will involve a further step of converting the NHto NHCOR orNHCOCH by a reaction with for example the corresponding acyl chloride ClCOR or ClCOCH.

Thus in one embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor the compound represented by the structure of formula I 

In one embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I wherein is X is O. In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I wherein is T is OH. In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I wherein is Ris CH. In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I wherein Z is NO. In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I wherein Z is CN. In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I wherein Y is CF. In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I wherein Q is NHCOCH. In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I wherein Q is F.

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound represented by the structure of formula IV 

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound represented by the structure of formula V 

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound represented by the structure of formula VI 

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen modulator compound represented by the structure of formula XV 

In one embodiment the coupling of compounds II and III is carried out in the presence of a base. Any suitable base that will deprotonate the hydrogen of the XH moiety for example a phenol moiety when X is O and allow the coupling may be used. Nonlimiting examples of bases are carbonates such as alkali carbonates for example sodium carbonate NaCO potassium carbonate KCO and cesium carbonate CsCO bicarbonates such as alkali metal bicarbonates for example sodium bicarbonate NaHCO potassium bicarbonate KHCO alkali metal hydrides such as sodium hydride NaH potassium hydride KH and lithium hydride LiH and the like.

The leaving group L is defined herein as any removable group customarily considered for chemical reactions as will be known to the person skilled in the art. Suitable leaving groups are halogens for example F Cl Br and I alkyl sulfonate esters OSOR wherein R is an alkyl group for example methanesulfonate mesylate trifluoromethanesulfonate ethanesulfonate 2 2 2 trifluoroethanesulfonate perfluoro butanesulfonate aryl sulfonate esters OSOAr wherein Ar is an aryl group for example p toluoylsulfonate tosylate benzenesulphonate which may be unsubstituted or substituted by methyl chlorine bromine nitro and the like NO NO or sulfate sulfite phosphate phosphite carboxylate imino ester Nor carbamate.

The reaction is conveniently carried out in a suitable inert solvent or diluent such as for example tetrahydrofuran diethyl ether aromatic amines such as pyridine aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons such as benzene toluene and xylene dimethylsulfoxide DMSO dimethylformamide DMF and dimethylacetamide DMAC . The reaction is suitably carried out at a temperature in the range for example 20 to 120 C. for example at or near ambient temperature.

The coupling reagent is a reagent capable of turning the carboxylic acid VIII into a reactive derivative thereof thus enabling coupling with amine VII to form an amide bond. A suitable reactive derivative of a carboxylic acid is for example an acyl halide for example an acyl chloride formed by the reaction of the acid and an inorganic acid chloride for example thionyl chloride a mixed anhydride for example an anhydride formed by the reaction of the acid and a chloroformate such as isobutyl chloroformate an active ester for example an ester formed by the reaction of the acid and a phenol such as pentafluorophenol an ester such as pentafluorophenyl trifluoroacetate or an alcohol such as methanol ethanol isopropanol butanol or N hydroxybenzotriazole an acyl azide for example an azide formed by the reaction of the acid and azide such as diphenylphosphoryl azide an acyl cyanide for example a cyanide formed by the reaction of an acid and a cyanide such as diethylphosphoryl cyanide or the product of the reaction of the acid and a carbodiimide such as dicyclohexylcarbodiimide.

The reaction is conveniently carried out in a suitable inert solvent or diluent as described hereinabove suitably in the presence of a base such as triethylamine and at a temperature in the range as desribed above.

Furthermore in another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor the compound represented by the structure of formula X 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula XII in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce an amide of formula XIII

The substituent R is defined herein as an alkyl haloalkyl dihaloalkyl trihaloalkyl CHF CHF CF CFCF aryl phenyl halogen alkenyl or hydroxyl OH .

In one embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor the compound represented by the structure of formula XVI 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula XX in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce the amide of formula XVII.

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor the compound represented by the structure of formula XVI 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula XX in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce an amide of formula XVII

In one embodiment the carboxylic acid of formula XX is prepared by ring opening of the cyclic compound IXX in the presence of HBr.

In one embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor said compound represented by the structure of formula XVI 

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor said compound represented by the structure of formula XVI 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula XX in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce an amide of formula XVII

In another embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing a selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound having in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor said compound represented by the structure of formula XVI 

wherein Z and Y are as defined above with the carboxylic acid of formula XX in the presence of a coupling reagent to produce an amide of formula XVII

In one embodiment the coupling of compounds XVII and XVIII is carried out in the presence of a base. Any suitable base that will deprotonate the hydrogen of the XH moiety for example a phenol moiety when X is O and allow the coupling may be used. Nonlimiting examples of bases are carbonates such as alkali carbonates for example sodium carbonate NaCO potassium carbonate KCO and cesium carbonate CsCO bicarbonates such as alkali metal bicarbonates for example sodium bicarbonate NaHCO potassium bicarbonate KHCO alkali metal hydrides such as sodium hydride NaH potassium hydride KH and lithium hydride LiH and the like.

The leaving group L is defined herein as any removable group customarily considered for chemical reactions as will be known to the person skilled in the art. Suitable leaving groups are halogens for example F Cl Br and I alkyl sulfonate esters OSOR wherein R is an alkyl group for example methanesulfonate mesylate trifluoromethanesulfonate ethanesulfonate 2 2 2 trifluoroethanesulfonate perfluoro butanesulfonate aryl sulfonate esters OSOAr wherein Ar is an aryl group for example p toluoylsulfonate tosylate benzenesulphonate which may be unsubstituted or substituted by methyl chlorine bromine nitro and the like NO NO or sulfate sulfite phosphate phosphite carboxylate imino ester Nor carbamate.

The reaction is conveniently carried out in a suitable inert solvent or diluent such as for example tetrahydrofuran diethyl ether aromatic amines such as pyridine aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons such as benzene toluene and xylene dimethylsulfoxide DMSO dimethylformamide DMF and dimethylacetamide DMAC . The reaction is suitably carried out at a temperature in the range for example 20 to 120 C. for example at or near ambient temperature.

The coupling reagent is a reagent capable of turning the carboxylic acid VIII into a reactive derivative thereof thus enabling coupling with amine VII to form an amide bond. A suitable reactive derivative of a carboxylic acid is for example an acyl halide for example an acyl chloride formed by the reaction of the acid and an inorganic acid chloride for example thionyl chloride a mixed anhydride for example an anhydride formed by the reaction of the acid and a chloroformate such as isobutyl chloroformate an active ester for example an ester formed by the reaction of the acid and a phenol such as pentafluorophenol an ester such as pentafluorophenyl trifluoroacetate or an alcohol such as methanol ethanol isopropanol butanol or N hydroxybenzotriazole an acyl azide for example an azide formed by the reaction of the acid and azide such as diphenylphosphoryl azide an acyl cyanide for example a cyanide formed by the reaction of an acid and a cyanide such as diethylphosphoryl cyanide or the product of the reaction of the acid and a carbodiimide such as dicyclohexylcarbodiimide.

The reaction is conveniently carried out in a suitable inert solvent or diluent as described hereinabove suitably in the presence of a base such as triethylamine and at a temperature in the range as desribed above.

An alkyl group refers to a saturated aliphatic hydrocarbon including straight chain branched chain and cyclic alkyl groups. In one embodiment the alkyl group has 1 12 carbons. In another embodiment the alkyl group has 1 7 carbons. In another embodiment the alkyl group has 1 6 carbons. In another embodiment the alkyl group has 1 4 carbons. The alkyl group may be unsubstituted or substituted by one or more groups selected from halogen hydroxy alkoxy carbonyl amido alkylamido dialkylamido nitro amino alkylamino dialkylamino carboxyl thio and thioalkyl.

A haloalkyl group refers to an alkyl group as defined above which is substituted by one or more halogen atoms e.g. by F Cl Br or I.

An aryl group refers to an aromatic group having at least one carbocyclic aromatic group or heterocyclic aromatic group which may be unsubstituted or substituted by one or more groups selected from halogen haloalkyl hydroxy alkoxy carbonyl amido alkylamido dialkylamido nitro amino alkylamino dialkylamino carboxy or thio or thioalkyl. Nonlimiting examples of aryl rings are phenyl naphthyl pyranyl pyrrolyl pyrazinyl pyrimidinyl pyrazolyl pyridinyl furanyl thiophenyl thiazolyl imidazolyl isoxazolyl and the like.

A hydroxyl group refers to an OH group. An alkenyl group refers to a group having at least one carbon to carbon double bond. A halo group refers to F Cl Br or I.

An arylalkyl group refers to an alkyl bound to an aryl wherein alkyl and aryl are as defined above. An example of an aralkyl group is a benzyl group.

In one embodiment the process further comprises the step of converting the selective androgen receptor modulator SARM compound to its analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product N oxide hydrate or any combination thereof. Thus in one embodiment the present invention provides a process for preparing an analog of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I . In another embodiment this invention provides a process for preparing an isomer of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I . In another embodiment this invention provides a process for preparing a metabolite of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I . In another embodiment this invention provides a process for preparing a derivative of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I . In another embodiment this invention provides a process for preparing a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I . In another embodiment this invention provides a process for preparing a pharmaceutical product of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I . In another embodiment this invention provides a process for preparing an N oxide of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I . In another embodiment this invention provides a process for preparing a hydrate of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I . In another embodiment this invention provides a process for preparing a combination of any of an analog isomer metabolite derivative pharmaceutically acceptable salt N oxide and or hydrate of a selective androgen modulator compound of formula I .

Furthermore in one embodiment the present invention provides an analog of the compound of formula I prepared in accordance with the process disclosed herein. In another embodiment this invention provides an isomer of the compound of formula I prepared in accordance with the process disclosed herein. In another embodiment this invention provides a metabolite of the compound of formula I prepared in accordance with the process disclosed herein. In another embodiment this invention provides a derivative of the compound of formula I prepared in accordance with the process disclosed herein. In another embodiment this invention provides a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of the compound of formula I prepared in accordance with the process disclosed herein. In another embodiment this invention provides a pharmaceutical product of the compound of formula I prepared in accordance with the process disclosed herein. In another embodiment this invention provides an N oxide of the compound of formula I prepared in accordance with the process disclosed herein. In another embodiment this invention provides a hydrate of the compound of formula I prepared in accordance with the process disclosed herein. In another embodiment this invention provides a combination of any of an analog derivative metabolite isomer pharmaceutically acceptable salt hydrate or N oxide of the compound of formula I prepared by the process disclosed herein.

As defined herein the term isomer includes but is not limited to optical isomers and analogs structural isomers and analogs conformational isomers and analogs and the like.

In one embodiment this invention encompasses a process for preparing various optical isomers of the SARM compound. It will be appreciated by those skilled in the art that the SARMs of the present invention contain at least one chiral center. Accordingly the SARMs used in the methods of the present invention may exist in and be isolated in optically active or racemic forms. Some compounds may also exhibit polymorphism. It is to be understood that the present invention encompasses any racemic optically active polymorphic or stereroisomeric form or mixtures thereof which form possesses properties useful in the treatment of androgen related conditions described herein. In one embodiment the SARMs are the pure R isomers. In another embodiment the SARMs are the pure S isomers. In another embodiment the SARMs are a mixture of the R and the S isomers. In another embodiment the SARMs are a racemic mixture comprising an equal amount of the R and the S isomers. In one embodiment the process of the present invention further provides a step of converting the SARM compound into its optically active isomer. It is well known in the art how to prepare optically active forms for example by resolution of the racemic form by recrystallization techniques by synthesis from optically active starting materials by chiral synthesis or by chromatographic separation using a chiral stationary phase .

In another embodiment the process of the present invention further provides a step of converting the SARM compound into its pharmaceutically acceptable salt. As defined herein pharmaceutically acceptable salts include salts of amino substituted compounds with organic and inorganic acids for example citric acid and hydrochloric acid. The invention also includes N oxides of the amino substituents of the compounds described herein. Pharmaceutically acceptable salts can also be prepared from phenolic compounds by treatment with inorganic bases for example sodium hydroxide. Also esters of the phenolic compounds can be made with aliphatic and aromatic carboxylic acids for example acetic acid and benzoic acid esters.

This invention further includes a process for preparing derivatives of the SARM compounds. The term derivative includes but is not limited to ether derivatives acid derivatives amide derivatives ester derivatives and the like. Methods of preparing derivatives are known to a person skilled in the art. For example ether derivatives are prepared by coupling of the corresponding alcohols. Amide and ester derivatives are prepared from the corresponding carboxylic acid by a reaction with amines and alcohols respectively.

In addition this invention further includes a process for preparing hydrates of the SARM compounds. The term hydrate includes but is not limited to hemihydrate monohydrate dihydrate trihydrate and the like. Hydrates of the SARM compounds may be prepared by contacting the SARM compound with water under suitable conditions to produce the hydrate of choice.

This invention further includes a process for preparing metabolites of the SARM compounds. The term metabolite means any substance produced from another substance by metabolism or a metabolic process.

This invention further includes a process for preparing pharmaceutical products of the SARM compounds. The term pharmaceutical product means a composition suitable for pharmaceutical use pharmaceutical composition as defined herein.

The processes provided herein are useful in the preparation of a new subclass of compounds which are selective androgen receptor modulators SARM which are useful for oral testosterone replacement therapy which have an unexpected in vivo activity for an androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor. Further appropriately substituted compounds are effective to treat prostate cancer and useful for imaging of prostate cancer. The SARM compounds demonstrate an in vivo androgenic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal ligand for the androgen receptor.

As contemplated herein the appropriately substituted SARM compounds of the present invention are useful for a male contraception b treatment of a variety of hormone related conditions for example conditions associated with Androgen Decline in Aging Male ADAM such as fatigue depression decreased libido sexual dysfunction erectile dysfunction hypogonadism osteoporosis hair loss anemia obesity sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis benign prostate hyperplasia alterations in mood and cognition and prostate cancer c treatment of conditions associated with ADIF such as sexual dysfunction decreased sexual libido hypogonadism sarcopenia osteopenia osteoporosis alterations in cognition and mood depression anemia hair loss obesity endometriosis breast cancer uterine cancer and ovarian cancer d treatment and or prevention of chronic muscular wasting e decreasing the incidence of halting or causing a regression of prostate cancer f oral androgen relacement and or other clinical therpauetic and or diagnostic areas.

As used herein receptors for extracellular signaling molecules are collectively referred to as cell signaling receptors . Many cell signaling receptors are transmembrane proteins on a cell surface when they bind an extracellular signaling molecule i.e. a ligand they become activated so as to generate a cascade of intracellular signals that alter the behavior of the cell. In contrast in some cases the receptors are inside the cell and the signaling ligand has to enter the cell to activate them these signaling molecules therefore must be sufficiently small and hydrophobic to diffuse across the plasma membrane of the cell. As used herein these receptors are collectively referred to as intracellular cell signaling receptors .

Steroid hormones are one example of small hydrophobic molecules that diffuse directly across the plasma membrane of target cells and bind to intracellular cell signaling receptors. These receptors are structurally related and constitute the intracellular receptor superfamily or steroid hormone receptor superfamily . Steroid hormone receptors include progesterone receptors estrogen receptors androgen receptors glucocorticoid typ O receptors and mineralocorticoid receptors. The present invention is particularly directed to androgen receptors.

In addition to ligand binding to the receptors the receptors can be blocked to prevent ligand binding. When a substance binds to a receptor the three dimensional structure of the substance fits into a space created by the three dimensional structure of the receptor in a ball and socket configuration.

The better the ball fits into the socket the more tightly it is held. This phenomenon is called affinity. If the affinity of a substance is greater than the original hormone it will compete with the hormone and bind the binding site more frequently. Once bound signals may be sent through the receptor into the cells causing the cell to respond in some fashion. This is called activation. On activation the activated receptor then directly regulates the transcription of specific genes. But the substance and the receptor may have certain attributes other than affinity in order to activate the cell. Chemical bonds between atoms of the substance and the atoms of the receptors may form. In some cases this leads to a change in the configuration of the receptor which is enough to begin the activation process called signal transduction . As a result substances can be made which bind receptors and activate them called receptor agonists or inactivate them called receptor antagonists . Examples of non steroidal agonist are described in PCT International Patent Application Number PCT US98 11020 International filing date May 28 1998.

In one embodiment the present invention is directed to processes for preparing selective androgen receptor modulator compounds which are agonist compounds. Thus in one embodiment the SARM compounds of the present invention are useful in binding to and activating steroidal hormone receptors. In one embodiment the agonist compound of the present invention is an agonist which binds the androgen receptor. In another embodiment the compound has high affinity for the androgen receptor. In another embodiment the agonist compound also has anabolic activity. In another embodiment the present invention provides selective androgen modulator compounds which have agonistic and anabolic activity of a nonsteroidal compound for the androgen receptor.

In one embodiment the present invention is directed to processes for preparing selective androgen receptor modulator compounds which are antagonist compounds. Thus in one embodiment the SARM compounds of the present invention are useful in binding to and inactivating steroidal hormone receptors. In one embodiment the antagonist compound of the present invention is an antagonist which binds the androgen receptor. In another embodiment the compound has high affinity for the androgen receptor. In another embodiment the antagonist compound also has anabolic activity. In another embodiment the SARM compounds bind irreversibly to the androgen receptor. In another embodiment the SARM compounds are alkylating agents.

In yet another embodiment the SARM compounds of the present invention can be classified as partial AR agonist antagonists. The SARMs are AR agonists in some tissues and cause increased transcription of AR responsive genes e.g. muscle anabolic effect . In other tissues these compounds serve as inhibitors at the AR to prevent agonistic effects of the native androgens.

Assays to determine whether the compounds of the present invention are AR agonists or antagonists are well known to a person skilled in the art. For example AR agonistic activity can be determined by monitoring the ability of the SARM compounds to maintain and or stimulate the growth of AR containing tissue such as prostate and seminal vesicles as measured by weight. AR antagonistic activity can be determined by monitoring the ability of the SARM compounds to inhibit the growth of AR containing tissue.

The compounds of the present invention bind either reversibly or irreversibly to an androgen receptor. In one embodiment the androgen receptor is an androgen receptor of a mammal. In another embodiment the androgen receptor is an androgen receptor of a human. In one embodiment the SARM compounds bind reversibly to the androgen receptor of a mammal for example a human. Reversible binding of a compound to a receptor means that a compound can detach from the receptor after binding.

In another embodiment the SARM compounds bind irreversibly to the androgen receptor of a mammal for example a human. Thus in one embodiment the compounds of the present invention may contain a functional group e.g. affinity label that allows alkylation of the androgen receptor i.e. covalent bond formation . Thus in this case the compounds are alkylating agents which bind irreversibly to the receptor and accordingly cannot be displaced by a steroid such as the endogenous ligands DHT and testosterone. An alkylating agent is defined herein as an agent which alkylates forms a covalent bond with a cellular component such as DNA RNA or protein. It is a highly reactive chemical that introduces alkyl radicals into biologically active molecules and thereby prevents their proper functioning. The alkylating moiety is an electrophilic group that interacts with nucleophilic moieties in cellular components.

According to one embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for binding the SARM compounds of the present invention to an androgen receptor by contacting the receptor with a SARM compound and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof under conditions effective to cause the selective androgen receptor modulator compound to bind the androgen receptor. The binding of the selective androgen receptor modulator compounds to the androgen receptor enables the compounds of the present invention to be useful as a male contraceptive and in a number of hormone therapies. The agonist compounds bind to and activate the androgen receptor. The antagonist compounds bind to and inactivate the androgen receptor. Binding of the agonist or antagonist compounds is either reversible or irreversible.

According to one embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for suppressing spermatogenesis in a subject by contacting an androgen receptor of the subject with a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to bind the selective androgen receptor modulator compound to the androgen receptor and suppress spermatogenesis.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for contraception in a male subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to suppress sperm production in the subject thereby effecting contraception in the subject.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for hormonal therapy in a patient i.e. one suffering from an androgen dependent condition which includes contacting an androgen receptor of a patient with a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to bind the selective androgen receptor modulator compound to the androgen receptor and effect a change in an androgen dependent condition.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for hormone replacement therapy in a patient i.e. one suffering from an androgen dependent condition which includes contacting an androgen receptor of a patient with a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to bind the selective androgen receptor modulator compound to the androgen receptor and effect a change in an androgen dependent condition.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for treating a subject having a hormone related condition which includes administering to the subject a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to bind the SARM compound to the androgen receptor and effect a change in an androgen dependent condition.

Androgen dependent conditions which may be treated according to the present invention include those conditions which are associated with aging such as hypogonadism sarcopenia erythropoiesis osteoporosis and any other conditions later determined to be dependent upon low androgen e.g. testosterone levels.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for treating a subject suffering from prostate cancer comprising the step of administering to the subject a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to treat prostate cancer in the subject.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for preventing prostate cancer in a subject comprising the step of administering to the subject a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to treat prevent prostate cancer in the subject.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for delaying the progression of prostate cancer in a subject suffering from prostate cancer comprising the step of administering to the subject a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to delay the progression of prostate cancer in the subject.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for preventing the recurrence of prostate cancer in a subject suffering from prostate cancer comprising the step of administering to the subject a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to prevent the recurrence of prostate cancer in the subject.

According to another embodiment of the present invention a method is provided for treating the recurrence of prostate cancer in a subject suffering from prostate cancer comprising the step of administering to the subject a SARM compound of the present invention and or its analog derivative isomer metabolite pharmaceutically acceptable salt pharmaceutical product hydrate or N oxide or any combination thereof in an amount effective to treat the recurrence of prostate cancer in the subject.

As defined herein contacting means that the SARM compound of the present invention is introduced into a sample containing the enzyme in a test tube flask tissue culture chip array plate microplate capillary or the like and incubated at a temperature and time sufficient to permit binding of the SARM to the enzyme. Methods for contacting the samples with the SARM or other specific binding components are known to those skilled in the art and may be selected depending on the type of assay protocol to be run. Incubation methods are also standard and are known to those skilled in the art.

In another embodiment the term contacting means that the SARM compound of the present invention is introduced into a subject receiving treatment and the SARM compound is allowed to come in contact with the androgen receptor in vivo.

As used herein the term treating includes preventative as well as disorder remitative treatment. As used herein the terms reducing suppressing and inhibiting have their commonly understood meaning of lessening or decreasing. As used herein the term progression means increasing in scope or severity advancing growing or becoming worse. As used herein the term recurrence means the return of a disease after a remission.

The term erectile as used herein means capable of being erected. An erectile tissue is a tissue which is capable of being greatly dilated and made rigid by the distension of the numerous blood vessels which it contains.

 Hypogonadism is a condition resulting from or characterised by abnormally decreased functional activity of the gonads with retardation of growth and sexual development. Osteopenia refers to decreased calcification or density of bone. This is a term which encompasses all skeletal systems in which such a condition is noted.

 Osteoporosis refers to a thinning of the bones with reduction in bone mass due to depletion of calcium and bone protein. Osteoporosis predisposes a person to fractures which are often slow to heal and heal poorly. Unchecked osteoporosis can lead to changes in posture physical abnormality and decreased mobility.

 BPH benign prostate hyperplasia is a nonmalignant enlargement of the prostate gland and is the most common non malignant proliferative abnormality found in any internal organ and the major cause of morbidity in the adult male. BPH occurs in over 75 of men over 50 years of age reaching 88 prevalence by the ninth decade. BPH frequently results in a gradual squeezing of the portion of the urethra which traverses the prostate prostatic urethra . This causes patients to experience a frequent urge to urinate because of incomplete emptying of the bladder and urgency of urination. The obstruction of urinary flow can also lead to a general lack of control over urination including difficulty initiating urination when desired as well as difficulty in preventing urinary flow because of the inability to empty urine from the bladder a condition known as overflow urinary incontinence which can lead to urinary obstruction and to urinary failure.

 Cognition refers to the process of knowing specifically the process of being aware knowing thinking learning and judging. Cognition is related to the fields of psychology linguistics computer science neuroscience mathematics ethology and philosophy. The term mood refers to a temper or state of the mind. As contemplated herein alterations means any change for the positive or negative in cognition and or mood.

The term depression refers to an illness that involves the body mood and thoughts that affects the way a person eats sleeps and the way one feels about oneself and thinks about things. The signs and symptoms of depression include loss of interest in activities loss of appetite or overeating loss of emotional expression an empty mood feelings of hopelessness pessimism guilt or helplessness social withdrawal fatigue sleep disturbances trouble concentrating remembering or making decisions restlessness irritability headaches digestive disorders or chronic pain.

The term hair loss medically known as alopecia refers to baldness as in the very common type of male pattern baldness. Baldness typically begins with patch hair loss on the scalp and sometimes progresses to complete baldness and even loss of body hair. Hair loss affects both males and females.

 Anemia refers to the condition of having less than the normal number of red blood cells or less than the normal quantity of hemoglobin in the blood. The oxygen carrying capacity of the blood is therefore decreased. Persons with anemia may feel tired and fatigue easily appear pale develop palpitations and become usually short of breath. Anemia is caused by four basic factors a hemorrhage bleeding b hemolysis excessive destruction of red blood cells c underproduction of red blood cells and d not enough normal hemoglobin. There are many forms of anemia including aplastic anemia benzene poisoning Fanconi anemia hemolytic disease of the newborn hereditary spherocytosis iron deficiency anemia osteopetrosis pernicious anemia sickle cell disease thalassemia myelodysplastic syndrome and a variety of bone marrow diseases. As contemplated herein the SARM compounds of the present invention are useful in preventing and or treating any one or more of the above listed forms of anemia.

 Obesity refers to the state of being well above one s normal weight. Traditionally a person is considered to be obese if they are more than 20 percent over their ideal weight. Obesity has been more precisely defined by the National Institute of Health NIH as a Body to Mass Index BMI of 30 or above. Obesity is often multifactorial based on both genetic and behavioral factors. Overweight due to obesity is a significant contributor to health problems. It increases the risk of developing a number of diseases including Type 2 adult onset diabetes high blood pressure hypertension stroke cerebrovascular accident or CVA heart attack myocardial infarction or MI heart failure congestive heart failure cancer certain forms such as cancer of the prostate and cancer of the colon and rectum gallstones and gallbladder disease cholecystitis Gout and gouty arthritis osteoarthritis degenerative arthritis of the knees hips and the lower back sleep apnea failure to breath normally during sleep lowering blood oxygen and Pickwickian syndrome obesity red face underventilation and drowsiness . As contemplated herein the term obesity includes any one of the above listed obesity related conditions and diseases. Thus the SARM compounds of the present invention are useful in preventing and or treating obesity and any one or more of the above listed obesity related conditions and diseases.

 Prostate cancer is one of the most frequently occurring cancers among men in the United States with hundreds of thousands of new cases diagnosed each year. Over sixty percent of newly diagnosed cases of prostate cancer are found to be pathologically advanced with no cure and a dismal prognosis. One third of all men over 50 years of age have a latent form of prostate cancer that may be activated into the life threatening clinical prostate cancer form. The frequency of latent prostatic tumors has been shown to increase substantially with each decade of life from the 50 s 5.3 14 to the 90 s 40 80 . The number of people with latent prostate cancer is the same across all cultures ethnic groups and races yet the frequency of clinically aggressive cancer is markedly different. This suggests that environmental factors may play a role in activating latent prostate cancer.

In one embodiment the SARM compounds of the present invention are administered as the sole active ingredient. However also encompassed within the scope of the present invention are methods for hormone therapy for treating prostate cancer for delaying the progression of prostate cancer and for preventing and or treating the recurrence of prostate cancer which comprise administering the SARM compounds in combination with one or more therapeutic agents. These agents include but are not limited to LHRH analogs reversible antiandrogens antiestrogens anticancer drugs 5 alpha reductase inhibitors aromatase inhibitors progestins agents acting through other nuclear hormone receptors selective estrogen receptor modulators SERM progesterone estrogen PDE5 inhibitors apomorphine bisphosphonate and one or more additional SARMS for example another SARM with AR agonistic activity.

Thus in one embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with an LHRH analog. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with a reversible antiandrogen. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with an antiestrogen. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with an anticancer drug. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with a 5 alpha reductase inhibitor. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with an aromatase inhibitor. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with a progestin. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with an agent acting through other nuclear hormone receptors. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with a selective estrogen receptor modulators SERM . In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with progesterone. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with estrogen. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with PDE5 inhibitors. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with apomorphine. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with a bisphosphonate. In another embodiment the present invention provides compositions and pharmaceutical compositions comprising a selective androgen receptor modulator compound in combination with one or more additional SARMS.

The SARM compounds prepared according to the present invention may be incorporated into pharmaceutical compositions. As used herein pharmaceutical composition means a therapeutically effective amount of the active ingredient i.e. the SARM compound together with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier or diluent. A therapeutically effective amount as used herein refers to that amount which provides a therapeutic effect for a given condition and administration regimen.

As used herein the term administering refers to bringing a subject in contact with a SARM compound of the present invention. As used herein administration can be accomplished in vitro i.e. in a test tube or in vivo i.e. in cells or tissues of living organisms for example humans. In one embodiment the present invention encompasses administering the compounds of the present invention to a subject.

The pharmaceutical compositions containing the SARM agent can be administered to a subject by any method known to a person skilled in the art such as orally parenterally paracancerally transmucosally transdermally intramuscularly intravenously intradermally subcutaneously intraperitonealy intraventricularly intracranially intravaginally by inhalation or intratumorally.

In one embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered orally and are thus formulated in a form suitable for oral administration i.e. as a solid or a liquid preparation. Suitable solid oral formulations include tablets capsules pills granules pellets powders and the like. Suitable liquid oral formulations include solutions suspensions dispersions emulsions oils and the like. In one embodiment of the present invention the SARM compounds are formulated in a capsule. In accordance with this embodiment the compositions of the present invention comprise in addition to the SARM active compound and the inert carrier or diluent a hard gelatin capsule.

Further in another embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered by intravenous intraarterial or intramuscular injection of a liquid preparation. Suitable liquid formulations include solutions suspensions dispersions emulsions oils and the like. In one embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered intravenously and are thus formulated in a form suitable for intravenous administration. In another embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered intraarterially and are thus formulated in a form suitable for intraarterial administration. In another embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered intramuscularly and are thus formulated in a form suitable for intramuscular administration.

Further in another embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered topically to body surfaces and are thus formulated in a form suitable for topical administration. Suitable topical formulations include gels ointments creams lotions drops and the like. For topical administration the SARM agents or their physiologically tolerated derivatives such as salts esters N oxides and the like are prepared and applied as solutions suspensions or emulsions in a physiologically acceptable diluent with or without a pharmaceutical carrier.

Further in another embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered as a suppository for example a rectal suppository or a urethral suppository. Further in another embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered by subcutaneous implantation of a pellet. In a further embodiment the pellet provides for controlled release of SARM agent over a period of time. In a further embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions are administered intravaginally.

In another embodiment the active compound can be delivered in a vesicle in particular a liposome see Langer Science 249 1527 1533 1990 Treat et al. in Liposomes in the Therapy of Infectious Disease and Cancer Lopez Berestein and Fidler eds. Liss New York pp. 353 365 1989 Lopez Berestein ibid. pp. 317 327 see generally ibid .

As used herein pharmaceutically acceptable carriers or diluents are well known to those skilled in the art. The carrier or diluent may be a solid carrier or diluent for solid formuations a liquid carrier or diluent for liquid formulations or mixtures thereof.

Solid carriers diluents include but are not limited to a gum a starch e.g. corn starch pregeletanized starch a sugar e.g. lactose mannitol sucrose dextrose a cellulosic material e.g. microcrystalline cellulose an acrylate e.g. polymethylacrylate calcium carbonate magnesium oxide talc or mixtures thereof.

For liquid formulations pharmaceutically acceptable carriers may be aqueous or non aqueous solutions suspensions emulsions or oils. Examples of non aqueous solvents are propylene glycol polyethylene glycol and injectable organic esters such as ethyl oleate. Aqueous carriers include water alcoholic aqueous solutions cyclodextrins emulsions or suspensions including saline and buffered media. Examples of oils are those of petroleum animal vegetable or synthetic origin for example peanut oil soybean oil mineral oil olive oil sunflower oil and fish liver oil.

Parenteral vehicles for subcutaneous intravenous intraarterial or intramuscular injection include sodium chloride solution Ringer s dextrose dextrose and sodium chloride lactated Ringer s and fixed oils. Intravenous vehicles include fluid and nutrient replenishers electrolyte replenishers such as those based on Ringer s dextrose and the like. Examples are sterile liquids such as water and oils with or without the addition of a surfactant and other pharmaceutically acceptable adjuvants. In general water saline aqueous dextrose and related sugar solutions and glycols such as propylene glycols or polyethylene glycol are preferred liquid carriers particularly for injectable solutions. Examples of oils are those of petroleum animal vegetable or synthetic origin for example peanut oil soybean oil mineral oil olive oil sunflower oil and fish liver oil.

In addition the compositions may further comprise binders e.g. acacia cornstarch gelatin carbomer ethyl cellulose guar gum hydroxypropyl cellulose hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose povidone disintegrating agents e.g. cornstarch potato starch alginic acid silicon dioxide croscarmelose sodium crospovidone guar gum sodium starch glycolate buffers e.g. Tris HCI. acetate phosphate of various pH and ionic strength additives such as albumin or gelatin to prevent absorption to surfaces detergents e.g. Tween 20 Tween 80 Pluronic F68 bile acid salts protease inhibitors surfactants e.g. sodium lauryl sulfate permeation enhancers solubilizing agents e.g. cremophor glycerol polyethylene glycerol benzlkonium chloride benzyl benzoate cyclodextrins sobitan esters stearic acids anti oxidants e.g. ascorbic acid sodium metabisulfite butylated hydroxyanisole stabilizers e.g. hydroxypropyl cellulose hyroxypropylmethyl cellulose viscosity increasing agents e.g. carbomer colloidal silicon dioxide ethyl cellulose guar gum sweetners e.g. aspartame citric acid preservatives e.g. Thimerosal benzyl alcohol parabens lubricants e.g. stearic acid magnesium stearate polyethylene glycol sodium lauryl sulfate flow aids e.g. colloidal silicon dioxide plasticizers e.g. diethyl phthalate triethyl citrate emulsifiers e.g. carbomer hydroxypropyl cellulose sodium lauryl sulfate polymer coatings e.g. poloxamers or poloxamines coating and film forming agents e.g. ethyl cellulose acrylates polymethacrylates and or adjuvants.

In one embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions provided herein are controlled release compositions i.e. compositions in which the SARM compound is released over a period of time after administration. Controlled or sustained release compositions include formulation in lipophilic depots e.g. fatty acids waxes oils . In another embodiment the composition is an immediate release composition i.e. a composition in which all of the SARM compound is released immediately after administration.

In yet another embodiment the pharmaceutical composition can be delivered in a controlled release system. For example the agent may be administered using intravenous infusion an implantable osmotic pump a transdermal patch liposomes or other modes of administration. In one embodiment a pump may be used see Langer supra Sefton CRC Crit. Ref. Biomed. Eng. 14 201 1987 Buchwald et al. Surgery 88 507 1980 Saudek et al. N. Engl. J. Med. 321 574 1989 . In another embodiment polymeric materials can be used. In yet another embodiment a controlled release system can be placed in proximity to the therapeutic target i.e. the brain thus requiring only a fraction of the systemic dose see e.g. Goodson in Medical Applications of Controlled Release supra vol. 2 pp. 115 138 1984 . Other controlled release systems are discussed in the review by Langer Science 249 1527 1533 1990 .

The compositions may also include incorporation of the active material into or onto particulate preparations of polymeric compounds such as polylactic acid polglycolic acid hydrogels etc or onto liposomes microemulsions micelles unilamellar or multilamellar vesicles erythrocyte ghosts or spheroplasts. Such compositions will influence the physical state solubility stability rate of in vivo release and rate of in vivo clearance.

Also comprehended by the invention are particulate compositions coated with polymers e.g. poloxamers or poloxamines and the compound coupled to antibodies directed against tissue specific receptors ligands or antigens or coupled to ligands of tissue specific receptors.

Also comprehended by the invention are compounds modified by the covalent attachment of water soluble polymers such as polyethylene glycol copolymers of polyethylene glycol and polypropylene glycol carboxymethyl cellulose dextran polyvinyl alcohol polyvinylpyrrolidone or polyproline. The modified compounds are known to exhibit substantially longer half lives in blood following intravenous injection than do the corresponding unmodified compounds Abuchowski et al. 1981 Newmark et al. 1982 and Katre et al. 1987 . Such modifications may also increase the compound s solubility in aqueous solution eliminate aggregation enhance the physical and chemical stability of the compound and greatly reduce the immunogenicity and reactivity of the compound. As a result the desired in vivo biological activity may be achieved by the administration of such polymer compound abducts less frequently or in lower doses than with the unmodified compound.

The preparation of pharmaceutical compositions which contain an active component is well understood in the art for example by mixing granulating or tablet forming processes. The active therapeutic ingredient is often mixed with excipients which are pharmaceutically acceptable and compatible with the active ingredient. For oral administration the SARM agents or their physiologically tolerated derivatives such as salts esters N oxides and the like are mixed with additives customary for this purpose such as vehicles stabilizers or inert diluents and converted by customary methods into suitable forms for administration such as tablets coated tablets hard or soft gelatin capsules aqueous alcoholic or oily solutions. For parenteral administration the SARM agents or their physiologically tolerated derivatives such as salts esters N oxides and the like are converted into a solution suspension or emulsion if desired with the substances customary and suitable for this purpose for example solubilizers or other.

An active component can be formulated into the composition as neutralized pharmaceutically acceptable salt forms. Pharmaceutically acceptable salts include the acid addition salts formed with the free amino groups of the polypeptide or antibody molecule which are formed with inorganic acids such as for example hydrochloric or phosphoric acids or such organic acids as acetic oxalic tartaric mandelic and the like. Salts formed from the free carboxyl groups can also be derived from inorganic bases such as for example sodium potassium ammonium calcium or ferric hydroxides and such organic bases as isopropylamine trimethylamine 2 ethylamino ethanol histidine procaine and the like.

For use in medicine the salts of the SARM will be pharmaceutically acceptable salts. Other salts may however be useful in the preparation of the compounds according to the invention or of their pharmaceutically acceptable salts. Suitable pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the compounds of this invention include acid addition salts which may for example be formed by mixing a solution of the compound according to the invention with a solution of a pharmaceutically acceptable acid such as hydrochloric acid sulphuric acid methanesulphonic acid fumaric acid maleic acid succinic acid acetic acid benzoic acid oxalic acid citric acid tartaric acid carbonic acid or phosphoric acid.

The following examples are presented in order to more fully illustrate the preferred embodiments of the invention. They should in no way be construed however as limiting the broad scope of the invention.

 2R 1 Methacryloylpyrrolidin 2 carboxylic Acid R 129 . D Proline R 128 14.93 g 0.13 mol was dissolved in 71 mL of 2 N NaOH and cooled in an ice bath the resulting alkaline solution was diluted with acetone 71 mL . An acetone solution 71 mL of metacryloly chloride 127 13.56 g 0.13 mol and 2N NaOH solution 71 mL were simultaneously added over 40 min to the aqueous solution of D proline in an ice bath. The pH of the mixture was kept at 10 11 C. during the addition of the metacryloly chloride. After stirring 3 h room temperature the mixture was evaporated in vacuo at a temperature at 35 45 C. to remove acetone. The resulting solution was washed with ethyl ether and was acidified to pH 2 with concentrated HCl. The acidic mixture was saturated with NaCl and was extracted with EtOAc 100 mL 3 . The combined extracts were dried over NaSO filtered through Celite and evaporated in vacuo to give the crude product as a colorless oil. Recrystallization of the oil from ethyl ether and hexanes afforded 16.2 68 of the desired compound as colorless crystals mp 102 103 C. lit. 214 mp 102.5 103.5 C. the NMR spectrum of this compound demonstrated the existence of two rotamers of the title compound. H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 5.28 s and 5.15 s for the first rotamer 5.15 s and 5.03 s for the second rotamer totally 2H for both rotamers vinyl CH 4.48 4.44 for the first rotamer 4.24 4.20 m for the second rotamer totally 1H for both rotamers CH at the chiral canter 3.57 3.38 m 2H CH 2.27 2.12 1H CH 1.97 1.72 m 6H CH CH Me C NMR 75 MHz DMSO d for major rotamer 173.3 169.1 140.9 116.4 58.3 48.7 28.9 24.7 19.5 for minor rotamer 174.0 170.0 141.6 115.2 60.3 45.9 31.0 22.3 19.7 IR KBr 3437 OH 1737 C O 1647 CO COOH 1584 1508 1459 1369 1348 1178 cm 80.8 c 1 MeOH Anal. Calcd. for CHNO C 59.00 H 7.15 N 7.65. Found C 59.13 H 7.19 N 7.61.

 3R 8aR 3 Bromomethyl 3 methyl tetrahydro pyrrolo 2 1 c 1 4 oxazine 1 4 dione R R 130 . A solution of NBS 23.5 g 0.132 mol in 100 mL of DMF was added dropwise to a stirred solution of compound R 129 16.1 g 88 mmol in 70 mL of DMF under argon at room temperature and the resulting mixture was stirred 3 days. The solvent was removed in vacuo and a yellow solid was precipitated. The solid was suspended in water stirred overnight at room temperature filtered and dried to give 18.6 81 smaller weight when dried 34 of the title compound as a yellow solid mp 152 154 C. lit. 214 mp 107 109 C. for the S isomer H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 4.69 dd J 9.6 Hz J 6.7 Hz 1H CH at the chiral center 4.02 d J 11.4 Hz 1H CHH 3.86 d J 11.4 Hz 1H CHH 3.53 3.24 m 4H CH 2.30 2.20 m 1H CH 2.04 1.72 m 3H CHand CH 1.56 s 2H Me C NMR 75 MHz DMSO d 167.3 163.1 83.9 57.2 45.4 37.8 29.0 22.9 21.6 IR KBr 3474 1745 C O 1687 C O 1448 1377 1360 1308 1227 1159 1062 cm 124.5 c 1.3 chloroform Anal. Calcd. for CHBrNO C 41.24 H 4.61 N 5.34. Found C 41.46 H 4.64 N 5.32.

 2R 3 Bromo 2 hydroxy 2 methylpropanoic Acid R 131 . A mixture of bromolactone R 130 18.5 g 71 mmol in 300 mL of 24 HBr was heated at reflux for 1 h. The resulting solution was diluted with brine 200 mL and was extracted with ethyl acetate 100 mL 4 . The combined extracts were washed with saturated NaHCO 100 mL 4 . The aqueous solution was acidified with concentrated HCl to pH 1 which in turn was extracted with ethyl acetate 100 mL 4 . The combined organic solution was dried over NaSO filtered through Celite and evaporated in vacuo to dryness. Recrystallization from toluene afforded 10.2 g 86 of the desired compound as colorless crystals mp 107 109 C. lit. 214 mp 109 113 C. for the S isomer H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 3.63 d J 10.1 Hz 1H CHH 3.52 d J 10.1 Hz 1H CHH 1.35 s 3H Me IR KBr 3434 OH 3300 2500 COOH 1730 C O 1449 1421 1380 1292 1193 1085 cm 10.5 c 2.6 MeOH Anal. Calcd. for CHBrO C 26.25 H 3.86. Found C 26.28 H 3.75.

N 4 Nitro 3 trifluoromethyl phenyl 2R 3 bromo 2 hydroxy 2 methylpropanamide R 132 . Thionyl chloride 8.6 g 72 mmol was added dropwise under argon to a solution of bromoacid R 131 11.0 g 60 mmol in 70 mL of DMA at 5 to 10 C. The resulting mixture was stirred for 2 h under the same conditions. A solution of 4 nitro 3 trifluoromethyl aniline 12.4 g 60 mmol in 80 mL of DMA was added dropwise to the above solution and the resulting mixture was stirred overnight at room temperature. The solvent was removed on Rotavapor using high vacuum oil pump the residue was diluted with saturated NaHCOsolution and extracted with ethyl ether 100 mL 3 . Combined extracts were dried over anhydrous NaSO filtered through Celite and purified by flash chromatography on silica gel using methylene chloride as eluent to afford 18.0 g 80 of the desired compound mp 98 100 C. R 0.2 silica gel CHCl H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 10.54 s 1H NH 8.54 d J 2.1 Hz 1H ArH 8.34 dd J 9.0 Hz J 2.1 Hz 1H ArH 8.18 d J 9.0 Hz 1H ArH 6.37 s 1H OH 3.82 d J 10.4 Hz 1H CHH 3.58 d J 10.4 Hz 1H CHH 1.48 s 3H Me C NMR 75 MHz DMSO d 173.6 C O 143.0 127.2 123.2 122.6 q J 33.0 Hz 122.0 q J 271.5 Hz 118.3 q J 6.0 Hz 74.4 41.4 24.9 IR KBr 3344 OH 1680 C O 1599 1548 C C Ar 1427 1363 1161 cm MS ESI m z 370.8 M Anal. Calcd. for CHBrNO C 35.60 H 2.72 N 7.55. Found C 35.68 H 2.72 N 7.49.

N 4 nitro 3 trifluoromethyl phenyl 2S 3 4 acetylamino phenoxy 2 hydroxy 2 methylpropanamide S 147 . The title compound was prepared from compound R 132 0.37 g 1.0 mmol 4 acetamidophenol 0.23 g 1.5 mmol KCO 0.28 g 2.0 mmol and 10 of benzyltributylammonium chloride as a phase transfer catalyst in 20 mL of methyl ethyl ketone was heated at reflux overnight under argon. The reaction was followed by TLC the resulting mixture was filtered through Celite and concentrated in vacuo to dryness. Purification by flash column chromatography on silica gel hexanes ethyl acetate 3 1 yielded 0.38 g 86 R 0.18 hexanes ethyl acetate 3 1 of the desired compound as a light yellow powder mp 70 74 C. The solid can be recrystalized from ethyl acetate and hexane H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 10.62 s 1H NH 9.75 s 1H NH 8.56 d J 1.9 Hz 1H ArH 8.36 dd J 9.1 Hz J 1.9 Hz 1H ArH 8.18 d J 9.1 Hz 1H ArH 7.45 7.42 m 2H ArH 6.85 6.82 m 2H ArH 6.25 s 1H OH 4.17 d J 9.5 Hz 1H CHH 3.94 d J 9.5 Hz 1H CHH 1.98 s 3H Me 1.43 s 3H Me C NMR 75 MHz DMSO d 174.6 C O 167.7 154.2 143.3 141.6 132.8 127.4 123.0 122.7 q J 33.0 Hz 122.1 q J 271.5 Hz 120.1 118.3 q J 6.0 Hz 114.6 74.9 73.8 23.8 23.0 IR KBr 3364 OH 1668 C O 1599 1512 C C Ar 1457 1415 1351 1323 1239 1150 1046 cm MS ESI m z 464.1 M Na Anal. Calcd. for CHFNO C 51.71 H 4.11 N 9.52. Found C 52.33 H 4.40 N 9.01.

The synthesis of the various ether analogs of compound V utilizes the common intermediate that is the final reaction step. Bromo intermediates are used which allow various phenolic compounds to displace the bromide to give the desired ether product. Bromohydrin was converted to an epoxide and to open the epoxide to give the same desired ether product.

Melting points were determined on a Thomas Hoover capillary melting point apparatus and are uncorrected. Infrared spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer System 2000 FT IR. Optical rotations were determined on an Autopol III Automatic Polarimeter Rudolph Research Model III 589 10 Fairfield N.J. . Proton and carbon 13 magnetic resonance spectra were obtained on a Bruker AX 300 spectrometer 300 and 75 MHz for H and C respectively . Chemical shift values were reported as parts per million relative to tetramethylsilane TMS . Spectral data were consistent with assigned structures. Mass spectra were determined on a Bruker HP Esquire LC System. Elemental analyses were performed by Atlantic Microlab Inc. Norcross Ga. and found values were within 0.4 of the theoretical values. Routine thin layer chromatography TLC was performed on silica gel on aluminum plates silica gel 60 F 254 20 20 cm Aldrich Chemical Company Inc. Milwaukee Wisc. . Flash chromatography was performed on silica gel Merck grade 60 230 400 mesh 60 . Tetrahydrofuran THF was dried by distillation over sodium metal. Acetonitrile MeCN and methylene chloride CHCl were dried by distillation from PO.

Compound V 3 4 acetylamino phenoxy 2 Hydroxy 2 methyl N 3trifluoro methyl 4 nitro phenyl proprionamide is a member of the oxolutamide family of androgen receptor agonists and is a nonsteroidal selective androgen receptor modulator SARM . It binds the androgen receptor in vitro with high affinity Ki 7.5 0.5 nM . In vivo it acts as a partial agonist at the androgen receptor and results in strong anabolic and weakly androgenic effects. Compound V has no other known endocrine activities.

A 72 L flask with a mechanical stirrer and inlet for inert atmosphere was set up in a cooling bath. The flask was placed under argon and charged with 5000 g 43.4 moles of D proline ICN lot 7150E 99 11.9 L of 4N NaOH and 12 L acetone. The mixture was cooled to 5 C. on an ice bath. A solution of 4548.8 g 43.5 moles of methacryloyl chloride Aldrich lot 12706HO 98 in 12.0 L of acetone was prepared. The solution of methacryloyl chloride and 11.9 L of 4N NaOH were added simultaneously to the reaction mixture in the 72 L flask. During the addition the temperature was maintained less than 10 C. and the pH of the reaction mixture was maintained at greater than or equal to 10. The pH was maintained by adding the 4N NaOH more slowly or more quickly depending on the pH of the solution. The addition time was approximately 2 hours and 40 minutes. After the addition was complete the reaction mixture was stirred overnight and allowed to warm to room temperature.

The acetone was removed on a rotary evaporator and the aqueous mixture was extracted with t butyl methyl ether 28.0 L . The mixture was then acidified with concentrated HCl 6568.1 g to a pH of less than 2. The product was isolated by extraction into methylene chloride 3 20 L . The extracts were concentrated on a rotary evaporator. T Butyl methyl ether 10 L was added and concentrated on the rotary evaporator to perform a solvent exchange. Additional t Butyl methyl ether 10 L was added to precipitate the product. Ice was charged to the rotary evaporator bath and the product was allowed to crystallize. The crystalline product was collected and isolated by filtration. The weight after drying in a vacuum oven at 50 C. was 4422.2 g 55.6 yield .

A 50 L flask was set up with a mechanical stirrer inlet for inert atmosphere and cooling capacity. The flask was placed under an argon atmosphere and was charged with 4410.0 g 24.1 moles of R 129 and 8.8 L of DMF. Then NBS 6409.6 g 36.0 moles was added slowly over a period of 2 hours and 7 minutes. The reaction mixture was agitated for at least 8 hours. Water 20.0 L was added to precipitate the product. The product was allowed to stir for at least 4 hours to crystallize. The crystalline product was collected and isolated by filtration. The weight after drying in a vacuum oven at 50 C. was 5532.1 g 87.7 yield .

A 50 L flask was set up with a mechanical stirrer inlet for inert atmosphere and heating capacity. The flask was placed under an argon atmosphere and was charged with 5472.3 g 20.8 moles of R R 130 and 14.175 L of deionized water and 14 118.4 g of 48 HBr. The reaction mixture was heated to 102 C. for 6 hours and allowed to cool 31 C. Brine 20 L was added to the reaction mixture and the product was extracted with 6 20.4 L of t Butyl methyl ether. The organic layers were combined and concentrated with the rotary evaporator. Toluene 4.0 L was charged to the rotary evaporator. The product was dried by toluene distillation. The mixture was concentrated with the rotary evaporator. The product was recrystallized from toluene 45.0 L by heating to 100 C. to dissolve the product. The flask was cooled on ice and the product was allowed to crystallize. The crystalline product was collected by filtration and washed with toluene 3.4 L . The weight after drying in a vacuum oven at 50 C. was 3107.0 g 81.3 yield .

A 50 L flask was set up with a mechanical stirrer inlet for inert atmosphere and cooling capacity. The flask was placed under an argon atmosphere and was charged with 2961.5 g 16.2 moles of R 131 and 9.0 L of THF. The flask was cooled on ice to less than 5 C. Thionyl chloride 1200 mL 16.4 moles dissolved in 6.0 L of THF was added slowly via an addition funnel to the reaction flask. The temperature of the reaction flask was maintained less than or equal to 10 C. The addition time was 1 hour 10 minutes. The reaction mixture was allowed to agitate for an additional 2 hours 50 minutes. Then a solution of 2359.4 g of 11.4 moles of 4 nitro 3 trifluoromethylaniline Aldrich 98 and 3.83 L of triethylamine in 6.0 L THF was added over a period of 3 hours 5 minutes. The temperature of the reaction flask was maintained less than or equal to 10 C. The ice bath was removed and the reaction mixture was allowed to stir for 30 minutes. With a heating mantle the reaction mixture was heated to 50 C. for 15 hours and 10 minutes. After the reaction was complete as analyzed by TLC the reaction mixture was cooled to less than 30 C. and 7.5 L of deionized water was added. The aqueous layer was removed and a second water wash 7.5 L was performed. The organic layer was then washed three times with 10 bicarbonate 8.1 L until the pH was greater than 7.

The solvent was removed on a rotary evaporator. Toluene 3.0 L was added and then removed on the rotary evaporator to dry the crude product. The product was dissolved in 2.0 L of toluene at 65 C. Upon cooling the product crystallized. The crystalline product was collected and isolated by filtration. The wet cake was washed with 1.0 L of toluene. The weight after drying in a vacuum oven at 50 C. was 3751.0 g 70.3 yield .

A 22 L flask was set up with a mechanical stirrer inlet for inert atmosphere and cooling capacity. The flask was placed under an argon atmosphere and was charged with 1002.8 g 2.70 moles of R 132 4.0 L of THF and 454.2 g 3.00 moles of 4 acetamidophenol Aldrich 98 . While stirring the flask was then charged with 1769.9 g of cesium carbonate Aldrich 99 . The flask was heated to reflux for at least 8 hours and the reaction monitored by TLC silica gel dichloromethane hexane 3 1 Epoxide Rf 0.5 . When the reaction was complete the flask was allowed to cool to room temperature.

Water was added to dissolve the carbonate and ethyl acetate was added to help with the phase separations. The aqueous phase was separated as waste. The organic phase was washed with a second portion of water. The organic layer was transferred to a rotary evaporator and the solvent was removed. The solvent was exchanged into ethanol by charging ethanol into the rotovap flask and removing some of the ethanol to remove all of the ethyl acetate. The ethanol solution was added to water to precipitate the product. The crude product was collected by filtration and washed with water. The product was transferred back to the rotary evaporator for crystallization. Ethyl acetate was charged to the rotovap flask to exchange the solvent into ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate was removed under vacuum which dried the product. A minimum amount of ethyl acetate was added to dissolve the product at 60 C. T Butyl methyl ether was added to crystallize the product. After cooling the product was collected by filtration and washed with t Butyl methyl ether. The wet cake was added back to the rotary evaporator and ethanol was charged. A solvent exchange into ethanol removed the residual t Butyl methyl ether. Filtering the ethanol solution into water recrystallized the product. After stirring the product was collected by filtration and washed with water. The weight after drying in a vacuum oven oat 50 C. was 52 .

It will be appreciated by a person skilled in the art that the present invention is not limited by what has been particularly shown and described hereinabove. Rather the scope of the invention is defined by the claims that follow 

