---

title: Injection locked dual opto-electronic oscillator
abstract: An injection locked dual opto-electronic oscillator having a master oscillator which generates a high Q RF output signal with a plurality of harmonic signals within a predetermined pass band. A slave oscillator has a modulation input coupled to the output signal from the master oscillator as well as an output signal. The slave oscillator has a cavity length selected to produce a single mode operation within the pass band. An electronic phase shifter in the slave oscillator is adjustable to produce constructive interference at a single harmonic of the output signal from the master oscillator and destructive interference of all other harmonics within the pass band and to bring the slave oscillator into injection locked condition with the master oscillator. Therefore the slave OEO is used as a filter for the spurious radiation generated by the master OEO and at the same time preserves the high Q of the RF carrier signal from the master OEO.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07151415&OS=07151415&RS=07151415
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07151415
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050201
---
This application claims priority of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 550 887 filed Mar. 5 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference.

The invention described herein may be manufactured used and licensed by or for the United States Government.

Microwave radio frequency RF resonators or oscillators are used in numerous different applications including high frequency communication navigation timing global position radar detection and the like. The previously known microwave resonators have operated completely in the electronic domain. These previously known microwave electronic oscillators however all suffer from a number of common disadvantages.

One disadvantage of the RF electronic oscillators is that such RF oscillators operate with a relatively narrow bandwidth. As such the amount of information that can be contained on modulated microwave frequencies is likewise necessarily limited.

A still further disadvantage of these previously known RF oscillators or modulators is that the electronic components used to construct the RF oscillators are relatively bulky subject to EMI interference and are also prone to high signal loss. Additionally the quality factor or Q of the previously known electronic microwave resonators is typically in the range of 1 000 100 000. This relatively low Q factor of the currently known microwave RF oscillators results in a relatively low signal to phase noise ratio for the oscillator.

An opto electronic oscillator OEO was previously invented to benefit the high Q by long optical fiber cavity. However this type of fiber OEO suffers from spurious radiation due to the supermodes introduced by the long cavity.

The present invention provides an injection locked dual opto electronic microwave oscillator assembly which overcomes all of the previously known disadvantages of the previously known RF microwave oscillators.

In brief the opto electronic oscillator assembly of the present invention comprises a master opto electronic oscillator having a laser which generates an optical output signal. The output signal from the laser is coupled as an input to an optical modulator having an RF input as well as an output.

The RF modulated optical output from the optical modulator is then coupled by an optical fiber to an optical input of a photodetector. The photodetector upon receipt of the signal from the optical fiber converts the optical signal into an RF signal. The RF signal is then filtered by bandpass filter so that the output signal from the bandpass filter is within a predetermined pass band. That signal is in turn amplified by an RF amplifier and a portion of the output signal from the amplifier is coupled as a feedback signal to the modulation input of the optical modulator.

The length of the optical fiber for the master oscillator is selected to produce a long cavity high Q factor for the master oscillator i.e. a Q factor in excess of 10. Consequently the output signal from the master oscillator includes not only the primary frequency but also harmonics at evenly spaced intervals within the pass band of the filter. The frequency spacing of the harmonics is approximately equal to

A portion of the output signal from the master oscillator is then coupled as an inject lock input signal to a slave opto electronic oscillator. The slave opto electronic oscillator is substantially identical to the master electro oscillator with two exceptions. First the length of the optical fiber within the slave oscillator is selected with a cavity length which permits only a single mode oscillation within the pass band. As such the optical fiber used in the slave oscillator is much shorter than the length of the optical fiber in the master oscillator. Although this results in a relatively low Q for the slave oscillator a high Q output signal from the slave oscillator is still maintained due to the injection locked high Q input signal received from the master oscillator.

Secondly the slave oscillator includes an RF phase shifter in series with the RF signal within the slave oscillator. Adjustment of the phase of the RF signal by the phase shifter enables the RF signal from the master oscillator to injection lock the slave oscillator to achieve positive interference at a single harmonic within the pass band and simultaneously achieve negative interference at every other harmonic of the input signal received from the master oscillator. This in turn effectively cancels out all of the harmonics other than the single harmonic while simultaneously maintaining the high Q high signal to phase noise value of the master oscillator.

In practice the combination master and slave oscillators form an injection locked oscillator assembly in which the high Q signal from the master oscillator is injected into the slave oscillator and locks the oscillation frequency and phase of the slave oscillator. Since the cavity length of the optical fiber in the slave oscillator is selected such that only one oscillation mode is allowed within the RF pass band the high Q of the master oscillator is maintained on the output from the slave oscillator and all unwanted harmonics are simultaneously eliminated.

With reference first to a preferred embodiment of the dual opto electronic oscillator assembly of the present invention is shown and includes both a master opto electronic oscillator as well as a slave opto electronic oscillator . Both the master oscillator and slave oscillator will be separately described.

Still referring to the master oscillator includes a continuous wave laser having its output connected as an input signal to an optical modulator . Any conventional laser may be used and it will be understood that the output signal from the laser may be either in the visible or invisible spectrum.

The optical modulator includes both an RF microwave input as well as an optical output . The optical modulator may be of any conventional construction such as a Mach Zehnder modulator or an electro absorption modulator. Since the frequency of the laser is much higher than the RF microwave modulation signal at the modulator input the optical signal on the output from the optical modulator consists of an optical signal modulated at the frequency of the RF modulating signal. It is also possible to use a directly modulated laser instead of the laser and modulator to provide the optical output .

The output from the optical modulator is coupled by an optical fiber to an optical input of a photodetector . In the well known fashion the photodetector converts the optical signal on its input to an RF signal on its output .

The output from the photodetector is amplified by a microwave RF amplifier . The output from the RF amplifier passes through an RF bandpass filter to an RF coupler . The RF coupler then electrically connects a portion of the RF signal from the filter to the RF input of the modulator . The RF signal applied to the modulator input thus forms a feedback signal to cause the master oscillator to oscillate at the desired microwave frequency e.g. 10 gigahertz.

The optical fiber serves as a long cavity optical delay to create a temporally shifted feedback signal to the optical modulator in order to achieve the oscillation. Furthermore the length of the optical fiber is selected to produce the necessary high Q for the master oscillator in order to achieve the required signal to phase noise level. In practice a length of several kilometers of the optical fiber will produce Q values in excess of 10for the master oscillator .

In an optical oscillator the mode spacing i.e. the spacing between adjacent harmonic signals is inversely proportional to the oscillator delay created by the optical fiber . The space in between the harmonic frequencies can be determined by the following formula 

Consequently assuming that the optical fiber has an index of refraction of approximately 1.46 as would be the case with Corning SMF28 optical fiber and a length of 6 kilometers the spacing between adjacent harmonics is about 34 kilohertz.

In practice only a single mode or signal frequency of oscillation is desired from the master oscillator . However the microwave RF filter exhibits a pass band of 8 megahertz or greater and as such passes not only the desired center frequency but many harmonics at the frequency spacing f.

With reference now to an exemplary output signal on an output from the RF coupler is shown. The output from the RF coupler includes a plurality of evenly spaced radio frequency peaks each of which has a high Q shape and high signal to noise ratio. The peaks are evenly spaced from each other by the frequency f.

With reference again to the RF coupler also provides an RF output signal on its output to the slave oscillator . The slave oscillator is also an opto electronic oscillator and as such includes a continuous wave laser which generates an optical input signal to an optical modulator . An output from the optical modulator is optically coupled by an optical fiber to an input of a photodetector .

The photodetector converts the optical signal from the optical modulator to an RF signal which is then amplified by RF amplifier and coupled as an input signal to an RF filter . The RF filter has substantially the same pass band as the RF filter e.g. 8 megahertz and thus filters out all harmonics outside the pass band.

The output from the RF filter is then coupled through an RF phase shifter to an RF combiner which combines the signal from the phase shifter with the input signal from the master oscillator . This combined signal is then fed to an RF coupler which divides the combined RF signal from the RF combiner into an RF output from the opto electronic oscillator as well as an RF input of the optical modulator .

Unlike the master oscillator the optical fiber of the slave oscillator is relatively short i.e. about 50 meters for a 10 gigahertz oscillator such that the Q of the slave oscillator is very low. The length of the optical fiber furthermore is selected such that the slave oscillator can only operate in a single oscillation mode within the pass band of the RF filter .

With reference now particularly to a frequency spectrum output signal is illustrated of the slave oscillator operating in a closed loop mode i.e. in the absence of a signal from the master oscillator . As can be seen in the output signal from the slave oscillator provides a single peak within the pass band of the RF filter . However unlike the output from the master oscillator the output signal from the slave oscillator exhibits excessive noise due to the low Q of the slave oscillator .

The multi mode signals on the output of the RF coupler of the master oscillator however are injected into the RF combiner of the slave oscillator. The phase shifter is then adjusted by any conventional means e.g. electronically or manually to bring the slave oscillator into the locking range of one of the strongest modes or peaks of the master oscillator . When thus locked the phase shifter produces constructive interference at a single harmonic or oscillation mode of the output signal from the master oscillator together with destructive interference of all other harmonics or modes within the pass band. This in turn produces a single mode high Q output signal on the output from the slave oscillator as illustrated in since the high Q signal from the master oscillator is maintained by the slave oscillator .

As can be seen from the foregoing the present invention provides an opto electronic oscillator assembly which by using a master oscillator with a high Q value as an injection locking signal to an opto electronic oscillator with a low Q produces a single mode output signal with extremely high signal to phase noise ratio. Furthermore the utilization of opto electronics in the master oscillator enables the master oscillator to achieve an oscillator with Q values that are several magnitudes of order greater than Q values that can be obtained by previously known electronic oscillators alone which in turn produces the high signal to noise ratio in the output signal from the oscillator assembly.

Having described my invention many modifications thereto will become apparent to those skilled in the art to which it pertains without deviation from the spirit of the invention as defined by the appended claims.

