---

title: Cryptographic engine abstraction layer for a software defined radio
abstract: A radio system comprises radio frequency receiving electronics and digital signal processing electronics coupled to the radio frequency receiving electronics. The radio system is characterized by security electronics coupled to the digital signal processing electronics. The security electronics comprise a cryptographic subsystem. The cryptographic subsystem comprises cryptographic equipment software, core cryptographic algorithms and a cryptographic engine abstraction layer hardware each of which is stacked with but separate from one another. The cryptographic engine abstraction layer hardware has been designed for the specific radio system design.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07835523&OS=07835523&RS=07835523
owner: Rockwell Collins, Inc.
number: 07835523
owner_city: Cedar Rapids
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050826
---
Conventional modern communication and some conventional modern navigation systems employ at least some form of information security and hence often require cryptography. A conventional transceiver system for a radio may comprise numerous processing subsystems for each channel. For example a transceiver unit may contain a digital signal processing subsystem a black processing subsystem a cryptographic subsystem a red processing subsystem etc. for each channel. In military communication systems and selected commercial communication systems the cryptography system and method employed are often computationally complex. Furthermore recent mandates from the National Security Agency NSA and the Department of Defense DOD require cryptography implementations to be programmable so that algorithms can be switched and updated. International military customers may wish to create and implement their own unique or country specific cryptography algorithms.

To date computationally complex and programmable cryptography has been implemented using programmable crypto engines that are sometimes hardware and sometimes software programmable. In either case the implementation of a given algorithm requires detailed technical knowledge of the engine architecture and instruction set. For crypto engines that provide multi level security MLS or multiple single levels of security MSLS the implementation expertise and domain knowledge requirements are even greater. This required expertise precludes many international customers from implementing their own unique or country specific algorithms. The proprietary nature of some of these cryptographic engines also makes it difficult for one company or customer to implement new algorithms without the consent of likely unwilling corporate competitors.

Even if one were to overcome the domain knowledge issue once the algorithms are implemented they are not portable to other cryptographic engines. The unportability of the crypto engines is due to the architectures of the engines on the market today e.g. Harris Sierra I and II GD AIM Engine and Raytheon Cornfield and those under development such as NRL PEIP II and Rockwell Collins Janus have almost completely different architectures. The constituent elements e.g. processors FPGAs memory devices etc. are also almost always different.

What is needed therefore is a system and a method that overcomes one or more of the deficiencies described above. What is needed is an approach that abstracts away the specifics of the hardware architecture must be used so that the primary algorithm software can be easily rehosted on any cryptographic engine that employs such abstraction. No such approach has been developed and applied to cryptographic engines.

It would be desirable to provide a system and or method that provides one or more of these or other advantageous features. Other features and advantages will be made apparent from the present specification. The teachings disclosed extend to those embodiments which fall within the scope of the appended claims regardless of whether they accomplish one or more of the aforementioned needs.

What is provided is a radio system. The radio system comprises radio frequency receiving electronics and digital signal processing electronics coupled to the radio frequency receiving electronics. The radio system also comprises security electronics coupled to the digital signal processing electronics. The security electronics comprise a cryptographic subsystem. The cryptographic subsystem comprises cryptographic equipment software core cryptographic algorithms and a cryptographic engine abstraction layer hardware each of which is stacked with but separate from one another the cryptographic engine abstraction layer hardware having been designed for the specific radio system design.

What is also provided is a method of providing radio communications. The method comprises providing radio frequency communications to radio frequency receiving electronics and processing a received signal by digital signal processing electronics coupled to the radio frequency receiving electronics. The method also comprises decrypting received signals by using security electronics coupled to the digital signal processing electronics. The security electronics comprise a cryptographic subsystem the cryptographic subsystem comprises cryptographic equipment software core cryptographic algorithms and a cryptographic engine abstraction layer hardware each of which is stacked with but separate from one another the cryptographic engine abstraction layer hardware having been designed for the specific radio system design.

Further what is provided is an apparatus for providing radio communications. The apparatus comprises a means for providing radio frequency communications to radio frequency receiving electronics and a means for processing a received signal by digital signal processing electronics coupled to the radio frequency receiving electronics. The apparatus also comprises a means for decrypting received signals by using security electronics coupled to the digital signal processing electronics. The security electronics comprise a cryptographic subsystem the cryptographic subsystem comprises cryptographic equipment software core cryptographic algorithms and a cryptographic engine abstraction layer hardware each of which is stacked with but separate from one another the cryptographic engine abstraction layer hardware having been designed for the specific radio system design.

Other principal features and advantages of the invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art upon review of the following drawings the detailed description and the appended claims.

Before describing in detail the particular improved system and method it should be observed that the invention includes but is not limited to a novel structural combination of conventional data signal processing components and communications circuits and not in the particular detailed configurations thereof. Accordingly the structure methods functions control and arrangement of conventional components and circuits have for the most part been illustrated in the drawings by readily understandable block representations and schematic diagrams in order not to obscure the disclosure with structural details which will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art having the benefit of the description herein. Further the invention is not limited to the particular embodiments depicted in the exemplary diagrams but should be construed in accordance with the language in the claims.

With reference to a device in accordance with an exemplary embodiment is shown. In the exemplary embodiment device includes but is not limited to a plurality of transceiver antennas a receiver exciter for each of the plurality of transceiver antennas a modem for each of the plurality of transceiver antennas a modem a networking information security INFOSEC functional unit NIU and a plurality of user channels . The device need not be a communication device. For example the device may be a computer of any form factor. In the exemplary embodiment device may provide communication capabilities across the entire communication spectrum or across only a portion of the spectrum. In operation a wireless communication signal is received by one of the plurality of transceiver antennas and processed through the corresponding receiver exciter whereby the received signal is filtered from a transmission radio frequency RF to an intermediate frequency IF and possibly converted from an analog signal to a digital signal. The processed signal is demodulated by the respective modem before processing through NIU and sending onto the appropriate user channel . Similarly in a reverse procedure data from one of the plurality of user channels is received by NIU is modulated by one of the modems and is sent to a corresponding receiver exciter for transmission by one of the transceiver antennas over network .

Devices in a network are connected by communication paths that may be wired or wireless. Device may connect with a plurality of networks . Device includes a wired connection that connects to modem . The plurality of networks may include both wired and wireless devices such as satellites cellular antennas radios etc. Thus device may communicate with other devices through both wired and wireless connections. The plurality of networks additionally may interconnect with other networks and contain sub networks. A network can be characterized by the type of transmission technology used. Device may support communication using transmission technologies known by those skilled in the art both now and in the future.

In an alternative embodiment device may include separate transmit and receive antennas. Also as known to those skilled in the art a modem can process signals from more than one receiver exciter and or more than one wired connection. As a result there may be fewer or additional modems . Additional components may be utilized by communication device . For example device includes one or more power source that may be a battery. Additionally device may include power amplifiers filters and other RF devices for example to perform antenna switching and or cosite mitigation.

NIU provides a host of functions that configure and control the flow of radio traffic between the modems and the user channels . The user channels may support red applications and or black applications. A red application utilizes security controlled information such as the received signal or other information accessible by communication device whereas black applications do not utilize security controlled information. NIU also enforces a security policy associated with the flow of information between the modems and the user channels . In an exemplary embodiment NIU includes but is not limited to a processor an RF controller a cryptographic system and a platform interface .

Processor executes instructions that may be written using one or more programming language scripting language assembly language etc. The instructions may be carried out by a special purpose computer logic circuits or hardware circuits. Thus processor may be implemented in hardware firmware software or any combination of these methods. The term execution is the process of running an application or the carrying out of the operation called for by an instruction. Device may have one or more processor that use the same or a different processing technology to execute instructions.

RF controller controls the flow of information between the plurality of modems and the plurality of user channels and maintains the MILS. RF controller may be implemented in hardware firmware software or any combination of these methods. Cryptographic system implements cryptographic functions associated with encryption decryption of input data received from one of the user channels or received from one of the modems . Platform interface provides the interface with the user channels 

In general cryptography is used to protect data while it is being communicated between two points or while it is stored in a medium vulnerable to physical theft. Communication security provides protection of data by enciphering it at the transmitting point and deciphering it at the receiving point. The transmitting and the receiving points may be located within the same or different devices. The key must be available at the transmitter and receiver simultaneously during communication. The algorithms may be implemented in software firmware hardware or any combination thereof. A cryptographic system includes a cryptographic engine keying information and operational procedures for their secure use. A cryptographic engine implements cryptographic functions.

Cryptographic systems may be utilized in various computer and telecommunication applications including data storage access control and personal identification network communications radio facsimile e mail and other electronic messaging systems audio video voice transmission etc. The cryptographic system may be implemented in hardware software and or firmware. The cryptographic system performs security functions including execution of cryptographic algorithms and key generation in support of the cryptographic algorithms. Key establishment may be performed using either electronic methods a key loading device such as a smart card token PC card or other electronic key loading device manual methods using a keyboard or a combination of electronic and manual methods. Cryptographic keys can be stored in either plain text or encrypted form.

A cryptographic system can execute various cryptographic algorithms that alternatively encrypt or decrypt data. Encrypting data converts it to an unintelligible form called a cipher. Decrypting the cipher converts the data back to its original form called plain text. In general decrypting the cipher involves an inverse of the algorithm used to encrypt the data. As examples a cryptographic system can implement the data encryption standard DES the triple data encryption algorithm TDEA and or the advanced encryption standard AES . DES includes multiple mathematical algorithms for encrypting and decrypting binary coded information based on a binary number called a key. TDEA is a compound operation of DES encryption and decryption operations. A TDEA key consists of three DES keys. Data can be recovered from a cipher only by using exactly the same key used to encipher it. The National Security Agency NSA works in partnership with the National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST to maintain a set of cryptographic algorithms that are suitable to applications across a wide range of communicator needs. NSA defines cryptographic algorithms in 4 types according to the evaluated strength or origin of the algorithms. These types are 

The programmable nature of the crypto engine should allow any level of algorithms to be implemented within the radio system and the cryptographic subsystem.

Military radio systems such as the Joint Tactical Radio System JTRS available from Rockwell Collins Inc. of Cedar Rapids Iowa has employed the Software Communication Architecture SCA standard to make software as portable as possible between JTRS compliant radio platforms. This approach has been proven to work well for general purpose processors GPPs . The same approach has been applied to modem resources of Floating Point Gate Arrays FPGAs and Digital Signal Processors DSPs where the concept of so called modem hardware abstraction layer MHAL has been developed to abstract away the specific hardware constituents of a JTRS modem so that modem waveform software can be easily developed for any modem or ported from one modem to another.

A solution to the above is to develop a similar abstraction layer for cryptographic functions. Note that SCA already abstracts service calls via standard cryptographic subsystem definitions function and interface . In accordance with an exemplary embodiment a standard call may be used for the encryption function encrypt . The SCA does not standardize calls for lower level functions within such services e.g. calls for permute and vector dot product are not defined.

In accordance with an exemplary embodiment lower level functions are made standard regardless of the hardware that is used to implement a given cryptographic engine. To do this one can employ the stack depicted in . Stack which is a portion of cryptographic system of comprises a Crypto Engine which may be designed as different hardware platforms for different radio systems and different radio system vendors. In package the Crypto Engine Abstraction Layer the Core Crypto Algorithms layer and the Crypto Equipment Software Layer are embodied in a single integrated package. In accordance with an exemplary embodiment the single integrated package may be broken down into its constituent components and . Crypto Engine Abstraction Layer may be configured as a hardware component that is designed as unique to the specific radio system platform that it is to be used on whether it be a different model or hardware for a different vendor.

The core algorithms may be segregated into Core Crypto Algorithms layer . Cryptographic Engine Abstraction Layer CEAL may be configured to translate to the specific hardware Crypto Engine being used. With some similarity to the MHAL the CEAL may be a cryptographic engine support package for the cryptographic engine much as board support packages e.g. APIs etc. are often provided with commercial off the shelf COTS electronic cards to make them easy to program for a particular application. Stack may be compatible with the SCA.

Referring now to additional detail regarding the stack layers depicted in is provided. Security API is focused solely on providing cryptographic services to waveform software . Example cryptographic services are Encrypt and Decrypt function calls. The crypto equipment software is focused on providing messages preambles and message header services. Example message preamble functions are phasing and framing patterns to detect cipher text signal and acquire clock synchronization. The core crypto algorithm layer is focused on implementation of the required crypto algorithm e.g. DES AES Type 1 etc. using the services provided by the crypto engine abstraction layer . Crypto engine abstraction layer provides the basic computations necessary for implementing a crypto algorithm. Example computations required to implement an algorithm are permutation expansion shift and compress.

The decoupling of the cryptographic engine and its cryptographic engine abstraction layer enables the writing of new algorithms and or porting them to new platforms engines to be more straightforward. The problem of international customers wishing to implement their own software algorithms on these complex engines may be solved by the aforementioned architecture. Further the life cycle cost for other customers porting their software from one system to another may be made more affordable.

While the detailed drawings specific examples and particular formulations given describe preferred and exemplary embodiments they serve the purpose of illustration only. The inventions disclosed are not limited to the specific forms shown. For example the methods may be performed in any of a variety of sequence of steps. The hardware and software configurations shown and described may differ depending on the chosen performance characteristics and physical characteristics of the computing devices. For example the type of computing device communications bus or processor used may differ. The systems and methods depicted and described are not limited to the precise details and conditions disclosed. Furthermore other substitutions modifications changes and omissions may be made in the design operating conditions and arrangement of the exemplary embodiments without departing from the scope of the invention as expressed in the appended claims.

