---

title: Method for creating an aeronautic sound shield having gas distributors arranged on the engines, wings, and nose of an aircraft
abstract: The present invention blocks and/or attenuates the upstream travel of acoustic disturbances or sound waves from a flight vehicle or components of a flight vehicle traveling at subsonic speed using a local injection of a high molecular weight gas. Additional benefit may also be obtained by lowering the temperature of the gas. Preferably, the invention has a means of distributing the high molecular weight gas from the nose, wing, component, or other structure of the flight vehicle into the upstream or surrounding air flow. Two techniques for distribution are direct gas injection and sublimation of the high molecular weight solid material from the vehicle surface. The high molecular weight and low temperature of the gas significantly decreases the local speed of sound such that a localized region of supersonic flow and possibly shock waves are formed, preventing the upstream travel of sound waves from the flight vehicle.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07407131&OS=07407131&RS=07407131
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
number: 07407131
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051114
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates generally modifying the local speed of sound characteristics of a gas or fluid flow more particularly to modifying these characteristics using the distribution of a high molecular weight and or low temperature gas into to the flow and most particularly to attenuating the acoustic disturbance and or noise associated with aircraft by modifying the local speed of sound characteristics using high molecular weight and or low temperature gas upstream of the aircraft.

Reduction of noise generated by jet engines has become an important aspect of aircraft design. Sound waves from aircraft traveling at subsonic speed propagate in all directions relative to the aircraft. The reduction of noise generated by aircraft has obvious benefits including reducing noise pollution and thereby reducing safety risks to persons in the vicinity of aircraft. Also sound waves have a tendency to contribute to wear and fatigue of aircraft components.

Many technical solutions have been employed in order to reduce noise generated by aircraft. These include using physical barriers attached to aircraft in order to provide a physical shield to block or attenuate sound waves and injecting gases directly into the jet engine exhaust in order to suppress noise. These solutions provide some reduction to noise levels but normally result in some reduction in aircraft efficiency or performance. In addition all of these solutions relate to decreasing sound waves only downstream from the aircraft but do not address sound waves emanating upstream from the aircraft.

Therefore it is desired to provide a relatively low cost apparatus and method to attenuate or block aircraft noise emanating in any direction from an aircraft without affecting aircraft performance.

The invention proposed herein comprises a device and method for blocking an or attenuating the upstream movement of acoustic disturbances or sound waves emanating from an aircraft flying at subsonic speeds. By blocking the acoustic disturbances the invention eliminates or reduces the sound perceived by an approaching aircraft.

Accordingly it is an object of this invention to provide a method to block or attenuate acoustic disturbances or sound waves emanating from an aircraft flying at subsonic speeds.

It is a further object of this invention to provide a shield for acoustic disturbances or sound waves emanating from an aircraft that does not significantly degrade aircraft performance.

It is yet a further object of this invention to provide a method to reduce noise from an aircraft that is relatively low cost.

This invention meets these and other objectives related to reducing aircraft sound by providing a device and method to block the upstream travel of sound waves by the formation of local supersonic flow and possibly shock waves due to an increase in the local speed of sound. By distributing a high molecular weight and preferably low temperature gas into the air flow upstream or around an aircraft or flight vehicle the local speed of sound is greatly decreased thereby producing local areas of supersonic flow. Shock waves form upstream and around the aircraft structure in these pockets of supersonic flow. The acoustic disturbances and or sound waves from the flight vehicle can be blocked and or attenuated with the appropriate positioning of gas injection locations.

In addition the pockets of supersonic flow and local shock waves alter the pressure distribution around the aircraft. This change in the pressure distribution leads to changes in the aerodynamic and stability and control characteristics of the aircraft. This could be used advantageously to impart forces and moments to the aircraft providing an alternative method of controlling the aircraft without the use of conventional moving control surfaces.

The invention as embodied herein comprises a device and method for blocking and or attenuating acoustic waves emanating from aircraft. The invention also provides a method for controlling an aircraft by altering the pressure distribution around the aircraft.

In general the invention provides for distributing a high molecular weight gas HMW gas into the airflow adjacent around the aircraft. As used herein the term high molecular weight gas means a gas having a molecular weight of above 100. The HMW gas creates a local area or pocket wherein the speed of sound is reduced compared to the surrounding airflow. Due to the reduction of the speed of sound in the local area local areas of supersonic flow and possibly shock waves will be formed. Acoustic disturbances or sound waves emanating from the aircraft will be blocked or attenuated by the local areas of supersonic flow. The HMW gas may be distributed into the airflow at a position or multiple positions where the user determines it is appropriate to block acoustic waves emanating from the aircraft.

In addition to blocking acoustic waves the local areas of supersonic flow and local shock waves alter the pressure distribution around the aircraft. By altering the pressure distribution around aircraft changes in the aerodynamic and stability and control characteristics of the aircraft occur. Thus by changing these characteristics forces may be imparted to portions of the aircraft in order to alter the aircraft s direction.

Referring to the invention comprises one or more gas distributors positioned on a structure of an aircraft traveling at subsonic speeds. The gas distributors distribute a HMW gas to an area where the user desires to provide reduction in noise created by the aircraft . The HMW gas decreases the speed of sound in a local area where it is distributed. The size of the local area is dependant upon the amount and speed at which the HMW gas is distributed which may be selected by one skilled in the art consistent with the disclosure herein.

In operation the HMW gas is distributed to form a local area of supersonic flow and possibly shock waves due to a decrease in the local area speed of sound. Acoustic waves emanating from the aircraft are blocked or attenuated by the local area of supersonic flow and shock waves.

The gas distributors may employ any mechanism that provides for distributing the HMW gas to create local areas of supersonic flow sufficient in size to provide the desired attenuation of noise from portions of or from an entire aircraft . Two preferred gas distributor mechanisms are an injection system shown in and and a sublimation system shown in .

One preferred injection system is a direct injection system as shown in . For the direct gas injection system typical components include a gas storage tank a gas injection valve and a gas injector . In this system the HMW gas is stored at high pressure in the gas storage tank and the gas injection valve is opened to feed the HMW gas through the gas injector into the air flow. Gas injection pressures may be controlled by a regulator thus controlling the gas penetration distance and dispersion.

Another preferred injection system is a transverse injection system as shown in . The components of a transverse injection system include the same components described above for a direct injection system except the gas injector is replaced by an extended boom that extends from the structure and distributes the HMW gas through one or more injectors at the end of the boom .

A preferred sublimation system is shown in . This system includes a coating that is applied to the structure that remains adhered in a chemically unaltered form to the structure until the aircraft is airborne. As the aircraft travels the coating sublimes directly into a HMW gas . The coating may be covered prior to use of the aircraft to ensure that it does not sublime prematurely prior to use of the aircraft . In such a system the coating would be made of a liquid solid version of the HMW gas material.

The structure or portion of an aircraft where the gas distributors are attached may be selected depending upon the type and location of sound emanating from the aircraft one desires to attenuate. For certain applications of the present invention it may be desired to ensure that acoustic waves from the aircraft do not travel upstream of the aircraft to prevent said waves from reaching persons in front of the aircraft . For these applications it would be preferred to place the gas distributors on the nose and or leading edges of the aircraft . To specifically attenuate engine noise the gas distributors may be placed on the engines or on the wings adjacent to the engines. To provide control of the aircraft through altering pressure distribution as described above gas distributors may be placed on or near the wings tail section or nose of the aircraft .

A HMW gas has a molecular weight of at least 100. For comparison air has a molecular weight of 29. It is preferred that the HMW gas has a molecular weight above 120 and it is most preferred that the HMW gas has a molecular weight above 140. Many monatomic and polyatomic gases and gas mixtures may be employed as HMW gases to be used in the present invention. Some characteristics favorable to integration with the invention include being colorless odorless non toxic nonflammable chemically inert and thermally stable. Preferred candidate gases should also be readily available from commercial sources and relatively inexpensive.

Examples of such HMW gases are monatomic Xenon Xe molecular weight of 131 and polyatomic n perfluorobutane CF molecular weight of 238 . Other refrigerant gases such as R134A molecular weight of 102 and R125 molecular weight of 125 may also be considered. The use of gas mixtures may be especially interesting in terms of the capability of formulating custom HMW gases with desired properties.

One particular preferred HMW gas for the present invention is sulfur hexafluoride SF molecular weight of 146 which was used for some of the calculations below to further describe the present invention. It possesses many characteristics favorable to integration with the invention such as being colorless odorless non toxic nonflammable chemically inert and thermally stable. SFis readily available from commercial sources and is inexpensive. SFis commonly used as an insulating gas in electrical equipment and as an etchant in the semiconductor industry. It is chemically inert and stable in the presence of most materials to temperatures of about 500 C. 932 F. . At atmospheric pressure SFsublimes directly from a solid to a gas.

It is also preferred that the HMW gas be provided at a temperature below ambient. As used herein ambient temperature is the temperature of air outside of an aircraft . As shown further below the reduction in the speed of sound is increased as the temperature of the HMW gas decreases below ambient.

The local speed of sound a is defined in Equation 1 where is the ratio of specific heats Ris the specific gas constant for air and T is the local temperature. square root over EQN. 1 

The specific gas constant can be related to the universal gas constant R and the molecular weight MW using Equation 3.

For constant values of the ratio of specific heats and the universal gas constant the speed of sound may be decreased by increasing the molecular weight and decreasing the temperature. By decreasing the local speed of sound sufficiently the local Mach number may reach supersonic values M 1 in a subsonic velocity flow.

The following numerical example demonstrates the desired effect of the present invention by employing the above principles and equations.

Assuming an aircraft is flying at an altitude of 6 000 meters 19 685 feet and a velocity of 130 meters second 426.5 ft sec 252.7 knots . Assuming 1.4 and standard temperature at 6 000 meters altitude of T 249.2 K 11.11 F. the speed of sound is given by Equation 1.

At these conditions the aircraft is subsonic. Assuming sulfur hexafluoride SF 1.095 MW32 146 is injected into the flow at the same temperature as the freestream air the local speed of sound is given by Equation 4.

The effect of temperature can be seen if the sulfur hexafluoride is injected at its sublimation temperature of 63.9 C. 209.25 K 83.0 F. . The speed of sound is decreased by about 8.4 .

Referring to representative results of computational fluid dynamics CFD analyses of the invention are depicted. The CFD analysis is a two dimensional viscous non reacting unsteady numerical solution.

What is described are specific examples of many possible variations on the same invention and are not intended in a limiting sense. The claimed invention can be practiced using other variations not specifically described above.

