---

title: System and method of service product offer management
abstract: The disclosure is generally directed to a system and method of managing and deploying Internet protocol television (IPTV) services. The method includes a service product offer management and deployment system. The method further includes a service product ordering subsystem to receive and process a service product order in response to service product offer. The service product order identifies a particular communication service subscriber, a service area, a service control group, a service product attribute, a facility deployment component, and a set of permitted end user device types. The method also includes a service delivery platform subsystem coupled to the service product ordering subsystem. Further, the method includes an Internet protocol television deployment subsystem coupled to the service delivery platform. The Internet protocol television deployment subsystem includes a plurality of video content packages.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07627501&OS=07627501&RS=07627501
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property I, L.P.
number: 07627501
owner_city: Reno
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051031
---
The present disclosure relates to a system and method of deploying television content related services.

For years televisions have been a staple of consumer electronics sales. As such a large majority of households in the United States owns at least one television. Providing content to those televisions is a lucrative business and there are numerous types of television content to choose from. For example viewers can subscribe to digital broadband television networks and digital satellite television networks in order to receive standard digital television content or high definition television content.

In many cases a set top box device is required at a customer location in order to receive television content from a content provider and decode the television content before transmitting the content to a television. Additionally services can be ordered via the set top box device.

The disclosure is generally directed to a system and method of managing and deploying Internet protocol television IPTV services. In a particular embodiment the method includes a service product offer management and deployment system. The method further includes a service product ordering subsystem to receive and process a service product order in response to service product offer. The service product order identifies a particular communication service subscriber a service area a service control group a service product attribute a facility deployment component and a set of permitted end user device types. The method also includes a service delivery platform subsystem coupled to the service product ordering subsystem. Further the method includes an Internet protocol television deployment subsystem coupled to the service delivery platform. The Internet protocol television deployment subsystem includes a plurality of video content packages. One of the plurality of content packages is selected for permitted transmission and is granted access to protected content for a particular subscriber based on the service product order for the particular communication service subscriber.

Referring to elements of an IPTV system that is generally designated are shown. As illustrated in the system includes a service product ordering subsystem that is coupled to a service delivery platform subsystem via an integration bus . In a particular embodiment the service product ordering subsystem and the service delivery platform subsystem communicate using java messaging service JMS hypertext transfer protocol HTTP enterprise java beans EJB java remote method invocation RMI common object request broker architecture CORBA or other similar mechanisms.

As shown in a representative customer home is coupled to the IPTV deployment subsystem . Specifically a gateway device is coupled to the IPTV deployment subsystem via a communication link . A first customer premises equipment CPE a second CPE and a third CPE are coupled to the gateway device .

In a particular embodiment the service product ordering subsystem includes an ordering management system OMS that can include one or more product catalogs product definitions and a workflow. Further the SDP subsystem includes a subscription management module a service broker module a content management module and one or more adapters . Additionally as depicted in the IPTV deployment subsystem includes a subscriber management system that includes an IPTV platform.

In a particular embodiment during operation the service product ordering subsystem can receive and process a service product order that identifies a particular communication service subscriber a service area a service control group a service product attribute a facility deployment component and a set of permitted end user device types. The service product attribute can identify a product offer e.g. video video and data video data and VoIP or video data VoIP and wireless service. Also the service product attribute can include a video service attribute that identifies a level of content available where the level of content is selected from a list that at least includes a premium level and a standard level. The level of content can also be selected from a list that includes a standard level a silver level and a gold level. Further the level can include a genre pack. In an illustrative embodiment the gold level but not the silver level or the standard level can include selected premium content such as HBO s Signature package. Also in an illustrative embodiment the silver level but not the standard level can include other premium content such as include HBO s Family package.

In a particular embodiment the facility deployment component identified by the service product order can be implemented as fiber to the premises FTTP fiber to the node FTTN or digital subscriber line DSL technology. Moreover the set of permitted end user devices can include a residential gateway RGW device a set top box a digital video recorder an integrated access device IAD and a session initiation protocol SIP telephone device.

Further in another particular embodiment the IPTV deployment subsystem can include a broadcast channel map that is stored within a computer readable medium within the IPTV deployment subsystem . In a particular embodiment the standard level includes the channels in the broadcast channel map and the premium level includes the channels in the broadcast channel map and at least one additional channel.

In yet another particular embodiment the SDP subsystem receives the service product offer information from the service product offer ordering subsystem and provides one or more data items that identify a subscriber class a subscriber subclass and an item category as an input to the IPTV deployment subsystem . Further the IPTV deployment subsystem can map the subscriber class to a subscriber group and determine a content access grant level based on the subscriber group. In particular one of a set of content packages can be selected based on the content access grant level and a selected content package can be communicated to a subscriber device e.g. the gateway that has access to the IPTV deployment subsystem . The IPTV deployment subsystem can receive data that identifies a set of devices that are associated with a particular subscriber. The set of devices can be evaluated with respect to a particular end user device to receive a selected content package.

Additionally in a particular embodiment the IPTV deployment subsystem includes a plurality of video content packages. At least one of the plurality of video content packages can be selected for permitted transmission and can be granted access to protected content for a particular subscriber based on the service product order for the particular communication service subscriber identified.

Referring to details concerning the service product ordering subsystem and the SDP subsystem are illustrated. As shown the SDP subsystem includes a first interface such as a Web Services WS interface. In a particular embodiment the service product ordering subsystem is coupled to the first interface via an account management interface and a service order interface . The subscription management module and the content manager within the SDP subsystem are also coupled to the first interface . As shown the subscription management module receives provisioning data from the service product ordering subsystem via the first interface and transmits updated coordination data to the service product ordering subsystem via the first interface . In a particular embodiment the content manager is coupled to the first interface via a WS CM adapter .

As depicted in the service broker and the content manager can be coupled to the IPTV delivery platform via a second interface . In a particular embodiment the second interface can also be a WS interface. In a particular embodiment the service broker can transmit IPTV service account and device provisioning data to the second interface and in turn the second interface can transmit IPTV service account and device provisioning data to the IPTV delivery platform . Further the content manager can transmit IPTV service package assignment data to the second interface and the second interface in turn can transmit IPTV service package assignment data to the IPTV delivery platform . Moreover the content manager and the IPTV delivery platform can exchange package creation and management data directly.

Referring to further details of the service product ordering subsystem the SDP subsystem and the IPTV delivery subsystem are shown. As illustrated in the service product ordering subsystem includes subscriber data service area data product offer data product data component data and component property data .

Further as depicted in the SDP subsystem includes service control group data services data service area data subscriber data subscriber class data sub class item item catalog association data item category data association table data item data and device data .

As shown in the IPTV deployment subsystem can also include a first set of services associated with one or more customer accounts and a second set of services associated with one or more customer accounts.

In a particular embodiment the service product package identifies a service area a service control group a service product attribute a facility deployment component and a set of permitted end user device types. Further in a particular embodiment the service product attribute identifies a product offer that is selected from the group consisting of video only video and data video data and voice over internet protocol and video data voice over internet protocol and wireless. Additionally in a particular embodiment the service product attribute includes a video service attribute that identifies a level of available content the level of available content selected from a premium level and a standard level. Additionally the service product package can include a video on demand selection or a pay per view selection.

Referring to a ladder diagram illustrating a particular method of authorizing content at an end user set top box device is shown superimposed over an Internet protocol television IPTV system that is generally designated . As shown in the system includes a customer location that is coupled to an OSS BSS server . The OSS BSS server is coupled to an SDP server and an IPTV server .

The method shown in commences at step and the SDP subsystem transmits a get all packages request to the SMS subsystem within the IPTV server . In a particular embodiment the get all packages request includes a package name. At step the SDP subsystem transmits a create package request to the SMS subsystem. The create package request can include a package name and an included package list. In a particular embodiment the SDP subsystem can create a graphical user interface GUI that can enable higher level package definition and publication of the defined package to the IPTV deployment subsystem.

Moving to step the SDP subsystem transmits an indication to the OMS subsystem that identifies that the new package or product is available. At step the CSR actor creates a new order that includes a subscriber and product association and sends the new order to the OMS subsystem . In a particular embodiment the CSR actor can develop a product catalog for a single play. Further the CSR actor can create a screen and workflow to capture and initiate an order e.g. received from the customer. An example of a product catalog can include a single play gold package a silver package a bronze package and a plurality of a la carte packages. In a particular embodiment each order request can include a unique customer identification and a unique order identification.

Continuing to step the OMS subsystem can add subscriber data to the new order received from the CSR actor . In a particular embodiment the subscriber data can be added based on a customer identification and a serving area code. At step the OMS subsystem can associate a new product with the customer. This association can be based on an order identification a customer identification one or more product offering identifications and a product attribute value list. In an illustrative embodiment this association can be made using extensible markup language XML .

At step the SDP subsystem adds an account identification e.g. a native identification to the order. Further at step the SDP subsystem assigns a service package to the account. Moving to step the SDP subsystem adds a device to the order. The device can be added by adding a device identification and a native identification. In a particular embodiment the device is added by the SDP subsystem and sent to an IPTV platform via an application programming interface API call.

Proceeding to step the OMS subsystem adds one or more video products to a billing account e.g. a billing account. At step the SDP subsystem transmits an indication to the OMS subsystem that a video service device is online. At step the OMS subsystem instructs the billing subsystem to begin billing the customer for the service. Thereafter at step the OMS subsystem transmits an order completion notice to the CSR actor subsystem . At step the CSR actor subsystem transmits an order completion notification to the customer and the method then ends. In a particular embodiment the package identification that is available from an IPTV platform is established within the SDP subsystem . Further the configuration of the available packages into orderable products can be mapped by the SDP subsystem .

Referring to an illustrative embodiment of a general computer system is shown and is designated . The computer system can include a set of instructions that can be executed to cause the computer system to perform any one or more of the methods or computer based functions disclosed herein. The computer system may operate as a standalone device or may be connected e.g. using a network to other computer systems or peripheral devices. In a particular embodiment one or more of the system or subsystem components illustrated in can include one or more of the elements described in conjunction with the computer system depicted in .

In a networked deployment the computer system may operate in the capacity of a server or as a client user computer in a server client user network environment or as a peer computer system in a peer to peer or distributed network environment. The computer system can also be implemented as or incorporated into various devices such as a personal computer PC a tablet PC a set top box STB a personal digital assistant PDA a mobile device a palmtop computer a laptop computer a desktop computer a communications device a wireless telephone a land line telephone a control system a camera a scanner a facsimile machine a printer a pager a personal trusted device a web appliance a network router switch or bridge or any other machine capable of executing a set of instructions sequential or otherwise that specify actions to be taken by that machine. In a particular embodiment the computer system can be implemented using electronic devices that provide voice video or data communication. Further while a single computer system is illustrated the term system shall also be taken to include any collection of systems or sub systems that individually or jointly execute a set or multiple sets of instructions to perform one or more computer functions.

As illustrated in the computer system may include a processor e.g. a central processing unit CPU a graphics processing unit GPU or both. Moreover the computer system can include a main memory and a static memory that can communicate with each other via a bus . As shown the computer system may further include a video display unit such as a liquid crystal display LCD an organic light emitting diode OLED a flat panel display a solid state display or a cathode ray tube CRT . Additionally the computer system may include an input device such as a keyboard and a cursor control device such as a mouse. Further the computer system can include a wireless input device e.g. a remote control device. The computer system can also include a disk drive unit a signal generation device such as a speaker or remote control and a network interface device .

In a particular embodiment as depicted in the disk drive unit may include a computer readable medium in which one or more sets of instructions e.g. software can be embedded. Further the instructions may embody one or more of the methods or logic as described herein. In a particular embodiment the instructions may reside completely or at least partially within the main memory the static memory and or within the processor during execution by the computer system . The main memory and the processor also may include computer readable media.

In an alternative embodiment dedicated hardware implementations such as application specific integrated circuits programmable logic arrays and other hardware devices can be constructed to implement one or more of the methods described herein. Applications that may include the apparatus and systems of various embodiments can broadly include a variety of electronic and computer systems. One or more embodiments described herein may implement functions using two or more specific interconnected hardware modules or devices with related control and data signals that can be communicated between and through the modules or as portions of an application specific integrated circuit. Accordingly the present system encompasses software firmware and hardware implementations.

In accordance with various embodiments of the present disclosure the methods described herein may be implemented by software programs executable by a computer system. Further in an exemplary non limited embodiment implementations can include distributed processing component object distributed processing and parallel processing. Alternatively virtual computer system processing can be constructed to implement one or more of the methods or functionality as described herein.

The present disclosure contemplates a computer readable medium that includes instructions or receives and executes instructions responsive to a propagated signal so that a device connected to a network can communicate voice video or data over the network . Further the instructions may be transmitted or received over the network via the network interface device .

While the computer readable medium is shown to be a single medium the term computer readable medium includes a single medium or multiple media such as a centralized or distributed database and or associated caches and servers that store one or more sets of instructions. The term computer readable medium shall also include any medium that is capable of storing encoding or carrying a set of instructions for execution by a processor or that cause a computer system to perform any one or more of the methods or operations disclosed herein.

In a particular non limiting exemplary embodiment the computer readable medium can include a solid state memory such as a memory card or other package that houses one or more non volatile read only memories. Further the computer readable medium can be a random access memory or other volatile re writable memory. Additionally the computer readable medium can include a magneto optical or optical medium such as a disk or tapes or other storage device to capture carrier wave signals such as a signal communicated over a transmission medium. A digital file attachment to an e mail or other self contained information archive or set of archives may be considered a distribution medium that is equivalent to a tangible storage medium. Accordingly the disclosure is considered to include any one or more of a computer readable medium or a distribution medium and other equivalents and successor media in which data or instructions may be stored.

Although the present specification describes components and functions that may be implemented in particular embodiments with reference to particular standards and protocols the invention is not limited to such standards and protocols. For example standards for Internet and other packet switched network transmission e.g. TCP IP UDP IP HTML HTTP represent examples of the state of the art. Such standards are periodically superseded by faster or more efficient equivalents having essentially the same functions. Accordingly replacement standards and protocols having the same or similar functions as those disclosed herein are considered equivalents thereof.

The illustrations of the embodiments described herein are intended to provide a general understanding of the structure of the various embodiments. The illustrations are not intended to serve as a complete description of all of the devices and features of apparatus and systems that utilize the structures or methods described herein. Many other embodiments may be apparent to those of skill in the art upon reviewing the disclosure. Other embodiments may be utilized and derived from the disclosure such that structural and logical substitutions and changes may be made without departing from the scope of the disclosure. Additionally the illustrations are merely representational and may not be drawn to scale. Certain proportions within the illustrations may be exaggerated while other proportions may be minimized. Accordingly the disclosure and the figures are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive.

One or more embodiments of the disclosure may be referred to herein individually and or collectively by the term invention merely for convenience and without intending to voluntarily limit the scope of this application to any particular invention or inventive concept. Moreover although specific embodiments have been illustrated and described herein it should be appreciated that any subsequent arrangement designed to achieve the same or similar purpose may be substituted for the specific embodiments shown. This disclosure is intended to cover any and all subsequent adaptations or variations of various embodiments. Combinations of the above embodiments and other embodiments not specifically described herein will be apparent to those of skill in the art upon reviewing the description.

The Abstract of the Disclosure is provided to comply with 37 C.F.R. 1.72 b and is submitted with the understanding that it will not be used to interpret or limit the scope or meaning of the claims. In addition in the foregoing Detailed Description various features may be grouped together or described in a single embodiment for the purpose of streamlining the disclosure. This disclosure is not to be interpreted as reflecting an intention that the claimed embodiments require more features than are expressly recited in each claim. Rather as the following claims reflect inventive subject matter may be directed to less than all of the features of any of the disclosed embodiments. Thus the following claims are incorporated into the Detailed Description with each claim standing on its own as defining separately claimed subject matter.

The above disclosed subject matter is to be considered illustrative and not restrictive and the appended claims are intended to cover all such modifications enhancements and other embodiments which fall within the true spirit and scope of the present invention. Thus to the maximum extent allowed by law the scope of the present invention is to be determined by the broadest permissible interpretation of the following claims and their equivalents and shall not be restricted or limited by the foregoing detailed description.

