---

title: Apparatus and method for field testing polymer insulators
abstract: A system and method for testing polymer insulators is provided. One embodiment includes applying a voltage to a grading shield that is oriented about a top region of a polymer insulator and to a high voltage lead of the polymer insulator; detecting a leakage current across the polymer insulator; determining a resistive current component from the detected leakage current; comparing the resistive current component to a predefined criteria; determining that when the resistive current component is greater than the predefined criteria when the applied voltage is applied, the polymer insulator has failed the test; and determining that when the resistive current component is less than or equal to the predefined criteria when the applied voltage is applied, the polymer insulator has passed the test.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07061253&OS=07061253&RS=07061253
owner: Georgia Tech Research Corporation
number: 07061253
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050406
---
This application claims priority to copending U.S. provisional application entitled PASS FAIL TECHNIQUE TO DETERMINE DIELECTRIC INTEGRITY OF POLYMER INSULATORS GAPLESS MOV LIGHTNING ARRESTERS having Ser. No. 60 560 052 filed Apr. 7 2004 which is entirely incorporated herein by reference.

This application is related to co pending commonly assigned Non Provisional Application entitled APPARATUS AND METHOD FOR FIELD TESTING MOV ARRESTERS filed concurrently herewith on Apr. 6 2005 and accorded Ser. No. 11 099 909 which is hereby incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Embodiments of the field testing unit are generally related to electric utility power system device testing and more particularly is related to a system and method for field testing polymer insulators.

Current practices in the electric utility industry are increasingly seeing the necessity to install replacement transmission facilities such as line insulators while the line is energized. For example a utility may have their personnel replace aged or contaminated porcelain or polymer insulators with new replacement polymer insulators. The replacement of the existing insulator with the new polymer insulator in some situations may be done while the line remains energized operating at its design voltage .

There have been incidents where a newly installed polymer insulator immediately failed when initially energized. For personnel safety purposes utilities may require that the electrical integrity of each insulator be tested and verified before replacement under energized conditions. To accomplish this the utility tests the insulators individually at a location remote from the installation site such as at a high voltage test facility. The testing process is tedious time consuming and can only accommodate a limited number of insulators at a time.

Once the insulators are tested they are tagged and sent to the worksite or stored for future use. Once the insulators leave the test facility it is very possible for conditions to occur that may subsequently compromise the electrical integrity of the insulator. A safer and more appropriate test procedure would be to test the polymer insulators on site immediately before installation.

The polymer insulator consists of a plurality of sheds coupled together in a linear fashion as shown. The size of a shed diameter and thickness and the number of sheds used in any particular polymer insulator may be designed such that the polymer insulator may be used at a desirable operating voltage. Furthermore great design flexibility is available such that the polymer insulator may be connected to a power line structure e.g. pole tower or the like and the energized conductor in a variety of manners. It is appreciated that the simplified illustrative diagram of the polymer insulator having five sheds is indented for illustration purposes to demonstrate testing techniques and issues.

Prior art test devices are not suitable for testing modern high resistance polymer insulators for good as new condition. Typically prior art test devices are used in a laboratory or test facility environment to test insulators with much larger leakage component currents.

During testing a voltage is applied to the polymer insulator at high voltage lead such that an electric field not illustrated is established around the polymer insulator. The prior art test device detects leakage currents I Iand I . If the polymer insulator is properly functioning the total detected leakage current will be less than a specified threshold. Here currents Iis a leakage current component traveling through the internal portions of the polymer insulator . Iare capacitive type leakage currents established through the surrounding air. Iis a leakage current flowing over the surface of the sheds .

One difficulty in the illustrated test system of is that the polymer insulator when tested may be in close proximity to an object . Icomponents are established between the proximity object and the polymer insulator during testing. Furthermore various Icomponents from the high voltage lead the sheds the prior art test device and ground are established. There is no practical way to predict the magnitude or effect of these Icomponents on the test result. Electrically these random stray currents cause a phase shift in the total measured leakage current. These unpredictable Icomponents which cannot be easily measured or detected may cause significant test result errors when testing modern polymer insulators that have an electrical impedance dominated by high resistance.

Furthermore applying a high voltage to the high voltage test lead may be dangerous to the testing personnel in the event of an accident. Typically an accident during high voltage testing may significantly injure or may be fatal to the victim of the accident. Accordingly testing at a test laboratory or test facility is difficult because of safety issues and the associated testing procedures that must be followed during the test.

It may also be desirable to test other electric system devices before installation. For example protective devices such as metal oxide varistor MOV arresters are used to protect transmission facilities from sudden voltage surges such as might be caused by a lightning strike or system disturbance. During transportation from the test site to the field location the MOV arrester may become damaged if jarred or vibrated as may occur when transported to a remote site over rough unimproved roads or trails. However such damage may not be visibly apparent to the personnel installing the MOV arrester. Or over time the insulating characteristics of the MOV arrester may degrade before time to install in an energized line. In addition MOV arresters degrade in service over time as a result of protecting transmission facilities from sudden voltage surges. If such defective or degraded MOV arresters remain in service they may fail catastrophically or not be able to provide the intended protection to the electric transmission system. Upon failure during a voltage surge event other system facilities may be damaged because the MOV arrester did not properly function.

MOV arresters may be tested at the remote facilities much like the above described polymer insulators . However the testing process is tedious time consuming and can only accommodate a limited number of MOV arresters at a time.

Embodiments of the field test system provide a system and method for testing polymer insulators. Briefly described one embodiment comprises applying a voltage to a grading shield that is oriented about a top region of a polymer insulator and to a high voltage lead of the polymer insulator detecting a leakage current across the polymer insulator determining a resistive current component from the detected leakage current comparing the resistive current component to a predefined criteria determining that when the resistive current component is greater than the predefined criteria when the applied voltage is applied the polymer insulator has failed the test and determining that when the resistive current component is less than or equal to the predefined criteria when the applied voltage is applied the polymer insulator has passed the test.

Another embodiment comprises a a grading shield that is oriented about a top region of a polymer insulator b a power supply controller configured to receive power from a power supply and configured to regulate a voltage received from the power supply into a regulated voltage c a power supply transformer configured to couple to a high voltage lead of the polymer insulator and the grading shield so that the regulated voltage received from the power supply controller is transformed to an applied voltage that is applied to the high voltage lead and the grading shield d a signal digitizer configured to receive information corresponding to detected leakage current from a ground lead of the polymer insulator and configured to generate a digital signal corresponding to the detected leakage current and e a processing system configured to detect the digital signal and determine a resistive current component corresponding to the leakage current such that when the resistive component of the leakage current is greater than a predefined criteria when the applied voltage is applied the processing system determines that the polymer insulator has failed the test and when the resistive component of the leakage current is less than or equal to the predefined criteria when the applied voltage is applied the processing system determines that the polymer insulator has passed the test.

Grading shields shown in one embodiment as corona rings and are oriented generally as illustrated thereby establishing a more uniform electric field not shown about the polymer insulator during test conditions. Thus one corona ring is oriented about upper region of the polymer insulator. Another corona ring is oriented about a lower region of the polymer insulator in another embodiment. Other embodiments may use any suitable grading shield or grading device.

During test conditions the random Icomponents between the sheds the proximity object the insulator test unit and ground are minimized graphically depicted by the relatively light lead lines . Icomponents between the corona rings and are controlled and are not random graphically depicted by the relatively dark lead lines . The stray capacitance C resulting from the geometry of and or the orientation of the grading shield devices is bounded on the low end by a relatively low stray capacitance and on the upper end by a relatively high stray capacitance. The minimum shielding capacitance required should produce controlled Ifrom the high voltage grading shield to a ground shield that is much greater than the Iof the proximity coupling shed to ground coupling and insulator unshielded end effects of electric field distribution especially at the high voltage source end. The maximum shielding allowed is set by the effective bits of resolution of the signal digitizer the sampling rate of the signal digitizer and the phase accuracy of the voltage divider and connection leads and . For a given signal digitizer voltage divider and connection leads and the working range for the controlled Iis between the limits stated above. In one embodiment a leakage current between 50 micro amps and 150 micro amps for a 9 bit digitizer set at 100 kHz sample rate using a voltage divider with less than 4 minutes of phase error and a non inductive current shunt is sufficient. In one embodiment a pair of 10 inch diameter corona rings are used as grading shields. Since the random and unpredictable Icomponents are minimized and upper and lower boundaries are set on the C the Iand Imay be directly measured with a high degree of accuracy and repeatability by the field test system .

It is appreciated that the above described components of the field test system may reside together in a single enclosure or selected components may be grouped conveniently into separate enclosures. For example in one embodiment the processing system and display is a commercially available laptop or notebook type computer that is easily used in the field and that is conveniently portable. In another embodiment the power supply is a portable generator or an external power supply. In another embodiment the signal digitizer may be a suitable commercially available oscilloscope or other similar type device.

During testing of the polymer insulator predetermined high voltages are applied to the corona ring and the high voltage lead in a specified manner described in greater detail hereinbelow. During the test the voltage divider coupled to connection via connection detects the applied voltage. The voltage divider steps down the detected voltage to a voltage that is within the digitizing range of the signal digitizer using a suitable voltage divider ratio. Any suitable voltage divider device may be used such that voltages over the test range may be converted into voltages that can be digitized. In one embodiment the ratio error is less than 2 and the phase error is less that 4 minutes.

The voltage divider provides the stepped down voltage to the signal digitizer via connection . The signal digitizer generates from the analog voltage received from the voltage divider a digitized signal. This digitized signal is communicated to the processing system via connection . Accordingly the digitized signal corresponds to the test voltage applied to corona ring and the high voltage lead of the polymer insulator . The signal digitizer is configured with a suitable sampling rate such that the provided digital signals are discernable to the processing system .

Shunt is coupled to the ground lead and the optional corona ring if used via connection . Shunt is a low inductance resistor in one embodiment. Thus any current flowing through or over the polymer insulator is transferred onto connection . Shunt converts the detected current into a suitable voltage signal that is communicated to the signal digitizer via connection . The signal digitizer generates from the detected analog voltage signal provided by the shunt another digitized signal that is communicated to the processing system . Accordingly the other digitized signal corresponds to detected leakage current flowing through and or over the polymer insulator in addition to fixed capacitive stray currents. In one embodiment the total leakage current is detected.

Information corresponding to the test voltage and the detected leakage current are both required to determine the resistive component of current in the processing system . One embodiment uses the digitized test voltage signal and the digitized leakage current signal.

The power supply controller receives power from the power supply via connection and precisely regulates the voltage output onto connection . The power supply transformer then transforms the received regulated voltage from the power supply controller to a high voltage that is applied through connection . Since the winding ratio of the power supply controller is a precisely known value the applied high voltage on connection is known.

Furthermore since the voltage divider and signal digitizer are providing a highly accurate measurement of the applied voltage on connection to processing system processing system can generate and communicate a control signal to the power supply controller via connection to cause further adjustments to the voltage output on connection . Accordingly the applied voltage on connection may be further controlled to a highly accurate and known value. In one embodiment this value is a specified test voltage.

As an illustrative example of controlling the applied voltage consider an embodiment where the power supply is a portable power generator or an external power system which provides 120 volts alternating current AC at 60 hertz Hz . It is appreciated that the received voltage from the power supply may be provided within a range of 10 of the nominal 120 volt operating voltage. Furthermore the value of the provided AC voltage may fluctuate with time.

The power supply controller may precisely regulate the received voltage to a voltage between zero volts and 120 volts AC. Assume for illustrative purposes that it is desirable to apply a test voltage of 132 kilovolts kV to polymer insulator which is designed for operation at 132 kV. The power supply transformer converts the received voltage to a voltage that very closely equals 132 kV.

The actual output voltage on connection is detected such that the processing system accurately determines any differences between the actual applied voltage on connection and the desired test voltage of 132 kV. Processor executing test logic determines an error corresponding to the difference between the desired test voltage and the actual voltage on connection .

A control signal corresponding to determined error is communicated from the processing system to the power supply controller . Power supply controller then causes further regulation of the voltage output onto connection . This exemplary feedback control system is understood to iteratively adjust the applied voltage on connection to a value that substantially equals the desired 132 kV. Furthermore if the voltage provided by power supply fluctuates or changes voltage on connection can be regulated to maintain the desired value.

In addition to precisely controlling the voltage output on connection the power supply controller limits current on connection . Because of the current limiting nature of the power supply controller it is appreciated that safety to test personnel is provided when polymer insulators are tested in the field prior to installation. Since the total available amount of current deliverable from the field test system may be limited to less than a few tens of milli amps mA it is unlikely that the test personnel presumably in good health will be significantly injured or killed in the event of an accident.

As noted above embodiments of the field test system are configured such that the system may be conveniently transported into the field for testing of the polymer insulators prior to installation. In one embodiment a test criteria is used to determine the likelihood of failure of the polymer insulator if installed and energized in the field. The test is based upon a comparison of the resistive component of the leakage current detected on connection associated with flow over through the polymer insulator with the criteria . In one embodiment if the resistive component of the leakage current is less than or equal to the criteria the likelihood of failure is deemed low and the polymer insulator is indicated as being acceptable for installation. However if the resistive component of the leakage current is greater than the criteria the likelihood of failure is deemed high and the polymer insulator is indicated as being unacceptable for installation. That is the field test system indicates to the test personnel that the polymer insulator should not be installed since it is likely to fail when energized by the electric transmission system.

To perform the field test the polymer insulator is positioned in a suitable support device not shown that is configured such that the corona rings and or may be oriented about the ends of the polymer insulator as illustrated in FIG. . Connection is then coupled to the high voltage lead and connection is coupled to the ground lead . If not already connected connection is coupled to the corona ring and connection is coupled to the corona ring if used .

To conduct the testing of polymer insulator the test personnel specifies a voltage to be applied to connection . For example if the polymer insulator is rated for a nominal voltage or 132 kV the test personnel may specify a test voltage of 132 kV. Or the test personnel may specify another suitable applied voltage for testing of the polymer insulator . In an alternative embodiment the test personnel may specify the designed operating voltage of the polymer insulator or another suitable identifier such as a model number or the like. A data table or the like is used to determine a test voltage based upon the specified identifier.

It is understood that any suitable testing protocol may be devised for testing of polymer insulators . A single test may be performed or a plurality of tests may be performed. If a plurality of tests are performed different applied voltages appropriate for testing that particular polymer insulator may be specified. Or the field conditions may be altered between tests. For example one test may be performed when the polymer insulator is dry and another test may be performed after application of a liquid to the surface of the polymer insulator such as water or the like.

In one embodiment the detected current on connection is analyzed and then compared to the criteria . If the resistive component of the detected current is less than or equal to the criteria the field test system indicates a pass condition. If the resistive component of the detected current is greater than the criteria the field test system indicates a fail condition. The pass fail condition may be graphically displayed on a display with suitable text and or coloring. Or another indicator may be used. For example audible tones may be used to indicate pass fail conditions. Or special light emitting devices may be used to indicate pass fail conditions. In other embodiments numerical results are presented to the test personnel.

In one embodiment the criteria is specified to be one 1.0 microamp. This value is based upon empirical test results of various embodiments that have been reduced to practice. However other values of criteria may be selected. In one embodiment the value of criteria is selectable or specifiable by the test personnel. It is noted that based upon empirical test results the criteria is applicable for various field conditions such as if the insulator is wet or dry. Thus a single criteria can be used for all test conditions and or for all types of polymer insulators . However in other embodiments different criteria may be specified for different test conditions and or for different polymer insulators .

In a preferred embodiment for testing of a polymer insulator the two corona rings and are employed by the field test system . In an alternative embodiment the low voltage corona ring may be omitted. However test results may be less reliable and have less repeatability. Using both corona rings and allows accurate consistent and repeatable testing of all types of polymer insulators .

In one embodiment of the field test system the components illustrated in are identical such that field tests on both polymer insulators and MOV arresters can be performed with the same field test system . However as described in greater detail hereinbelow the test logic will be configured to apply voltages to and to analyze test data from the MOV arrester . For example the test logic is configured to cause the power supply controller to automatically adjust the regulated voltage and hence the voltage on connection in an incremental step wise manner when testing MOV arresters. That is applied voltages are changed sequentially increased or decreased by a predefined incremental amount in step wise manner.

Internal components of the MOV arrester include one or more MOV disks and electrodes . Electrodes ensure a low resistive contact from the MOV disks to the high voltage lead and to the ground lead . These components are encased in an enclosure that may function much like the above described polymer insulators . It is understood that not all internal components of the MOV arrester are illustrated in .

MOV disks are non conductive when the applied voltage is less than the designed break down voltage. For example at applied voltages equal to the operating voltage of the electric transmission system to which they are coupled to resistive current is negligible. That is a relatively large change in applied voltage over the non conductive region results in a relatively small change in measurable resistive current. This non conductive region is illustrated in where Iis substantially zero.

The MOV disks are conductive when the applied voltage is greater than the designed break down voltage. For example during a relatively high voltage surge caused by a lightning strike or a system disturbance the resistive current is very high. Accordingly when applied voltages are in the conductive region a relatively small change in applied voltage results in a relatively large change in resistive current. This conductive region is illustrated in .

When voltage applied to the MOV arrester transitions from the non conductive voltage region to the conductive region denoted as the transition region in resistive current begins to more rapidly increase as voltage increases. This portion of curve exhibiting a rapidly increasing current may be referred to as the knee of the Iv. voltage curve .

Of particular interest are regions of curve where a relatively small change in applied voltage results in a relatively large change in resistive current which is measurable or discernable. The location of this transition is referred to hereinafter as the point of conduction . The voltage at this point is referred to hereinafter as the conduction voltage Vx . The current at this point is referred to hereinafter as the conduction current Ix . The point of conduction can be accurately and reliably identified by determining the slope of the curve . That is the point of conduction may be identified by determining a change in the resistive component of the measured current per the change in the applied voltage slope and then comparing the determined slope with a predefined value that corresponds to the slope at the point of conduction . The corresponding slope of curve at Vx and or Ix is easily discernable on .

Slopes may be more easily discernable in some situations illustrated on since the vertical axis of plot corresponds to the determined slope of curves and . Slope curves and plot the slope of curves and respectively.

Testing of MOV arresters is based upon applying a series of incrementally increasing voltages or decreasing voltages to the MOV arrester under test.

Voltages are applied on the high voltage lead via connection . For each applied voltage a current having resistive and capacitive components is detected on connection . The corresponding resistive current is then calculated by logic . In one embodiment the total amount of leakage current is detected.

Information corresponding to the test voltage and the detected leakage current are both required to determine the resistive component of current in the processing system . One embodiment uses the digitized test voltage signal and the digitized leakage current signal.

In one embodiment for each incremental change in applied voltage the corresponding resistive current components are compared to determine a change in resistive current for that voltage increment. Then the change in resistive current is divided by the incremental voltage change to determine slope at that point. As the test progresses over a series of incrementally applied voltages the determined slope at each of the test points approximates the slope curve .

In another embodiment voltages are increased on the tested MOV arrester up to at least the conduction voltage Vx r of the reference MOV arrester. In yet another embodiment voltages are increased on the tested MOV arrester up to at least the conduction current Ix r of the reference MOV arrester. In these embodiments at least the determined resistive current for each voltage increment is saved. The above described associated slopes for each test point do not need to be necessarily calculated with these embodiments. In one embodiment voltages may be increased in either a continuous manner with current readings sampled at known applied voltages. Such an embodiment applies voltages in a continuous manner and concurrently samples current through the MOV arrester and the test voltage

Because of the above described configuration of embodiments of the field test system the applied voltages are known and controllable with a high degree of accuracy since the power supply controller is providing a plurality of regulated voltages that are changed in an incremental step wise manner. Accordingly the processing system compares the digital signal corresponding to the detected applied voltage to an incremental regulated voltage selected for testing the MOV arrester and the processing system generates and communicates a control signal to the power supply controller such that the detected applied voltage substantially equals the selected incremental regulated voltage at least within a predefined threshold .

Data corresponding to the reference MOV arrester is pre stored in memory . For example the reference test data itself the value of the conduction voltage Vx r and or conduction current Ix r of the reverence MOV arrester and or other suitable data corresponding to curves and or may be stored in memory depending upon the embodiment. Similarly as data is collected during the testing of the MOV arrester under test the data is saved into memory . In some embodiments the reference data and the test data may reside on different medium. For example reference data might be downloaded from a medium provided by the manufacturer or vendor of the MOV arrester. 

The pre stored reference data corresponding to the point of conduction of the reference MOV arrester is used to determine the scope of testing of MOV arrester . Depending upon the embodiment testing starts at some predetermined initial voltage and continues until the applied voltage is increased up at least to the conduction voltage Vx r of the reverence MOV arrester at least to the conduction current Ix r of the reverence MOV arrester or at least until the conduction point of the MOV arrester under test is determined. That is the applied voltages are increased up to a final test voltage value that corresponds to the conduction point of the reference MOV arrester.

Generally if the tested MOV arrester indicates a point of conduction conduction voltage Vx t and or conduction current Ix t that is significantly different than the reference point of conduction conduction voltage Vx r and or conduction current Ix r of the reference MOV arrester the tested MOV arrester is deemed as unsuitable for use. That is the tested MOV arrester is deemed to have failed the test. That is the tested MOV arrester is deemed to have failed the test if the test data of the tested MOV arrester does not correspond to data associated with the reference point of conduction of the reference MOV arrester.

However if the tested MOV arrester indicates a point of conduction conduction voltage Vx t and or conduction current Ix t that is relatively similar the reference point of conduction conduction voltage Vx r and or conduction current Ix r of the reference MOV arrester within some predetermined amount the tested arrester is deemed as suitable for use. That is the tested MOV arrester is deemed to have passed the test. For example the tested voltage Vt may be slightly less than the reference conduction voltage Vx r but since the difference between the tested voltage Vt and reference conduction voltages Vx r is less than the predetermined amount the tested MOV arrester is deemed to have passed the test. In another situation the tested current It may be slightly greater than the reference conduction current Ix t but since the difference between the tested current It and reference conduction current Ix r is less than the predetermined amount the tested MOV arrester is deemed to have passed the test. That is the tested MOV arrester is deemed to have passed the test if the test data of the tested MOV arrester corresponds to data associated with the reference point of conduction of the reference MOV arrester.

In an embodiment where the applied test voltages are increased up to a value that corresponds to the reference MOV arrester conduction voltage Vx r the corresponding test current It is seen to be significantly greater than the reference conduction current Ix r . Since this difference is significant the test system determines a fail condition for the tested MOV arrester . That is the difference between the test current It and some predefined current corresponding to the reference conduction current Ix r may be calculated. This predefined current may be Ix r or may be Ix r adjusted by some selected amount of margin. If the calculated difference is greater than the reference conduction current Ix r a predefined threshold margin or the like the test system determines a fail condition. Alternatively if the calculated difference is within the reference conduction current Ix r the predefined threshold margin or the like the test system determines a passed condition. Accordingly the MOV arrester has passed the test when Vt is greater than or equal to a predefined voltage corresponding to Vx r and such that the MOV arrester has failed the test when Vt is less than the predefined voltage

In an embodiment where the applied test voltages are increased up to a value that corresponds to the reference MOV arrester conduction current Ix r the corresponding test voltage Vt is seen to be significantly less than the reference conduction voltage Vx r . Since this difference is significant the test system determines a fail condition for the tested MOV arrester . That is the difference between the test voltage Vt and a predefined voltage corresponding to Vx r may be calculated. This predefined voltage may be Vx r or may be Vx r adjusted by some selected amount of margin. If the calculated difference is greater than the reference conduction voltage Vx r a predefined threshold margin or the like the test system determines a fail condition. Alternatively if the calculated difference is within the reference conduction voltage Vx r the predefined threshold margin or the like the test system determines a passed condition.

In an embodiment where the applied test voltages are increased up to the point of conduction of the tested MOV arrester the corresponding test current will be greater than the reference conduction current Ix r . Also the corresponding test voltage will be less than the reference conduction voltage Vx r . Since these differences are determinable the test system determines a fail condition for the tested MOV arrester . That is the difference between the corresponding test information current and or the reference conduction current of the tested MOV arrester when the tested current is greater or when the tested voltage is lower than the reference point of conduction information Ix r or Vx r a predefined threshold margin or the like the test system determines a fail condition. Alternatively if the calculated difference is within the reference point of conduction information Ix r or Vx r the predefined threshold margin or the like the test system determines a passed condition.

Any suitable margin may be selected based upon the practices of the user performing the test. Thus one embodiment provides for the optional specification of this amount of margin by the user. In other embodiments the margin can be preset into the database for the reference MOV test data.

In other embodiments other current voltage response characteristics of the test and reference data may be selected for comparison. For example another current voltage point associated with the transition region may be selected. In another embodiment other relevant slope points of the reference curve and test curves may be determined and compared see slope curves and respectively of . For example since current is being detected one embodiment determines a conduction current that corresponds to the conduction voltage.

Several points are made regarding curves and and or their associated slope curves and respectively. First if the curves and are very close together the curves may be difficult for the test personnel to visually discern differences between the point of conduction of the tested MOV arrester and the reference point of conduction when the curves are displayed on display . For example the displayed curves may not have sufficient resolution along the voltage axis for viewing by the test personnel.

Accordingly various embodiments mathematically determine and compare the points of conduction of a tested MOV arrester and the reference MOV arrester less the predefined amount of margin . Results of the testing and comparison may then be presented on display . In some embodiments only an indication of pass fail test results is displayed on display using suitable text and or coloring. Or another indicator may be used. For example audible tones may be used to indicate pass fail conditions. Or special light emitting devices may be used to indicate pass fail conditions. In other embodiments numerical results are presented to the test personnel.

Second actual display of the curves and or or slope curves and displayed on display is not required for the test personnel to understand test results if the test results are presented in a pass fail format. The above described indicators of pass fail conditions may be sufficient to indicate suitability of the tested MOV arrester to be installed in the field. Accordingly a very simple reliable and easy to use field test system may be made.

In one exemplary embodiment applied voltages are incremented by 2 kV. This increment in applied voltage is sufficiently large such that the incremental voltages can be applied in a reasonable period of time. The 2 kV voltage increment when in the general area corresponding to the point of conduction of the MOV arrester allows detection of a discernable and significant amount of leakage current by the test equipment.

Other suitable voltage increments may be used for testing MOV arresters so long as the point of conduction of the tested MOV arrester can be reliably and accurately determined. However care must be taken so that the selected voltage increment amount is not too large or not too small. For example a much larger voltage increment may provide a more detectable change in leakage current. However when using a very large voltage increment sufficient resolution may not be provided to accurately identify the point of conduction. On the other hand a very small voltage increment may provide for a determination of a very accurate point of conduction. However with a very small voltage increment the changes in leakage current may be so small that the detected changes may not be accurate or reliable.

As noted above when the applied voltages are in the transition region and or the conductive regions of the MOV arrester the changes in the detected current on connection are discernable with sufficient resolution that meaningful and accurate changes in the resistive current component of the detected leakage current can be determined. Other suitable increments of applied voltage may be used by other embodiments so long as sufficient resolution of current changes in the region of the conduction voltages Vx t or other current voltage response criteria can be detected.

The above described configuration of the components of the exemplary field test system embodiment allows the automatic application and precise regulation of applied voltage increments. The changes in the resistive current component are computationally determined for the voltage increments based upon measured leakage current at each voltage increment. The processing system determines the point of conduction of the tested MOV arrester and compares the determined point of conduction with the point of conduction of a reference MOV arrester. Test results are presented in a pass fail format. Thus no actions are required on the part of the test personnel to test the MOV arrester .

In the above described embodiments where the applied voltages are incremented by 2 kV the conduction voltage Vx t of the tested MOV arrester is defined to be the point on curve or where the determined rate of change in the resistive component of the detected leakage current for a 2 kV voltage change corresponds substantially equals to 0.04 milli amps mA . This point is indicated by the encircled region on curve .

Furthermore based upon actual test results the determined 0.04 mA rate of change in resistive current corresponding to a 2 kV change in the applied voltage consistently corresponded to the point of conduction for a variety of tested MOV arresters from different manufacturers and for different designed operating voltages. Thus the same test and comparison criteria may be used to normalize the test for a great variety of MOV arresters.

Since there are a variety of MOV arresters used by the industry a database of reference data curves points of conduction Vx r and or Ix r values which correspond to the above described criteria for many different MOV arresters may be stored in memory or in another suitable medium. MOV arrester types may be identified with any suitable identifier which is correlated to the reference data. For example but not limited to the identifier may be an operating voltage model number or the like. Furthermore the database may be easily updated to accommodate new models and or changes in technology. Accordingly during testing the test personnel need only specify the identifier of the reference MOV arrester that corresponds to the MOV arrester that is to be tested.

As noted above the criteria corresponds to the reference point of conduction. One exemplary point of conduction was identified. The point of conduction used in any particular embodiment of field test system may be selected so long as the point of conduction is readily identifiable with an acceptable degree of accuracy reliability and repeatability for the MOV arrester under test. In other embodiments margin may be subtracted from the reference point of conduction or added to the determined point of conduction . That is if the determined point of conduction for the tested MOV arrester is sufficiently close to the reference point of conduction within the predefined margin the MOV arrester passes testing.

To perform the field test the MOV arrester is positioned in a suitable support device not shown . Connection is coupled to the high voltage lead and connection is coupled to the ground lead .

Prior to testing the MOV arrester the test personnel specifies the type of MOV arrester corresponding to a tested reference MOV arrester that is to be tested. Accordingly the test logic retrieves the appropriate reference voltage Vx r or other reference data so that a comparison may be made with the test data from the MOV arrester .

Next precisely known voltages are incrementally applied onto connection in a step wise fashion. In one embodiment the applied initial applied voltage starts at zero volts and is increased in predefined and known increments up to a final applied voltage such that the above described conduction voltage Vx t or other selected current voltage criteria is determined.

In another embodiment the first applied voltage may be a predetermined voltage or selectable by the test personnel. For example the initial applied voltage might start at 50 of the operating voltage of the MOV arrester thereby avoiding the collection of unnecessary data and accordingly reduce the testing time. In another embodiment applied voltages are decreased in a step wise fashion starting at some predetermined initial applied voltage.

As noted above applied incremental voltages must be precisely known and the actual applied voltage must accurately correspond to the intended incremental voltage. To apply the incremental voltages onto connection in a step wise fashion a control signal is communicated from processing system via connection to the power supply controller . The control signal specifies the incremental voltage that is to be applied onto connection referred to as the intended incremental voltage. For example if the intended incremental voltages are incremented in 2 kV steps then the actual applied voltage must be incremented in 2 kV steps and must correspond precisely with the value of the intended incremental voltage at each increment. As noted above any suitable voltage increment may be used for testing MOV arresters so long as sufficient resolution of the test data is provided such that the conduction voltage Vx t or other selected current voltage criteria can be identified.

The above described feedback system allows precise control of applied voltages for each increment of the test. Voltage divider allows detection of the applied voltage on connection such that an error between the actual applied voltage and the intended incremental voltage may be determined by processing system . If the actual applied voltage does not equal the intended incremental voltage by some predefined error threshold typically a very small value the processing system generates and communicates another control signal to the power supply controller specifying an adjustment to the applied voltage. This adjustment process continues until the actual applied voltage equals the intended incremental voltage by at least the predefined error threshold . Then current is detected on connection and the corresponding results saved into memory .

As the test proceeds applied voltages are adjusted incrementally in a step wise fashion. For each applied incremental voltage current is detected on connection as described above. The current data for each incremental voltage is digitized and communicated to the processing system . Incremental changes in voltages should be sufficiently small such that the current data associated with curve is determinable. However incremental voltages changes should not be so large that the current data is meaningless. That is as voltages are incrementally increased through the transition region into the conduction region the location Vx t corresponding to the conduction current should be identifiable.

Once the resistive component of the current is determined for the voltage increment the resistive component is compared with the determined resistive component of the previous voltage increment. This difference is used to determine the rate of change in the resistive current component and corresponds to the slope of the slope curves and .

Upon completion of the test for the current increment the applied voltage is then adjusted to the next incremental value. The applied voltage is precisely adjusted to equal the next intended incremental voltage and the current then is detected on connection . The process is continued until the conduction voltage Vx t or other selected current voltage criteria is determined. Accordingly the test is then completed.

In one embodiment applied voltages are incrementally increased up to a voltage that corresponds to the conduction voltage of the reference MOV arrester. In another embodiment the applied voltage may be increased to a greater amount. Then the value of the conduction voltage and or the conduction current for the tested MOV arrester is compared with the value of the conduction voltage and or the conduction current of the MOV arrester. If the value of the conduction voltage and or the conduction current for the tested MOV arrester is equal to or greater than the conduction voltage and or the conduction current of the MOV arrester the tested MOV arrester has passed and is suitable of installation in the field. In practice an amount of margin is subtracted from the known conduction voltage and or current of the MOV arrester. Thus if the conduction voltage and or current for the tested MOV arrester is greater than or equal to this reference conduction voltage or current less the margin value the tested MOV arrester passes testing. 

In another embodiment applied voltages are incrementally increased up to a point where the measured leakage current or the determined resistive current component corresponds to the conduction current of the reference MOV arrester. In another embodiment the applied voltage may be increased further so that the measured leakage current or the determined resistive current component is greater than the reference conduction current. Then the value of the conduction voltage and or the conduction current for the tested MOV arrester is compared with the value of the conduction voltage and or the conduction current of the MOV arrester as described above.

In yet another embodiment applied voltages are incrementally increased up to a point where the determined slope corresponds to the slope corresponding to the point of conduction of the reference MOV arrester. In another embodiment the applied voltage may be increased further so that the determined slope is greater than the slope corresponding to the reference point of conduction. Then the value of the conduction voltage and or the conduction current for the tested MOV arrester is compared with the value of the conduction voltage and or the conduction current of the MOV arrester as described above.

The above described components illustrated in and their associated connections may be designed to be partial discharge PD free. PD free grade components and connections are used so that PD can be detected in the insulator or arrester under test as an additional test parameter. For example the presence of PD in the insulator or arrester under test is a condition of specimen failure since it is known that PD can degrade the electrical characteristics of these devices. It follows that the test power supply and all connections must be PD free for the range of test voltages used.

One embodiment for PD detection is configured to monitor the detected current on connection to identify any random occurrences of partial discharge PD . The test logic analyzes the measured current waveform for significant deviations from one digitized point to the next in the frequency cycle for example 60 Hz . In one exemplary embodiment the predefined deviation value is 20 of the true rms current value of the total current although any suitable value could be used. Significant deviations greater that the predefined deviation value indicates a possible PD occurrence. If at least one occurrence of PD is detected the test results for the insulator or arrester is a fail condition.

In some embodiments the test logic is further configured to remove the effects of the harmonic currents which can interfere with PD detection by shunt . The harmonic components are detected by a comparison of the same digitized points from cycle to cycle. If these same or repetitive cycle to cycle digitized points exceed the predefined deviation these points are not identified as PD. This algorithm may lower the overall PD count but the PD detection is only to determine the presence of PD not to place a calibrated level on the detection method. The PD detection is used to verify any shielding or voltage stand off irregularities at operating voltage in otherwise good insulation. In this manner the PD counts due to normal harmonic leakage currents are removed from the PD detection of the polymer insulator or the MOV arrester and the deviation counts due to PD only are recorded for pass or fail determination.

As noted above some embodiments of the field test system may be configured to test both polymer insulators and MOV arresters . Such embodiments would have a switch or other selectable device such as a menu shown on the display to enable the selection so that the test personnel can indicate to the field test system what type of device is to be tested. For example if the processor system is a laptop or notebook type system selection can be provided via a menu and the user interface system keyboard and or pointer device . In other embodiments a physical switch may be used to select between polymer insulator and MOV arrester testing.

Processes used by one exemplary embodiment for performing the above described testing of polymer insulators and MOV arresters are described in detail. is a flowchart illustrating a process used by an embodiment of the field test system to test a polymer insulator . is a flowchart illustrating a process used by an embodiment of the field test system to test a MOV arrester . Flow chart of and flow chart of show the architecture functionality and operation of an embodiment for implementing the test logic . An alternative embodiment implements the logic of flow charts and or with hardware configured as a state machine. In this regard each block may represent a module segment or portion of code which comprises one or more executable instructions for implementing the specified logical function s . It should also be noted that in alternative embodiments the functions noted in the blocks may occur out of the order noted in and or or may include additional functions. For example two blocks shown in succession in and or may in fact be substantially executed concurrently the blocks may sometimes be executed in the reverse order or some of the blocks may not be executed in all instances depending upon the functionality involved as will be further clarified hereinbelow. All such modifications and variations are intended to be included herein within the scope of this disclosure

The process of testing a polymer insulator begins at block . At block a voltage is applied to a grading shield that is oriented about a top region of a polymer insulator and to a high voltage lead of the polymer insulator. At block a leakage current across the polymer insulator is detected. At block a resistive current component is determined from the detected leakage current. At block the resistive current component is compared to a predefined criteria. At block when the resistive current component is above a predefined criteria when the applied voltage is applied the polymer insulator is determined to have failed the test. At block when the resistive current component is less than or equal to the predefined criteria when the applied voltage is applied the polymer insulator is determined to have passed the test. The process ends at block .

The process of testing a MOV arrester begins at block . At block a plurality of applied voltages are applied to a high voltage lead of the MOV arrester the plurality of applied voltages being changed between an initial test voltage and final test voltage the final test voltage corresponding to a point of conduction of a reference MOV arrester. At block a resistive current through the MOV arrester for each of the applied voltages is determined. At block information corresponding to the resistive current when the applied test voltage corresponds to the point of conduction of the reference MOV arrester is determined. At block the determined information is compared with information associated with the point of conduction of the reference MOV arrester. At block the MOV arrester is determined to have passed the test when the determined information corresponds to the information associated with the reference MOV arrester. At block the MOV arrester is determined to have failed the test when the determined information does not correspond to the information associated with the reference MOV arrester. The process ends at block .

It should be emphasized that the above described embodiments of the field test system are merely possible examples of implementations of the invention. Many variations and modifications may be made to the above described embodiments. All such modifications and variations are intended to be included herein within the scope of this disclosure.

