---

title: Method and system for web-based enterprise change and configuration management reports
abstract: A method and system for presenting an enterprise change and configuration report are provided. In accordance with one embodiment of the present application, a method for presenting an enterprise change and configuration report includes identifying at least one datasource that stored change management information, collecting change management information from the datasource and integrating the change management information into a change management report that is accessible via a web browser. A plurality of datasources that include change management data may be identified and change management data from each datasource of the plurality of datasources may be collected and integrated to provide the change management report.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08429609&OS=08429609&RS=08429609
owner: CA, Inc.
number: 08429609
owner_city: Islandia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050519
---
The present specification is based on co pending U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 573 053 filed May 21 2004 entitled METHOD AND SYSTEM FOR WEB BASED ENTERPRISE CHANGE AND CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT REPORTS the entire contents of which are herein incorporated by reference.

The system and method of the present application are generally related to information processing environments in which software changes and configurations are managed. More specifically the system and method of the present application are related to providing an enterprise change and configuration report.

Large corporations deploy different change and configuration management CCM applications to manage their software on different distributed and mainframe platforms. Users of these CCM applications typically have a need to access these different applications on different platforms in order to generate and view CCM reports regarding the current status of change and configuration management information or change management information. This requires expertise on different platforms like Mainframe UNIX and Windows in addition to sufficient product knowledge of different applications in order to be able to generate the reports. Accordingly there is a need to enable users to generate view and print the enterprise wide changes and configuration management reports from central point using a web based application.

For example Computer Associates International CA currently sells change and configuration management applications like the AllFusion Endevor Change Manager for mainframe platforms and AllFusion Harvest Change Manager for UNIX and Windows platforms. Typically change and configuration management information is stored in different databases like Oracle Ingres and SQL Server etc. On mainframes the CCM information is typically stored in VSAM Virtual Storage Access Method files. Additionally the AllFusion Change Manager Enterprise Workbench is a web based portal that offers Enterprise wide change management capability by enabling access to both AllFusion Endevor Change Manager and AllFusion Harvest Change Manager from a web based application. Each of these products includes the reporting features that allow users to view and print CCM reports pertaining to the current status of the CCM information being managed by these applications. Currently in order to generate the change management reports on these different applications the user needs to know how to access and or login to these different platforms and requires sufficient product knowledge about these applications to be able to generate the CCM reports. Accordingly there is a need to provide a method and system for presenting an enterprise change and configuration report that avoids the problems described above.

This application describes methods and systems for collecting change management information from different datasources associated with a plurality of different CCM applications on a plurality of different platforms. The application further discloses methods and systems for presenting this change management information in the form of an integrated change management report accessible via a web browser.

A method for presenting enterprise change and configuration management reports according to an exemplary embodiment of the present application includes identifying at least one datasource that stores change management information collecting the change management information from the datasource and integrating the collected change management information to provide a change management report that is accessible via a web browser.

A system for presenting enterprise change and configuration management reports according to an embodiment of the present application includes an identifying device adapted to identify at least one datasource that stores change management information a collecting device adapted to collect change management information from the datasource identified by the identifying device and an integrating device adapted to integrate the collected change management information into a change management report that is accessible via a web browser.

A program storage device according to an embodiment of the present application is readable by a machine and tangibly embodies a program of instructions executable by the machine to perform method steps for presenting an enterprise change and configuration management report. The method steps include identifying at least one datasource that stores change management information collecting change management information from the datasource and integrating the collected change management information to provide a change management report that is accessible via a web browser.

A computer system according to an embodiment of the present application includes a processor and a program storage device readable by the computer system tangibly embodying a program of instructions executable by the processor to perform method steps for presenting a change and configuration management report wherein the method steps include identifying at least one datasource that stores change management information collecting change management information from the datasource and integrating the collected change management information to provide a change management report that is accessible via a web browser.

In describing the preferred embodiments of the present application illustrated in the drawings specific terminology is employed for sake of clarity. However the present application is not intended to be limited to the specific terminology so selected and it is to be understood that each specific element includes all technical equivalents which operate in a similar manner.

The method and system of the present application may be implemented in the form of a software application running on a computer system such as a mainframe personal computer PC handheld computer server etc. The computer system may be linked to a database or various types of storage media. The link may be for example via a direct link such as a direct hard wire or wireless connection via a network connection such as a local area network or via the Internet.

An example of a computer system capable of implementing the present method and apparatus is shown in . The computer system referred to generally as system may include a central processing unit CPU memory a printer interface a display unit a LAN local area network data transmission controller a LAN interface a network controller an internal bus a database and one or more input devices such as for example a keyboard mouse etc. Naturally other components may be included in the computer system and some components may not be present.

A method for presenting an enterprise change and configuration management report is discussed below with reference to .

In step S at least one datasource that stores change management information is identified. Naturally it is likely that more than one datasource in an enterprise stores change management information. In such a case a plurality of datasources that store change management information can be identified in step S. These datasources generally include a database or databases that are used by CCM management applications for example the databases typically utilized in CCM management applications implemented on UNIX and Windows platforms. Datasources may also include Virtual Storage Access Method VSAM files such as those typically utilized by CCM applications implemented on mainframe platforms. Since an enterprise will commonly include all of these platforms the datasource or datasources that are identified in S will typically include at least databases and VSAM files. The present application however is not limited to databases and VSAM files and may include any datasource or other storage medium and or device that stores change management information.

The change management information is collected from the datasource or datasources in step S. That is the change management information that is stored in the various datasources may be collected in step S. The collection of change management information may be implemented in different ways for different datasources. For example in a preferred embodiment of the present application where the datasource is a database such as those typically utilized to store control management information for Windows and Unix platforms the control management information may be collected using Structure Query Language SQL queries. SQL in an ANSI standard computer language used to access databases. On the other hand where the datasource is a VSAM file or files such as those typically used to store change management information in a mainframe platform the control management information is preferably downloaded using an Application Programming Interface API and preferably written to a file at least temporarily in Comma Separated Value CSV format.

In step S the collected CCM information is integrated into a change management report. That is the change management information collected in S may be integrated into a single report that reflects control management information from every datasource in the enterprise. In a preferred embodiment the change management report is provided in HTML format such that it is easily accessed and displayed using a web browser. Generally the change management report may include change management information from every datasource that stores change management information in the enterprise however the report may be customized to present whatever change management information is desired. For example the change management report may be customized to include only change management information related to certain datasources or only change management information from certain platforms in the enterprise.

The integrating step S is discussed below with reference to . In step S the collected change management information is organized for inclusion in the change management report. The organization of the change management data may include for example groups change management information based on the datasource it was collected from or based on the type of platform from which it was collected. In step S the change management report may be generated in HTML format based on the organized information. That is the change management report is generated in HTML format and reflects the organizing of S. The organizing in S may further include a step of selecting desired change management information to be organized. In this manner only selected change management information is organized and reflected in the change management report generated in step S.

As noted above the change management report is preferably provided in HTML format such that it is easily accessible to and displayed via a web browser for example. Thus the methodology of the present application allows the collection of change management information from one or more datasources and the generation of a single change management report representative of change management information of various distributed platforms that is accessible from a single web portal.

A system for presenting an enterprise change and configuration management report according to an embodiment of the present application is discussed below with reference to . An identifying device is adapted to identify at least one datasource that stores change management information. A collecting device is adapted to collect change management information from the datasource identified by the identifying device . An integrating device is adapted to integrate the collected change management information into a change management report that is accessible via a web browser . As illustrated in the identifying device may identify several datasources and the collecting device may collect change management information from the several datasources. The integrating device integrates the collected change management information into a change management report that is then accessible via the web browser .

The system depicted in can substantially perform the method discussed with reference to above and therefore is not described in further detail herein.

For example a web based application may be provided to generate view and print change and configuration management reports for different CCM applications on different platforms from a central location. CA s CleverPath Reporter is a distributed enterprise reporting solution and can be used for this purpose. Pursuant to this exemplary embodiment the enterprise CCM reporting capability can be integrated into the AllFusion Change Manager Enterprise Workbench allowing users to generate change management reports for AllFusion Endevor Change Manager AllFusion Harvest Change Manager and AllFusion Change Manager Enterprise Workbench from a single web based interface.

In one exemplary embodiment the method described with reference to may be implemented via CA s All Fusion Change Manager Enterprise Workbench application. The Workbench application is a web based application which allows access to CA s All Fusion Harvest Change Manager application. The Harvest Change Manager provides CCM information for Unix and Windows based platforms. The Workbench application also provides access to CA s All Fusion Endevor Change Manager application which provides CCM information for mainframe platforms.

The change management information for the Enterprise Workbench and the Harvest Change Manager is typically stored in databases like Oracle Ingres and SQL Server etc. on different distributed platforms like UNIX and Windows. These databases are thus among the datasources identified in step S of the present application. The change management information for the Harvest Change Manager application is typically stored in VSAM files on the mainframe. These VSAM files are also datasources that may be identified in S.

In a preferred embodiment the Workbench application uses CA s CleverPath Reporter to collect the CCM information as described in step S. That is for example when a user wants to generate AllFusion Enterprise Workbench and AllFusion Harvest Change Management CCM reports a CleverPath Reporter Server may directly read the change management information from the database or databases associated with the AllFusion Enterprise Workbench and the AllFusion Harvest Change Manager using SQL Structured Query Language queries which are preferably defined within CleverPath report files. As noted above change management reports are preferably provided in S in HTML format thus the CleverPath Reporter may output change management information in HTML format. In order for the Reporter Server to access the database or databases the database client components may be installed on a computer where the CleverPath Reporter Server is installed. The users can access these reports in HTML format from the All Fusion Change Manager Enterprise Workbench application which is a web based application.

In the case of All Fusion Endevor Change Manager the change management information may be stored in VSAM files on a mainframe. When the user wants to generate the CCM reports for the Endeavor Change Manager the information needed for Endevor reports can be collected for example as described in step S by downloading the information from the mainframe using an API and writing it to a file in the CSV format. The CleverPath Reporter may read the CSV files using for example Microsoft Text OBDC driver which is commonly available and can convert it to a report in HTML format. Pursuant to the above described exemplary embodiment the user will be able to generate and view the CCM reports for Enterprise Workbench Harvest and Endevor from the Enterprise Workbench web based application. That is change management information may be collected from the Enterprise Workbench Harvest and Endevor applications and accessed via a web based application.

Pursuant to another exemplary embodiment the CleverPath Reporter application includes a Reporter Builder application which may be used to build or integrate the collected information into one or more report files that may be used to generate change management reports. The Reporter Server application may be used to run report files on a command line to generate the reports. The output of the Reporter Server command line program may be the reported in the HTML format.

Pursuant to this embodiment once integrated into Enterprise Workbench discussed above certain pre defined Enterprise Workbench Endevor and Harvest reports may be available through menu options on the Enterprise Workbench web application. That is a user may select the change management information to be collected and integrated into a report based on predefined report selections. A selected report file can be run using the Reporter Server command line program and a generated report in HTML format can be made available to a user to view or print from a web page. The users can also use the Reporter Builder to build their own customized reports and integrate them into the Enterprise Workbench application.

The present disclosure may be conveniently implemented using one or more conventional general purpose digital computers and or servers programmed according to the teachings of the present disclosure. Appropriate software coding can readily be prepared based on the teachings of the present disclosure. The present disclosure may also be implemented by the preparation of application specific integrated circuits or by interconnecting an appropriate network of conventional component circuits.

The above described embodiments are illustrative and numerous additional modifications and variations can be introduced to these embodiments without departing from the spirit of the disclosure or from the scope of the appended claims. For example elements and or features of different illustrative embodiments may be combined with each other and or substituted for each other within the scope of the disclosure and appended claims.

Additional variations may be apparent to one skilled in the are from reading U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 573 053 filed May 21 2004 the entire contents of which are incorporated by reference herein.

