---

title: Gamma-1 and gamma-3 anti-human CD23 monoclonal antibodies and use thereof as therapeutics
abstract: Methods for inhibiting production of IgE in a human subject with an IgE-mediated allergic disorder by administering anti-CD23 antibodies.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07438906&OS=07438906&RS=07438906
owner: Biogen Idec MA Inc.
number: 07438906
owner_city: Cambridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050921
---
This is a continuation of U.S. patent application No. 09 292 053 filed Apr. 14 1999 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 033 589 which is a divisional of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 08 803 085 filed Feb. 20 1997 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 011 138

The present invention relates to monoclonal antibodies containing human gamma 1 constant domains which specifically bind human CD23 the low affinity receptor for IgE FceRII CD23 and their usage as therapeutic agents.

IgE is a member of the immunoglobulin family that mediates allergic responses such as asthma food allergies type 1 hypersensitivity and the familiar sinus inflammation allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis and as a result causes widespread suffering throughout the general population. IgE is secreted by and expressed on the surface of B cells. IgE synthesized by B cells can be anchored in the B cell membrane by a short transmembrane domain linked to the mature IgE sequence. Membrane and secreted versions of IgE are formed in the same cell by differential splicing of the IgE RNA transcript.

IgE also can be bound to B cells and T cells monocytes Langerhans cells follicular dendritic cells natural killer cells eosinophils and platelets through its Fc region to a low affinity IgE receptor FceRII hereafter FCEL and to mast cells and basophils through its Fc region to a high affinity IgE receptor FceRI hereinafter FCEH . The low affinity IgE receptor is generally referred to in the literature as CD23.

Upon exposure of a mammal to an allergen antigen presenting cells process the antigen for presentation to helper T cells. These helper T cells secrete cytokines such as IL 4 which assist B cells to undergo clonal amplification and secrete more allergen specific IgE. This newly synthesized IgE in turn is released into the circulation where it binds to mast cells and basophils through the high affinity receptor on their cell surface. Such mast cells and basophils are thereby sensitized to the specific allergen. The next exposure to the same allergen causes binding to specific IgE on the surface of mast cells and basophils thereby cross linking the FceRI on these cells and thus activating their release of histamine and other factors which are responsible for clinical hypersensitivity and anaphylaxis.

The art has reported antibodies capable of binding to FCEL CD23 bound IgE but not IgE bound to FCEH see for example WO 89 00138 and U.S. Pat. No. 4 940 782 . These antibodies are disclosed to be clinically advantageous because they bind to IgE which is bound to the low affinity receptor FCEL or to circulating IgE s but do not bind to IgE bound to the high affinity receptor FCEH . Therefore these antibodies will not activate mast cells or basophils.

Moreover anti CD23 antibodies have been reported to have potential as therapeutics e.g. for the treatment of allergic disorders inflammatory diseases and autoimmune diseases. For example Bonnefoy et al. WO 9612741 report that ligands which bind CD23 e.g. monoclonal antibodies are useful in the treatment or prophylaxis of inflammatory autoimmune and allergic diseases.

The usage of monoclonal antibodies to CD23 as both IgE agonists and antagonists has been reported. IgE antagonists have been reported to have potential utility in treatment of conditions or diseases wherein IgE suppression is therapeutically desirable e.g. allergic conditions such as allergic rhinitis and conjuntivitis atopic dermatitis and asthma. For example Bonnefoy et al. WO 8707302 1987 report monoclonal antibodies to human CD23 which are assertedly useful for assaying the presence of IgE receptors on cell types and as therapeutics in diseases wherein modulation of IgE is therapeutically desirable.

In part because of their potential as therapeutics and diagnostics many groups have reported the generation of monoclonal antibodies to CD23. See e.g. Rector et al. 55 481 488 1985 Suemura et al. 137 1214 1220 1986 Noro et al. 137 1258 1263 1986 Bonnefoy et al. 138 2170 2178 1987 Flores Romo et al. 261 1038 1046 1993 Sherr et al. 142 481 489 1989 and Pene et al. 85 6880 6884 1988 . Moreover as discussed supra the usage of such antibodies specifically to inhibit IgE production in systems where IgE synthesis is cytokine IL 4 induced has also been reported. Flores Romo et al Id. Sherr et al. Id. Bonnefoy et al. WO 8707302 Bonnefoy et al. WO 8707302 Bonnefoy et al. WO 9612741 Bonnefoy et al. 20 139 144 1990 Sarfati et al. 141 2195 2199 1988 and Wakai et al. 12 25 43 1993 . Also Flores Romo et al. Id. disclose that Fabs prepared from anti CD23 antibodies inhibit antigen specific induced IgE responses in vivo in the rat. However notwithstanding what has been reported the mechanism by which anti CD23 antibodies modulate IgE expression and in particular the manner by which they block IL 4 induced IgE production remains unclear.

It has been suggested that anti CD23 antibodies inhibit IgE production by signaling through CD23 present on the surface of IgE secreting B cells. It has been proposed that the function of CD23 which is upregulated on IgE secreting B cells is feedback inhibition of IgE production Yu et al. 369 753 756 1994 . This has been theorized because mice in which the CD23 gene has been removed have increased and sustained IgE production compared to controls Yu et al. . In addition it has been reported that binding to CD23 by IgE complexes or by a monoclonal antibody to anti CD23 suppresses ongoing IgE synthesis by a lymphoblastoid cell line that constitutively secretes IgE Sherr et al. Id. . It appears that this is due to down regulation of the messenger RNA for the secreted IgE heavy chain in this cell Saxon et al. 147 4000 4006 1991 . However the exact mechanism by which IgE expression is inhibited has yet to be explained in systems in which IgE secretion is IL 4 induced.

It has also been reported that crosslinking of Fc gamma RII with surface Ig B cell receptor on B cells leads to down regulation of Ig expression. D Ambrosia et al. 268 293 297 1995 . A similar mechanism can be proposed for B cells secreting IgE which also have cell surface CD23 and Fc gamma RII. An anti human CD23 antibody bound to a cell by antigen CD23 and also bound to Fc gamma RII through Fc interactions could transmit a signal to suppress IgE secretion through Fc gamma RII.

Mechanisms involved in IgE inhibition by anti CD23 antibodies have been proposed that include blocking interactions other than the interaction between membrane CD23 and IgE. Related to this CD23 which is a member of the C type lectin family has been shown to interact with several other ligands such as CD21 CD11b and CD11c present on a variety of cell types including T cells and monocytes. In this context CD23 can be envisioned as a cellular adhesion molecule.

Therefore it has been proposed that the CD21 CD23 interaction may be involved in antigen presentation and subsequent IgE production. Models suggest CD21 on B cells sending an activation signal for IgE production after binding to CD23 on activated T cells present primarily in atopic individuals. Leconant et al. 88 35 39 1996 and Bonnefoy et al. 107 40 42 1995 . Blocking this interaction with an anti CD23 could block induced IgE production. Aubry et al. 358 505 507 and 5 944 949 1993 Grosjean et al. 1992 Bonnefoy et al. 24 2982 2988 1994 Henchoz Lecoanet et al. 88 35 39 1996 Nambu et al. 44 163 167 1995 Bonnefoy et al. 107 40 42 1995 . 

Yet another mechanism which would potentially explain the effects of CD23 on IgE production involves soluble forms of CD23. It has been reported that CD23 is cleaved from the cell surface releasing several different forms of soluble CD23 or IgE binding factors. Sarfati et al. 53 197 205 1984 . Soluble CD23 is a cytokine with one of its reported activities being the augmentation of IL 4 induced IgE production from B cells. Pene et al. 39 253 269 1989 Pene et al. 18 929 935 1988 Sarfati et al. 141 2195 2197 1988 Sarfati et al. 1984 Id. Saxon et al. 86 3 pt 1 333 344 1990 . Also certain forms of soluble CD23 have been reported to inhibit IgE production Sarfati et al. 76 662 667 1992 . Accordingly anti CD23 antibodies potentially may block IgE production by 1 inhibiting the IgE augmenting effects of soluble CD23 and or 2 blocking the proteolytic release of soluble CD23 from the cell surface.

Thus based on the foregoing it is clear that there is significant complexity and uncertainty in the art with respect to the functions of more specifically CD23 and effects on IgE production and further with respect to the means by which ligands specific thereto affect IgE production.

Thus it is an object of the invention to produce novel ligands antibodies specific to CD23 and to use such antibodies to elucidate the mechanism by which anti CD23 antibodies modulate IgE expression.

It is another object of the invention to produce novel ligands antibodies which bind CD23 in particular human CD23 having improved ability to inhibit induced IgE expression.

It is a more specific object of the invention to produce anti human CD23 antibodies containing human gamma 1 constant domains.

It is another object of the invention to produce multivalent anti human CD23 antibodies which may be more effective by virtue of their enhanced potential for cross linking CD23 and Fc receptors.

It is another object of the invention to provide pharmaceutical compositions containing anti human CD23 monoclonal antibodies comprising human gamma 1 constant domains which are capable of inhibiting induced IgE production.

It is another object of the invention to use an anti human CD23 monoclonal antibody comprising human gamma 1 constant domains for treatment or prophylaxsis of disease conditions wherein inhibition of induced IgE production is therapeutically desirable.

More specifically it is an object of the invention to treat or prevent allergic conditions autoimmune diseases and inflammatory diseases using an anti human CD23 monoclonal antibody comprising human gamma 1 constant domains.

A recombinant antibody containing regions from two different antibodies usually different species antibodies most typically rodent variable sequences and human constant domain sequences.

An antibody that specifically binds human CD23 which contains a human gamma 1 constant region or fragment or modification thereof which inhibits induced IgE production. This includes in particular antibodies containing rodent or primate variable domains or antigen binding portions humanized PRIMATIZED and human anti human CD23 monoclonal antibodies which comprise a human gamma 1 constant domain fragment or modification thereof which inhibit induced IgE production in vitro.

A recombinant antibody containing primate variable sequences or antigen binding portions and human constant domain sequences.

A recombinant antibody containing a non human variable region or antigen binding portion which has been modified to more closely mimic a human antibody variable region and thereby eliminate or minimize potential immunogenicity if administered to humans without sacrificing the specificity or affinity of the immunoglobulin. There are several known methods of humanization including veneering which comprises select modification of surface residues framework replacement CDR grafting and molecular modeling.

A particular type constant domain sequence which confers upon an antibody specific effector activities. In the present application gamma 1 constant domain refers to a human gamma 1 constant domain fragment or modification thereof which retains gamma 1 effector functions in combination with anti CD23 variable domain sequences or antigen binding portions. Modifications include human gamma 1 constant domains which comprise the deletion substitution or addition of one or more amino acid residues. This effector function is manifested by the ability of an antibody containing such a constant domain to inhibit induced IgE production.

As discussed supra while many groups have previously reported the production of anti CD23 antibodies and the use thereof as antagonists and agonists for modulating IgE production the exact mechanism by which such antibodies modulate IgE expression in systems where IL 4 induces IgE production remains unclear. Thus it would be beneficial if the means by which such antibodies modulate IgE expression were elucidated or at least better explained as such information would be potentially useful in designing therapeutics for treatment of diseases wherein modulation of IgE production is therapeutically desirable. In particular it would be beneficial if improved antibodies specific to CD23 were obtained having improved capacity to inhibit induced IgE production as enhanced IgE levels are believed to be involved in numerous disease processes e.g. allergic conditions inflammatory conditions and autoimmune diseases. Such diseases include by way of example atopic dermatitis eczema allergic rhinitis and conjuntivitis Job s syndrome and asthma.

Toward that end the present inventors have surprisingly discovered that anti human CD23 monoclonal antibodies which contain human gamma 1 constant domains inhibit IgE production in systems where IgE production is induced by IL 4 significantly better than CD23 monoclonal antibodies of other effector types e.g. those comprising human gamma 4 constant domains or CD23 monoclonal antibodies or antibody fragments lacking effector functions altogether.

While Fc mediated effector functions are sometimes significant to the therapeutic activity of antibodies this discovery was surprising in the case of anti CD23 antibodies because the role of effector function in the IgE inhibitory activity of anti CD23 antibodies had not been previously reported. In fact previous evidence had suggested that antibody effector function was not significant to the ability of anti CD23 antibodies to inhibit induced IgE production. For example Flores Romo et al. 261 1038 1041 1993 had reported that Fabs prepared from a polyclonal anti CD23 antibody inhibited an in vivo induced IgE antigen specific response.

This discovery was made after the present inventors isolated various primate antibodies specific to CD23 having anti IgE inhibiting activity and compared these antibodies to PRIMATIZED versions with respect to their ability to inhibit IL 4 induced IgE production in vitro and in vivo.

More specifically and as described in greater detail infra five primate monoclonal antibodies which specifically bound both cellular and soluble CD23 were isolated from an Old World monkey macaque according to the methodology which is disclosed in commonly assigned application Ser. No. 08 379 072 now U.S. Pat. No. 5 658 570 which application is incorporated by reference in its entirety herein. This application described in detail a means for producing monoclonal antibodies to desired antigens desirable human antigens in Old World monkeys and their advantages in relation to antibodies of other species as therapeutics for example reduced or potentially lack of immunogenicity in humans because of the phylogenetic closeness of humans and Old World monkeys. In fact because of the phylogenetic closeness of these species it is difficult to distinguish Old World monkey immunoglobulins from human immunoglobulins by sequence comparison.

Four of these five primate monoclonal anti human CD23 antibodies were demonstrated to be capable of inhibiting IL 4 induced IgE production in an in vitro B cell assay described in detail infra and the most potent was also shown to inhibit IL 4 induced IgE in a SCID mouse animal model also described in detail infra . Based on this IgE inhibitory activity and expected low immunogenicity in humans such antibodies are potentially suitable as therapeutics for treating diseases wherein inhibition of IgE production is therapeutically desirable.

However in order to further reduce immunogenicity it was elected to PRIMATIZE two primate monoclonal antibodies a type of chimerization of antibodies according to the methodology which is disclosed in commonly assigned application Ser. No. 08 379 072 now U.S. Pat. No. 5 658 570 incorporated by reference herein. PRIMATIZATION essentially refers to the production of recombinant antibodies developed by IDEC Pharmaceuticals Corporation which comprise primate variable regions and human constant regions. PRIMATIZATION of the two primate anti human CD23 monoclonal 5E8 and 6G5 antibodies having potent IgE inhibiting activity was effected in order to eliminate any potential immnunogenicity attributable to the primate constant domains in humans.

Because of the inventors initial expectation from published literature that Fc effector function was not necessary for induced IgE inhibition human gamma 4 versions of these particular antibodies were initially produced. However quite surprisingly it was found that the gamma 4 versions produced from both of these primate monoclonal antibodies were ineffective i.e. they required significantly higher concentrations of PRIMATIZED gamma 4 antibody than the primate antibody to inhibit IL 4 induced IgE production in vitro assays.

Moreover even more surprising was the discovery that when the same two primate antibodies were then converted to human gamma 1 versions by substitution of the primate constant domains with human gamma 1 constant domains that these gamma 1 antibodies very effectively inhibited induced IgE production in vitro. Thus our results suggested that Fc effector function is apparently significant to the ability of anti human CD23 antibodies to inhibit induced IgE production. This hypothesis was confirmed when a third primate anti human CD23 monoclonal i.e. the 2C8 antibody which was shown by us to inhibit IgE production in vitro was converted to a F ab which was found to be substantially incapable of inhibiting induced IgE production in vitro. In fact this F ab was found to antagonize the suppressive effects on induced IgE blocking activity of the primate anti human CD23 monoclonal antibody 2C8.

In addition it was found that removing a glycosylation site in the heavy chain variable region of one of the antibodies 5E8 had no effect on binding of the antibody to CD23 as evidenced by obtained Kd values or on induced IgE inhibition. Thus the differences in IgE inhibition were shown to apparently not involve glycosylation differences.

The PRIMATIZED gamma 1 version of primate 6G5 was found to inhibit induced IgE expression in SCID mice while the same concentration of either the primate 6G5 or the PRIMATIZED p6G5G4p did not inhibit induced IgE expression. Therefore an antibody containing human gamma 1 constant domains was found to be even more effective in an in vivo animal model than the primate monoclonal antibody. Furthermore the inventors anticipate that anti CD23 antibodies containing human gamma 3 constant domains will be just as effective as those having gamma 1 constant domains because gamma 1 and gamma 3 constant domains have affinity for the same classes of Fc receptors.

Accordingly based on these results it has been surprisingly discovered that an active Fc region in particular that of human gamma 1 is significantly involved in the mechanism of IL 4 induced IgE inhibition by anti human CD23 monoclonal antibodies. This discovery is quite unexpected especially based on earlier reports that Fabs derived from polyclonal anti CD23 antibodies were capable of inhibiting induced IgE production and also based on the various theories as to how CD23 affects induced IgE expression.

Accordingly the present invention relates to anti human CD23 antibodies containing human gamma 1 constant domains and their use as therapeutics based on their ability to effectively inhibit IgE expression.

The skilled artisan can prepare anti human CD23 antibodies containing human gamma 1 constant domains by methods which are well known in the art for the manufacture of chimeric antibodies. Essentially such methods comprise producing anti human CD23 antibodies in a desired host or in vitro cloning a hybridoma or cell line which produces an anti human CD23 monoclonal antibody exhibiting desirable characteristics e.g. adequate CD23 binding affinity cloning the nucleic acid sequences which encode such antibody from said hybridoma or cell line e.g. by polymerase chain reaction using suitable primers isolating the variable domains contained therein recombining such variable domains with human gamma 1 constant domains and the appropriate human light chain constant domain and expressing the resultant nucleic acid sequence encoding a chimeric anti human CD23 gamma 1 immunoglobulin in a suitable expression system. Preferably the anti human CD23 antibodies of the invention will have apparent CD23 binding affinities ranging from 0.1 nM to 1000 nM more preferably at least 50 nM and most preferably at least 5 nM.

Host cells suitable for expression of recombinant immunoglobulins are well known in the art. For example recombinant antibodies may be expressed in Chinese hamster ovary CHO cells DG44 or DUXB11 or CHO cells CHO K 1 mouse myeloma cells SP2 0 or X63 Ag8.653 or NSO rat myeloma cells YB2 0 baby hamster kidney cells BHK human embryonic kidney line 293 monkey kidney cells CV1 human lung fibroblasts WI38 human cervical carcinoma cells HELA insect cells plant cells yeast or in bacteria. Further vectors suitable for expression of immunoglobulins are also well known in the art and are commercially available.

A particularly preferred vector system is the translationally impaired vector system disclosed in U.S. Ser. No. 08 147 696 now U.S. Pat. No. 5 648 267 which comprises a translationally impaired dominant selectable marker neo containing an intron into which a desired heterologous DNA is inserted. This vector system has been found to provide for very high yields of recombinant proteins e.g. immunoglobulins. However the subject anti CD23 antibodies may be produced in any vector system which is suitable for expression of functional immunoglobulins.

Also the present invention embraces human monoclonal antibodies of the gamma 1 type which are specific to human CD23. Methods for isolation of human monoclonal antibodies are also well known in the art and include in vitro methods e.g. in vitro immunization of human B cells in tissue culture and in vivo methods e.g. synthesis of human monoclonal antibodies in SCID mice. A preferred means of producing human monoclonal antibodies in SCID mice which combines in vitro priming of human spleen cells which are then introduced into SCID mice is disclosed in U.S. Ser. No. 08 488 376 incorporated by reference in its entirety herein . This method is advantageous as it provides for the reproducible recovery of monoclonal antibodies having high affinity against a desired antigen e.g. a human antigen.

Also the present invention embraces human monoclonal antibodies which compete with the primate anti human CD23 monoclonal antibodies 5E8 and 6G5 for binding to CD23.

Five primate monoclonal antibodies specific to CD23 were isolated from macaques substantially according to the methodology disclosed in Ser. No. 08 379 072 which has been incorporated by reference herein. The exact techniques utilized are described in detail below.

During purification soluble CD23 sCD23 was quantified by a three step ELISA using a murine anti CD23 antibody Binding Site catalog MC112 as a capture. The antigen was partially purified from cultures of 8866 cells maintained in suspension bioreactors using RPMI 1640 JRH Biosciences catalog 56 509 supplemented with 10 fetal bovine serum JRH Biosciences and 4 mM glutamine JRH Biosciences catalog 90114 at 37 C. Carbon dioxide was used to maintain pH 7.1. After removing cells by 0.45 m filtration phenylmethyl sulfonyl fluoride final concentration 0.2 mM Sigman Chemical Co. catalog P 7626 and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid final concentration 3 mM Sigma Chemical Co. catalog EDS were added to the supernate and the solution stored at 2 8 C. The cell free supernate was concentrated approximately 15 to 20 fold using a hollow fiber ultrafiltration cartridge A T Technology catalog UFP 10 C 9A 10 000 d MWCO or tangential flow ultrafiltration cartridge Filtron Corporation 10 000 d MWCO at ambient temperature. The concentrated supernate was sterile filtered and stored at 70 C. Thawed concentrates were de lipidated by adding SM 2 BioBeads BioRad Industries catalog 152 3920 at 5 g L and stirring overnight at 2 8 C. The resin was removed by filtration and the solution stored at 2 8 C. For some preparations of sCD23 concentrates were fractionated using ammonium sulfate 35 70 w v Fisher catalog A702 3 before or after de lipidation.

The de lipidated solution was subsequently purified using affinity chromatography at 2 8 C. The affinity matrix was prepared by covalently linking a murine anti CD23 monoclonal antibody BU38 to Sepharose using CNBr activated Sepharose 4B Sigma Chemical Co. catalog C 9142 . The BU38 antibody was purified to 90 homogeneity from ascites Binding Site catalog CUS830 using Protein A chromatography. The de lipidated solution was applied to the affinity column 1.5 5 cm equilibrated with 1 PBS Gibco BRL catalog 70013 0.32 pH 7.2 and the column washed with 1 PBS pH 7.2 containing 0.05 NP40 Sigma Chemical Co. to remove non bound protein. Soluble CD23 was eluted using 3.5 M MgCl Fisher catalog M33 500 . Fractions containing sCD23 were combined and dialyzed Baxter Spectra Por catalog D1615 1 against 1 PBS pH 7.2 at 2 8 C. After dialysis the protein solution was concentrated by centrifugation using Centriprep 10 spin filters Amicon Corporation MWCO 10 000 d and preparations stored at 70 C. The purity of sCD23 was estimated to be 70 using SDS PAGE analysis 4 20 precast gels Novex Corporation and Coomasie staining.

Cynomolgus monkeys White Sands Research Center Alamogordo New Mexico were immunized with soluble CD23 which had been purified from the supernatant of human RPMI 8866 cells B cell lymphoma Hassner and Saxon 132 2844 1984 . Each monkey was immunized every third week with 200 g soluble CD23 in 500 l PBS mixed with 167 l Temuritide adjuvant peptide Sigma St. Louis Mo. Catalog A 9519 and 333 l 3 PROVAX IDEC Pharmaceuticals Corporation . Immunization was effected intradermally intraperitoneally intramuscularly and subcutaneously. The titer of anti CD23 antibodies in the serum of the monkeys was measured by ELISA on 8866 cells and compared to a pre bleed from the same monkeys.

Monkey PRO 978 with a serum titer of fifty thousand was sacrificed and the spleen and lymph nodes were surgically removed and shipped on ice to IDEC pharmaceuticals submerged in sterile RPMI 1640 Gibco BRL Gaithersburg Md. Catalog 21870 050 supplemented with 10 fetal calf serum 2 mM L glutamine 2 mM sodium pyruvate and 50 g ml gentamicin. Immediately upon arrival the spleen was homogenized by squeezing it through a wire mesh with a glass pistil. Red blood cells were lysed in an ammonium chloride based hypotonic buffer and the remaining lymphocytes collected and washed in RPMI 1640 at least three times. Lymph nodes were homogenized similarly into a single cell suspension collected and washed at least three times in RPMI 1640.

After the last wash the cells were counted and the primate cells obtained above were then somatically fused to the mouse human heterohybridoma cell line H6K6 B5 Carroll et al. 89 61 1986 using standard techniques Boerner et al. 147 86 1991 and plated into 96 well dishes 175 dishes or 14 700 wells for the spleen and 17 dishes or 1386 wells for the lymph nodes at 300 000 cells per well.

This procedure involved the mixing of lymphocytes and the above identified fusion partner at a 2 1 ratio which cells were slowly resuspended into 50 PEG 1500 Sigma Catalog P5402 for 1 minute. These cells were then allowed to rest for 1 minute and then slowly further resuspended in excess RPMI 1640. Afterward the cells were again allowed to rest this time for 15 minutes before a light spin at 250 g. The cells were then resuspended in RMPI 1640 growth media which was supplemented with 20 Fetal Calf Serum 2 mM L Glutamine Sodium Pyruvate Non Essential Amino Acids and 50 g ml Gentamicin containing 100 M Hypoxanthine 16 M Thymidine Boehringer Mannheim Germany 623091 and 5.8 M Azaserine Sigma Catalog A 1164 HTA . HTA is a selection agent which provides the survival of successfully fused cells primate lymphocyte fused with heterohybridoma fusion partner .

Approximately 65 of the wells showed growth 10 500 wells . These wells were then screened for the presence of anti human CD23 antibody by a three step cell ELISA.

The first step of the ELISA comprised the transferral of fifty microliters of supernatant from each well to ninety six well plates which had previously been coated with 108866 cells CD23 positive cell line per well. These plates were made by first coating the plates with 50 l of aqueous solution containing twenty g ml Poly L Lysine Sigma Catalog P1399 MW 150 000 300 000 for thirty minutes at room temperature. The remaining solution was removed flicked out and the plates left to dry. Once dry fifty l of 8866 cells in PBS were transferred and spun at 600 g for five minutes. The 8866 cells were covalently bound to the plate by adding fifty l 0.5 glutaraldehyde Sigma Catalog G6257 in phosphate buffered saline PBS for 15 minutes. The glutaraldehyde was removed flicked out and the plates blocked with one hundred fifty l 100 mM glycine Sigma Catalog G 2879 in 0.1 BSA PBS. After the addition of supernatants the plates were incubated at 37 C. for one to two hours and washed seven to nine times with tap water and a goat anti human IgG antibody coupled to horse radish peroxidase HRPO Southern Biotech Birmingham Ala. Catalog 2040 05 diluted 1 2000 into 1 dry skimmed milk Vons in PBS 0.05 Tween 20 Sigma Catalog P1379 was added. The plates were incubated for forty five minutes at 37 C. and again washed seven to nine times in tap water. The presence of the HRPO was detected by a color development after the addition of a TMB reagent Kirkegaard Perry Gaithersburg Md. Catalog 50 76 02 and 50 65 02 100 l well. The reaction was stopped by adding twenty five l 4N HSO. Optical density OD was measured at 470 nM on a spectrophotometer Titertek Multiscan . The OD values greater than two times the background were scored as positive.

The second step in the ELISA was effected to confirm that the supernatants which had been scored positive in the first ELISA reacted to CD23 and not to some irrelevant antigen. This was effected by testing the supernatants on SupT1 cells ERC BioServices Corporation Rockville Md. Catalog 100 a CD23 negative human cell line using the same ELISA procedure. Supernatants that scored similarly in both tests were discarded. These results indicated that fifty six of the 10 500 wells with growth showed the presence of a primate monoclonal antibody that bound to 8866 cells in two separate screenings at different times and did not bind to SupT1 cells.

The third step of the ELISA was conducted to determine whether the supernatants identified according to the first two ELISA steps reacted with soluble CD23. In this third ELISA 96 well plates were coated at 4 C. overnight with 2 g ml BG 6 Biosource International Camarillo Calif. Catalog CT CD23 CF a mouse monoclonal antibody that binds to soluble CD23 but does not block CD23 IgE binding contained in a 50 mM bicarbonate buffer pH 9.3. After removing the coating buffer fifty l of semi purified soluble CD23 at a predetermined dilution in PBS were added to the plate and incubated for two hours at room temperature. After washing the plate with tap water seven to nine times 50 l supernatants from selected wells were added. After washing the plate in tap water seven to nine times 50 l rabbit anti human IgG mouse adsorbed HRPO Southern Biotech Catalog 6145 05 diluted 1 4000 in 1 dry skimmed milk in PBS with 0.05 Tween 20 were added incubated for two hours at 37 C. washed seven to nine times in tap water and developed with TMB as described above. Wells with OD s greater than two times the background were again scored as positive.

Twenty one of the fifty six wells that showed binding to 8866 cells also bound to sCD23 in the ELISA. These wells were expanded and subcloned at least twice by plating out cells at one cell per three wells. After approximately three months five stable hybridomas producing primate monoclonal antibodies to CD23 were obtained.

Essentially antibodies are purified by centrifugation of the culture supernatant to remove cells and debris. The resultant centrifuged samples are then filtered through a 0.2 m filter. A protein A sepharose Fast flow column is then prepared and equilibrated using PBS pH 7.4 . The supernatant is then loaded on the column at an appropriate flow rate 2 ml min . After loading the wash column is washed with 10 column volume of PBS pH 7.4 . The antibody is then eluted from the column with elution buffer 0.2 M acetic acid 0.1 M glycine pH 3.5 at 1 ml min flow rate. One milliliter fractions tube 2.0 M Tris Hcl pH 10.0 including 100 l of Tris are then collected. Afterward spectrophotometer readings are taken at 280 nm. The resultant fractions with high absorbance at 280 nm containing the antibody are then collected and dialyzed against PBS overnight. The product is then sterilized by filtration through 0.22 m membrane and stored at 20 C.

Four of these five primate anti human CD23 monoclonal antibodies 1H6 2C8 5E8 and 6G5 were demonstrated to inhibit IgE production in an in vitro assay which measures IgE production by IL4 hydrocortisone induced peripheral blood mononuclear cell PBMC cultures. These results are shown in . The assay conditions are described below. The fifth primate monoclonal anti human CD23 antibody B3B11 was inactive in this assay.

As discussed supra the subject primate antibodies and PRIMATIZED forms thereof were assessed for their ability to inhibit IgE production in an in vitro assay which measured the effect of such antibodies on IgE production by IL 4 stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Forty eight well flat bottom cluster plates Costar Catalog 3548 1.5 million PBMCs per ml per well 48 well plate 

Buffy coat cells 1 4 are diluted using HBSS at room temperature. These cells are derived from whole blood after an overnight incubation at room temperature to resolve and separate the plasma components clotted platelets and fibrin and buffy coat cells.

Thirty microliters of diluted buffy coat are then overlayed onto fifteen microliters of Histopaque in fifty ml conical tubes. These tubes are then centrifuged for twenty minutes at 1700 rpm at room temperature without brakes IEC 216 swinging bucket rotor . The white PBMC layer is then collected using a sterile pipette taking care not to disturb the other layers. The PBMCs peripheral blood mononuclear cells are the buffy coat cells which have been sedimented by centrifugation partially through a HISTOPAQUE density gradient to form a distinctly visible white layer of cells. These cells are collected with a pipette rinsed with HBSS and then counted using a hemocytometer. Typically 300 to 600 million PBMCs can be recovered from a single 450 ml buffy coat package.

The collected PBMCs are then washed three times in 1 FBS HBSS. The washed cells are collected by centrifugation for seven minutes at 1300 rpm at 7 C.

The number of cells collected is then determined using a hemocytometer. The cell concentration is adjusted to about three million cells per milliliter of HB101 growth medium.

Approximately about 1.5 million cells 0.5 ml are then added to each well of a 48 well plate. In general five replicate samples are prepared for each experiment. The perimeter wells of each plate are not used for cell samples. Accordingly these wells are filled e.g. using 0.5 ml of 0.05 BathClear DPBS.

0.5 ml HB101 growth medium containing desired amounts of IL 4 and Mab is then added to the wells. The IL 4 used is recombinant DNA generated human interleukin 4. The Mab used in the assay is a murine primate or PRIMATIZED antibody. Typically IL 4 is added at a final concentrate of 100 U ml and Mab is added at a final concentrate ranging from 0.01 to 3 g ml.

The cells are then incubated for nine to eleven days at 37 C. in a moist incubator set at 5 CO. After incubation the supernatant fluids are collected and the IgE content is measured.

Each well of a microtiter plate is coated using 100 l of a coating buffer containing 2 g ml goat anti human IgE.

After incubation each well in the plate is then washed three times with 200 l of Tween 20 PBS. After washing the non specific binding sites are blocked with 200 l blocking buffer well for 1 hour at 37 C.

One hundred l of samples or standards are then added to each well which wells are then incubated overnight at 4 C. After incubation the samples are tested with or without dilution. A standard concentration curve is prepared for each plate using several dilutions of IgE ranging from 0.1 to 50 ng ml.

One hundred l of horseradish peroxidase HRP labeled goat anti human IgE diluted 1 10 000 in dilution buffer is then added to each drained well. The plate is then incubated for 4 hours at 37 C.

One hundred l of 3 3 5 5 tetramethylbenzidine working substrate solution is then added to each well. The plate is then incubated for twenty five minutes in the dark at room temperature. After incubation the developing reaction is stopped by the addition of fifty l of 4 M sulfuric acid.

The absorbency is then read concurrently at 450 and 540 nm. The 540 nm absorbency values are subtracted as background.

IODO BEADS are washed with 100 mN Phosphate Buffer pH 7.4 twice using 1 mL of buffer per 2 beads. The beads are then dried on filter paper.

The two beads are then added to 100 l I solution containing about 1 mCi of I diluted with 200 l of the phosphate buffer and left at room temperature for 5 minutes.

The antibody 50 gs is added to the preloaded beads. The reaction time for maximal incorporation of radioactivity is 6 minutes.

Gel filtration is then performed to remove excess I or unincorporated I from the radiolabeled antibody solution. This is effected by passing the radiolabeled antibody over a column made up of 1.5 mL Sephadex G25 1.5 mL DEAE Sephadex A25 and 0.5 mL Amberlite. The radiolabeled antibody is eluted off in a total volume of 5 mL at a concentration of about 10 g mL. Elution Buffer 1 PBS containing 10 Gelatin 2 Sodium Azide and 1 BSA .

The specific activity of the 10 g mL radiolabeled solution is determined by taking a 1 l sample and running the sample on a gamma counter.

The antigen coated plate is blocked to eliminate non specific binding e.g. with mB7.1 CHO and the background plate i.e. Untransfected CHO for one hour at room temperature with 200 l well of blocking buffer Blocking Buffer 1 PBS containing 10 Gelatin 2 Sodium Azide 1 BSA and 10 FBS .

The 10 g mL radiolabeled antibody 50 ls is then titrated by two fold serial dilutions across the plate s using a multichannel pipette. Incubate for one hour at room temperature.

The plate s are again washed about 6 7 times with 200 l well of wash buffer Wash Buffer 1 PBS containing 10 Gelatin and 2 Sodium Azide .

The optimal radiolabeled antibody concentration is the concentration in which the difference between the specific counts and background counts is at a maximum.

The 10 g mL radiolabeled solution is diluted to the optimal concentration determined in the Direct Binding experiment.

The antigen coated plate and the background plate are blocked for one hour at room temperature with 200 l well of blocking buffer.

The cold no radiolabel antibody is then titrated by two fold dilutions in a separate U bottom microtitre plate. The starting concentration of the cold antibody should be at least 100 times greater than that of the optimal radiolabeled antibody concentration.

One hundred l well of the mixed solution are then transferred to the corresponding wells of the antigen coated plate and incubated for one hour at room temperature.

These calculations are determined by calculating the specific counts in each well tested by subtracting the background counts from the counts bound to the antigen coated plate.

Four of the five isolated primate anti human CD23 monoclonal antibodies B3B11 2C8 5E8 and 6G5 were found to inhibit IgE production in the above identified in vitro assay which measures IgE production by IL4 hydrocortisone induced peripheral blood mononuclear cell PBMC cultures. These results are shown in . The fifth primate monoclonal anti human CD23 antibody 3G12 was inactive in this assay.

Two of the four primate monoclonal anti human CD23 antibodies B3B11 and 2C8 found to be active in this in vitro assay were found to compete with a commercially available mouse anti human CD23 antibody MHM6 CAKO A S Glostrup Denmark Catalog M763 . top panel. However in repeated assays these antibodies were not as potent IgE inhibitors as MHM6 data not shown . By contrast the other primate anti CD23 monoclonal antibodies 5E8 and 6G5 were found to compete with each other and did not complete with MHM6. FIG. middle and bottom panels. Moreover the primate anti human CD23 monoclonal antibody 5E8 was found to be a potent inhibitor of IL 4 induced IgE in the in vitro assay. See 

A modified hu PBMC SCID mouse model was also developed to detect the effect of the subject antibodies on induced human IgE production in vivo. PBMCs obtained from two donors were cultured with IL 4 in vitro for two days. PBMCs were pooled and used to reconstitute groups of C.B. 17 SCID mice with and without antibodies. Mice were bled on day 14 21 28 and 35 and serum IgG and IgE levels were determined by ELISA. This in vivo model was used to assay primate and two different versions of PRIMATIZED antibodies to CD23 for their ability to inhibit the production of IgE.

A modified SCID mouse model was used because it is known that severe combined immunodeficiency scid scid SCID mice C.B. 17 Bosma et al. 301 527 1983 reconstituted with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells hu PBMC SCID can produce significant quantities of human immunoglobulins Ig Moiser et al. 335 256 1988 Moiser et al. 10 185 1990 Abedi et al. 22 823 1992 and Mazingue et al. 21 1763 1991 . The predominant isotype of human immunoglobulin Ig produced in hu PBMC SCID mice is IgG. Generally IgM IgA and IgE isotypes are found in very low or non detectable levels except in cases where PBMC is obtained from donors with certain autoimmune or allergic disease conditions. It has also been reported that manipulation of hu PBMC SCID mouse model with certain cytokines may be provided for the generation of significant levels of non IgG isotypes including IgE Kilchherr et al. 151 241 1993 Spiegelberg et al. 93 711 1994 and Carballido et al. 155 4162 1995 . The hu PBMC SCIDs has been also used to generate antigen specific Ig provided the donor has been primed for the antigen in vivo.

Therefore the aim of the present inventors was focused on establishing a suitable human IgE producing hu PBMC SCID mouse model that could be used to test the efficacy of therapeutic for treatment of IgE related diseases such as allergic disorders including the subject anti CD23 antibodies.

SCID mice C.B 17 scid scid immunodeficient mice were obtained from Taconic C.B. 17 IcrTac scidfDF and maintained in IDEC Pharmaceuticals animal facility. Mice were housed in sterilized microbarrier units with sterilized bedding. Animal studies were performed in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals specified by the Committee on Care of Laboratory Animal Resources Commission on Life Science National Research Council Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals DHHS Publ. No. NIH 86 23 Bethesda Md. NIH 1985 .

Human PBMC PBMCs were isolated from buffy coats obtained from a blood bank by centrifugation through Ficoll Hypaque Histopaque 1077 as recommended by the manufacturer Sigma Diagnostics Catalog 1077 1 . Lymphocyte preparation at the interface of the gradient were harvested and washed three times in Hanks Balanced Salt Solution HBSS Bio Whittaker Catalog 10 527F . For each experiment PBMCs were obtained from two separate donors and cultured separately in vitro. PBMCs were resuspended at 1 3 10cells ml concentration in HB Basal medium plus 1 HB101 lyophilized supplement Irvine Scientific Catalog T000 T151 containing 5 FCS plus 1000 IU ml of IL 4 Genzyme Inc. Catalog 2181 01 and incubated for 48 hours at 37 C. with 5 CO. After incubation the cells from different buffy coats were harvested pooled and used to reconstitute SCID mice.

Groups of mice four to five per group were injected with fifty sixty 10lymphocytes in 200 300 l volume of HBSS intraperitoneally i.p. on day zero. For the groups that received anti CD23 antibody on day zero PBMCs were mixed with anti CD23 antibody 200 to 400 g mouse before i.p. injection and the second injection was given on day seven. All mice received 5000 IU per mouse of IL 4 i.p. between day zero to day five. A group which was not injected with antibody served as the control group. Mice were bled from a retro orbital vein and the serum was analyzed for IgG and IgE on days fourteen twenty one twenty eight and thirty five by ELISA.

In order to clone primate immunoglobulin variable domains Poly A RNA was separately isolated from approximately 2 10cells from the primate heterohybridomas secreting the anti human CD23 monoclonal antibodies 6G5 and 5E8 by using the Micro FastTrack mRNA isolation Kit Invitrogen Catalog K1520 02 according to methods set forth by the manufacturer.

The first strand of cDNA was synthesized from the poly A RNA by using the cDNA Cycle Kit Invitrogen Catalog L1310 01 according to conventional methods.

The light and heavy chain variable regions of 6G5 and 5E8 were then isolated by PCR from cDNA using PCR primers that were selected based upon different consensus families of human immunoglobulins. 5 primers were selected which corresponded to the beginning of the leader sequences of the light and heavy variable region and 3 primers were selected which corresponded to the J region The specific primers used to PCR amplify the lambda light chain variable domain of 6G5 the kappa light chain variable domains of 5E8 and the heavy chain variable domains of 6G5 and 5E8 are set forth in Tables 1 3 . PCR was performed according to standard methods 30 cycles with 1 minute at 94 C. 1.5 minutes at 54 C. and 2 minutes at 72 C. in a Hot start 100 tube Gibco BRL Catalog 10332 013 . PCR was set up in 50 l reactions containing 5 l out of 80 l cDNA from 2 10cells as a template 2 l of 5 nM dNTP 1 l of Taq polymerase 5 l of Taq polymerase buffer 2 l of the 5 primer 25 pmoles l 2 l of the 3 primer 25 pmoles l and 36 l of water. Taq polymerase and buffer were obtained from Stratagene Catalog 600131 dNTP from Boehringer Mannheim Catalog 1581295. 

The first PCR amplification of the light chain variable region from the cDNA of primate monoclonal antibody 6G5 showed bands which were consistent in situ with the lambda light chain variable region. These bands appeared in all reactions using the three different early leader sequence primers. See Tables 1 3. However the PCR product obtained using primer 745 Family 2 was considered more specific because of the relatively greater intensity of the PCR product band.

This PCR product was isolated using a Qiaquick Gel Extraction Kit Qiagen Catalog 28704 . The purified PCR fragment was digested with Bgl II and Avr II restriction endonucleases and ligated into the mammalian expression vector N5LG1 which was digested with the same restriction endonucleases. Twenty microliters of the ligation mixture containing the purified PCR product from one fifty microliter PCR reaction 100 mg N5LG1 vector two microliters of 10 ligation buffer NEB Catalog 202S and two microliters of T4 ligase NEB Catalog 202S were then incubated at 14 C. overnight.

The mammalian expression vector N5LG1 contains genetic sequences e.g. regulatory sequences coding sequences which provide for the expression of four separate proteins in a mammalian cell. They are 

 i a partial immunoglobulin light chain with the human lambda light chain constant region and unique restriction endonuclease sites for inserting light chain variable domains 

 ii a partial immunoglobulin heavy chain with the and human gamma 1 chain constant region coding sequences and unique restriction endonuclease sites for inserting heavy chain variable domains 

 iii a neomycin phosphotransferase gene used to select for cells that have incorporated the plasmid and are resistant to the antibiotic Geneticin Gibco BRL Catalog 10131 1209 and

 iv a murine dihydrofolate reductase gene DHFR which provides for the selection and genomic amplification when cells are cultured in the presence of methotrexate MTX Sigma Catalog A 6770 Reff et al. 83 433 445 1994 .

After ligation the mixture was digested using Pme I restriction endonuclease which digests the parent N5LG1 plasmid but not the N5LG1 plasmid which has been ligated to the light variable domain of 6G5. After digestion the mixture was transformed into XL1 Blue competent cells Stratagene Catalog 200249 as follows.

One hundred microliters of competent cells were mixed with 10 l of the above ligation mixture set on ice for 30 minutes then heated at 45 C. for 30 seconds. This mixture was placed on ice for 2 minutes and 900 l of SOC prewarmed to room temperature was then added. SOC is LB broth Gibco BRL Catalog 10855 013 plus 0.02 M MgCl 0.02 M MgSOand 0.02 M D glucose. After incubation at 37 C. for an hour the mixture was centrifuged at 4000 g for a minute and 800 l of supernatant discarded. The rest of the mixture was plated onto a LB agar Gibco BRL Catalog 12945 044 dish containing 50 g ml ampicillin Amp Gibco BRL Catalog 13075 015 . Plasmid DNA was isolated from individual colonies of that grew on the Amp plate by using the Wizard Miniprep DNA purification system Promega Catalog A7510 .

The isolated plasmid DNA was then characterized by digestion with Bgl II and Avr II followed by agarose gel electrophoresis. An ethidium stained DNA band of 400 bp was indicative of a potential successful cloning of a light chain variable domain.

To confirm this was an immunoglobulin light chain variable domain sequencing was done using the Sequenase 7 Deaza dGTP DNA Sequencing Kit USB catalog 70990 with sequencing primers 607 and GE 108. See Sequencing Primers in Table 4. 

A second independent PCR amplification of the light chain from cDNA of primate monoclonal antibody 6G5 was effected using a 5 primer early leader sequence of lambda light chain family 2 primer 745 SEQ ID NO 15 and the 3 J region primer 926 SEQ ID NO 17 . See Primers for PCR of the lambda light chain variable domain of 6G5 in Tables 1 3 SEQ ID NOs 9 25 . The isolated PCR product see technique above was cloned into TA vector by using the Original TA Cloning Kit Invitrogen Catalog K2000 01 . The isolated miniprep DNA see technique above was examined under agarose gel electrophoresis after digestion with EcoR I restriction endonuclease. The resultant PCR product comprised in the TA vector was then sequenced as described previously using Sp6 SEQ ID NO 26 and M13 40 SEQ ID NO 27 forward primers See Sequencing primers in Table 4 SEQ ID NOs 26 35 . The resultant light chain sequence was identical to that of light chain from the first PCR. This entire sequence of the light chain variable domain of primate monoclonal anti human CD23 antibody 6G5 is presented below SEQ ID NOs 1 2 .

The first PCR amplification of the heavy chain variable domain from cDNA of primate monoclonal antibody 6G5 was performer by using the set of early leader sequence primers described supra and the 3 J region primer GE244 SEQ ID NO 23 . These primers are in Tables 1 3 SEQ ID NOs 9 25 infra. This reaction resulted in a 350 base PCR product. This 350 base product purified as described supra was digested with Nhe I and Sal I and ligated into N5LGl and digested with the same endonucleases in the first PCR amplification. The resultant ligation mixture was transformed into host cells using the same techniques for cloning the light chain. Plasmid N5LG1 containing the 350 base PCR product was then isolated and sequenced using sequencing primers 266 SEQ ID NO 32 and 268 SEQ ID NO 33 . These Sequencing primers are set forth in Table 4 SEQ ID NOs 26 35 . 

Sequencing revealed that the PCR product contained only part of the heavy variable domain and comprised a deletion in its amino terminus Sequence began at framework 2 codon 36 .

A second independent PCR reaction was conducted to amplify and isolate the heavy chain variable domain of primate monoclonal antibody 6G5 using a 5 early leader sequence primer for family 1 MB1503 SEQ ID NO 18 and a 3 J region primer GE244 SEQ ID NO 23 . These primers are also contained in Tables 1 3 SEQ ID NOs 9 25 The resultant PCR product was then cloned into the NSLG1 using the same techniques described supra. Its sequence was found to be identical to the first PCR product.

Therefore in order to clone the whole heavy variable domain of 6G5 including the missing 5 terminus a new longer 3 primer MB1533 SEQ ID NO 25 which included the CDR3 and framework 4 regions of the 6G5 heavy variable chain was then used in a third independent PCR reaction with the family 1 5 primer MB1503 SEQ ID NO 18 . These primers are also contained in Tables 1 3 SEQ ID NOs 9 25 . 

After PCR a larger 420 base PCR product was observed on the agarose gel. This PCR product was isolated as described previously and cloned into a TA vector. The resultant PCR product contained in the TA vector was then sequenced. Sequencing revealed that this DNA contained the whole heavy variable domain and that the 3 part was identical to that of previously cloned partial heavy chain variable domain from the first two PCR reactions.

A fourth independent PCR was performed using the same primers as the third PCR amplification. This resulted in a PCR product which was isolated and cloned into the TA vector as described previously. The sequence of the fourth independent PCR product was found to be identical to that obtained in the third PCR amplification. This sequence which comprises the heavy chain variable domain of primate monoclonal anti human CD23 antibody 6G5 is presented below

In order to insert the cloned heavy chain variable domains of 6G5 into a mammalian expression vector the heavy chain variable domain in the TA vector obtained in the 3rd independent PCR was digested with Nhe I and Sal I and cloned into the N5LG1 vector which was digested with the same restriction enzymes and which vector already contains the light chain variable domain. The resultant mammalian expression vector was named N5LG1 6G5.

To construct the N5LG4P 6G5 vector both the light and heavy chain variable domains were isolated from N5LG1 6G5 by digestion of Bgl II and Avr II and Nhe I and Sal I respectively. The mammalian expression vector N5LG4P vector is identical to the N5LG1 vector described above except the human gamma 1 was replaced with a human gamma 4 constant region containing a mutation of a serine to a proline in the hinge region to increase stability of the immunoglobulin and improve pharmacokinetics in vivo P mutation . The light chain variable domain was cloned in the plasmid first and the heavy chain variable domain was cloned into the vector containing the light chain variable domain using techniques previously described. This mammalian expression vector was named N5LG4P 6G5.

The first PCR reaction of the light chain variable domain from FEE cDNA was carried out using a set of kappa early leader sequence primers and the 3 J region primer GE204 SEQ ID NO 13 . See primers for PCR of the kappa light chain variable domain of 5E8 in Tables 1 3 SEQ ID NOs 9 25 . A 420 base PCR product was obtained. The isolated 420 base PCR product was digested with Bgl II and BsiW I restriction endonucleases cloned into the mammalian expression vector N5KG4P and sequenced using GE108 SEQ ID NO 29 and 377 SEQ ID NO 30 primers which are contained in Table 4 SEQ ID NOs 26 35 The mammalian expression vector N5KG4P is identical to the vector N5LG4P except it contains the human kappa light chain constant region in place of the human lambda light chain constant region. Sequencing of this 420 polynucleotide DNA revealed that it contains the entire kappa light chain variable domain.

A second independent PCR of the light chain variable region was performed using the 5 family 1 primer GE201 SEQ ID NO 9 and the 3 primer GE204 SEQ ID NO 13 . See primers for PCR of the kappa light chain variable domain of 5E8 in Tables 1 3 SEQ ID NOs 9 25 . The isolated PCR product was cloned into the TA vector using methods previously described and sequenced using Sp6 SEQ ID NO 26 and T7 promoter SEQ ID NOs 28 primers. Sequencing revealed that this PCR product was identical to that obtained from the first PCR. The entire sequence of the light chain variable domain of primate monoclonal anti human CD23 antibody 5E8 is presented below SEQ ID NOs 5 6 .

The first PCR of the heavy chain variable domain of 5E8 was performed using a set of 5 early leader heavy chain sequence primers and the 3 primer GE210 SEQ ID NO 24 . See primers for PCR of the heavy chain variable domain of 6G5 and 5E8 in Table 1 SEQ ID NOs 9 13 . A 420 base PCR product appeared in the family 3 primer reaction. The PCR product was purified and then digested with Nhe I and Sal I and cloned into the mammalian expression vector N5KG4P vector as described previously . The PCR product was sequenced using the 268 SEQ ID NO 33 and 928 SEQ ID NO 35 primers. See sequencing primers in Table 4 SEQ ID NOs 26 35 . 

A second independent PCR of the heavy chain variable domain of 5E8 was performed using the family 3 5 primer GE207 SEQ ID NO 20 and the 3 primer GE210 SEQ ID NO 24 . See primers for PCR of the heavy chain variable domain of 6G5 and 5E8 in Tables 1 3 SEQ ID NOs 9 25 . The isolated PCR product was cloned into a TA vector using the same techniques previously described and sequenced by using Sp6 SEQ ID NO 26 and T7 SEQ ID NO 28 primers. Sequencing revealed that the TAC at codon 91 had been changed into TGC.

In order to determine the appropriate codon at 91 a third independent PCR was performed using the same primers as the second PCR see above . The PCR product was again cloned into a TA vector and sequenced using Sp6 SEQ ID NO 26 and T7 SEQ ID NO 28 primers. The sequence was found to be identical to the heavy chain variable sequence obtained in the first PCR. Therefore the TGC at position 91 in the second independent PCR product is apparently the result of an error introduced during PCR. This entire sequence of the heavy chain variable domain of primate monoclonal anti human CD23 antibody 6G5 is presented below SEQ ID NOs 7 8 .

The heavy variable domain in N5KG4P was digested with Nhe I and Sal I purified and cloned into N5KG4P which contains the light chain variable domain of 5E8. This plasmid was then digested with the restriction endonucleases as previously described. This resulted in a vector containing both the light and heavy variable domain of 5E8. This vector was named N5KG4P 5E8. The heavy and light variable domains of N5KG4P 5E8 were then both inserted into the mammalian expression vector N5KG1 to create the N5KG1 5E8 vector.

4 Alteration of an Amino Acid in the Heavy Chain Variable Region of Primate Monoclonal Antibody 5E8 by Site Specific Mutagenesis and Construction of Mammalian Expression Vectors

Based upon the sequence of the 5E8 heavy variable domain there is a potential glycosylation site of the immununoglobulin at asparagine codon 75 numbering according to Kabat as shown above which corresponds to position 78 of SEO ID NO 8 . This potential glycosylation sire corresponds to a conserved asparagine linked glycosylation motif having the following tripeptide sequence Asn Any amino acid except proline Serine or threonine . Therefore a glycosylation mutant of 5E8 which would be unable to be glycosylated at this position because of modification of this glycosylation motif was generated by replacing the asparagine codon 75 with a lysine which is found in many human immunoglobulins at this position . Site specific mutagenesis was effected by the following methods.

A first PCR was done using N5KG4P 5E8 as a template and a 3 primer corresponding to codon 71 to 79 and which contains a mutation at codon 75 AAC changed to AAG Primer MB1654 SEQ ID NO 39 and a 5 primer at the beginning of the leader sequence Primer MB1650 SEQ ID NO 36 . See PCR Primers Used for the Generation of a Glycosylation Mutant of the Heavy Chain Variable Region 5E8 set forth in Table 5 SEQ ID NOs 36 39 .

A second PCR was performed on the same template by using a 5 primer corresponding to codon 71 to 79 containing the same mutation Primer MB1653 SEQ ID NO 38 and a 3 primer from the end of framework 4 Primer MB1651 SEQ ID NO 37 See PCR Primers Used for the Generation of a Glycosylation Mutant of the Heavy Chain Variable Region of 5E8 in Table 5 SEQ. ID NOs 36 39 . 

These two PCR products were isolated and mixed in equal molar ratios. A third independent PCR was then carried out by using the mixture of the first and second PCP products as a template with a 5 primer used in the first PCR MB1650 SEQ ID NO 36 and a 3 primer used in the second PCR MP 1651 SEQ ID NO 37 See PCP Primers Used for the Generation of a Glycosylation Mutant of the Heavy Chain Variable Region in Table 5 SEQ ID NOs 36 39 . The PCR product obtained in third PCR was found to contain the heavy variable domain coding region of 5E8 wherein the asparagine 75 had been changed to lysine.

The third PCR product was purified digested with restriction endonucleases Sal I and Nhe I and cloned into the N5KG4P containing the light variable domain only. The PCR product was sequenced to confirm that it comprised the mutant heavy variable domain. This mammalian expression plasmid was named N5KG4P 5E8N .

To construct of N5KG1 5E8N both light and heavy variable domains from N5KG4P 5E8N were digested with Bgl II and BsiW I and Nhe I and Sal I respectively. The light variable domain was cloned first and then the heavy variable domain was inserted into the mammalian expression plasmid N5KG1 to create the plasmid N5KG1 5E8N .

A large scale plasmid DNA was purified using the WIZARD Maxipreps DNA Purification System Promega Catalog A7421 .

The purified DNA was digested with Ssp I and BspLU11 I precipitated with ethanol once and resuspended in sterile TE.

Purified endonuclease restricted plasmid DNA was then introduced into Chinese hamster ovary CHO dihydrofolate reductase minus DG44 cells using electroporation. The electroporation technique used is described below.

Approximately 1.6 10CHO cells were spun in an appropriate size sterile Corning tube for one minute at 1000 RPM. The media was removed and the cells were washed in fifteen milliliters of sterile ice cold SBS sterile sucrose buffered solution is 272 mM sucrose 7 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4 1 mM MgCl and spun for 5 minutes at 1000 RPM. The SBS was removed and cells were suspended using fresh ice cold sterile SBS at a cell concentration of 1 10cells were per ml and left on ice for 15 minutes. The BTX 600 electroporator was turned on and preset at 230 volts with the maximum voltage knobs being set at 500 volts capacitance resistance. The capacitance was set at 400 microfaradays and the resistance was set at 13 ohms setting R1 .

Plasmid DNA 4 g DNA or 2 g DNA and 0.4 ml of cells 4 10cells were then placed in BTX 0.4 ml cuvettes BTX Catalog 620 . The cells were shocked by placing the cuvette into the BTX 600 stand and pressing the automatic charge pulse button. Approximately 20 separate electroporations were performed with each mammalian expression plasmid.

After shocking the cuvettes were left at ambient temperature for fifteen minutes. The cells and DNA were from each cuvette were resuspended in 20 ml of CHO SSFMII containing no hypoxanthine or thymidine Gibco BRL Catalog 31033 012 to which HT supplement 100 supplement is 10 mM sodium hypoxanthine 1.6 mM thymidine Gibco BRL Catalog 11067 014 had been added. The cells from a single electroporated cuvette were then plated into a 96 well plates 200 l well and placed into a 37 C. COincubator. Selection was started two or three days later by changing the media to the above media with the addition of 400 mg ml of Geneticin G418 Gibco BRL Catalog 10131 019 . The cells were grown at 37 C. and the cell media were changed every 3 5 days. After sixteen days G418 resistant clones appeared in the wells and the supernatant was assayed for antibody expression by ELISA. The highest expressing clones were then expanded individually. Monoclonal antibodies were purified as described below.

Plates Immulon 2 Dynatech Laboratories Inc. Catalog 011 010 3455 are coated overnight at 4 C. with 200 ng unlabeled goat anti human IgG antibody at 100 l well. This is effected using twenty milliliters of unlabeled goat anti human IgG 10 mls Coating Buffer plate Boehringer Mannheim Ab Catalog 605 400 . 1 500 dilution of 1 mg ml stock. The coating buffer is then removed from the plates and dried using a paper towel. One hundred microliters of a dilution buffer well is then added.

Antibody solutions and standards 100 ng ml 2.5 ng ml are then added in duplicate at 100 l well directly to the 100 ml dilution buffer. The antibody solutions and standards are contained in dilution buffer. The resultant solutions are then incubated for at least 1 hour at 37 C.

After incubation the contents of each plate are removed and the plates are washed with tap water five times. The plates are then dried on a paper towel.

After drying of the plates a second antibody is then added at 100 l well. This second antibody is either goat anti human Kappa HRPO added at 1 10 000 dilution or 1 l Ab 10 mls dilution buffer plate available from Southern Biotechnology Associates Inc. Catalog 2060 05 or a goat anti human Lambda HRPO used at 1 20 000 dilution or 1 l Ab 20 mls dilution buffer 2 plates available from Southern Biotechnology Associates Inc. Catalog 2070 05 .

The antibody and contents of the plate are allowed to incubate for one hour at 37 C. After incubation the contents of each plate are removed. The plates are again washed five time with tap water and the washed plates are dried. To the dried plates is then added HRPO substrate TMB Microwell two component in an amount of 100 l well. Five milliliters of TMB Peroxidase Substrate five milliliters of Peroxidase Solution B plate Kirdgaard and Perry Labs TMB Microwell two component reagents Catalog 50 76 00 .

The reaction is stopped by the addition of one hundred microliters of 2M HSOto each well when the weakest standard 2.5 ng ml is visible over background. The optical density of wells in plates is then read using a plate reader e.g. Molecular Devices Emax precision microplate reader set at wavelength OD 450 and OPT2 OD 540 .

Appropriate dilution of stock AB sterile filtered in normal saline protein determination by OD to give 1 mg ml

The culture supernatant is centrifuged to remove cells and debris. The centrifuge is then filtered through a 0.2 m filter. A protein A sepharose Fast flow column recombinant protein A Sepharose Fast floe Pharmacia Biotech Catalog 71 5.000 09 is then prepared and equilibrated using PBS pH 7.4 .

The supernatant is loaded on the column at an appropriate flow rate e.g. 2 ml min . After loading the column is washed with 10 column volume of PBS pH 7.4 . The antibody is eluted from the column using an elution buffer 0.2M acetic acid 0.1 M glycine pH 3.5 at 1 ml min flow rate. One milliliter fractions tube including 100 l of Tris are then collected. A spectrophotometer absorbance reading is then taken at 280 nm. The antibody fractions are then collected and dialyzed against PBS pH 7.9 overnight. The dialysate is then sterilized by filtration through a 0.22 m membrane and stored at 20 C.

The PRIMATIZED human gamma 4 anti human CD23 antibodies which are described supra were purified and assayed for induced IgE inhibitory activity in vitro. These results are contained in . This was effected using the in vitro IL 4 IgE assay described supra.

These assay results surprisingly indicated that both human gamma 4 anti human CD23 antibodies were not as active as the corresponding primate anti human CD23 antibodies i.e. they did not significantly inhibit induced IgE production in vitro.

However because primate 5E8 and p5E8G4P have a potential asparagine linked glycosylation site in the heavy chain variable region the effects of glycosylation at this site were investigated. It was found that both these antibodies contain N linked oligosaccharides at this site. Data not shown. Therefore in order to prevent glycosylation the asparagine in the glycosylation site was changed to a lysine in order to eliminate carbohydrate addition. This mutated antibody was named p5E8G4PN . Assay results demonstrated that this antibody behaved identically to p5E8G4P in the IL 4 IgE assay see and also exhibited an identical apparent affinity Kd for human CD23. See . Therefore these results indicated that the difference in IgE inhibition observed from the 5E8 gamma 4 PRIMATIZED antibody in comparison to primate 5E8 antibody was not attributable to glycosylation differences.

The three primate antibodies p5E8G4P p5E8G4PN and p6G5G4P were then expressed as human gamma 1 versions using substantially the same methodology. All three human gamma 1 anti human CD23 antibodies respectively designated p5E8G1 p5E8G1N and p6G5G1 were found to be active in the in vitro IL 4 IgE assay .

p5E8G1 was found to be statistically more suppressive than p5E8G4P at a concentration of 0.3 g ml P T t one tail 0.0055 and at 3 g ml p T

Similarly p6G5G1 completely inhibited induced IgE production at 3 mg ml while p6G5G4P did not. These results are in .

Thus these results suggested that an active Fc region in particular that of human gamma 1 is significant for induced IgE inhibition by anti human CD23 antibodies.

To confirm our hypothesis as to the involvement of the Fc effector portion in IgE inhibition of anti human CD23 antibodies a third primate antibody designated 2C8 also shown to inhibit IgE in vitro was converted to a F ab . IgE inhibitory activity was determined using the same IL 4 IgE assay described previously.

0.25 milliliters of the 50 slurry of Immobilized Pepsin is added to a 17 100 mm test tube 0.125 ml of gel . Four milliliters of digestion buffer are then added. The pepsin is then separated from the buffer using the serum separator. The buffer is then discarded and the wash procedure repeated using another four milliliters of buffer. The immobilized pepsin is then resuspended in 0.5 ml of digestion buffer.

Protein A AffinityPak columns and ImmunoPure Binding and Elution buffers are brought to room temperature.

2C8 F ab fragments are prepared by methods well known in the antibody art. The inventors elected to use a commercially available kit ImmunoPure F ab Preparation Kit Pierce Catalog 44888 using the manufacturer s protocols.

Ten milligrams of lyophilized 2C8 antibody were dissolved in one milliliter of a digestion buffer 20 mM sodium acetate buffer pH 4.5 . One milliliter of the antibody containing sample was than added to a tube containing immobilized pepsin.

The antibody and immobilized pepsin were then incubated for four hours in a high speed shaker water bath at 37 C. at high speed taking care to maintain the mixing constant during the incubation.

The resultant solubilized F ab and Fc fragments and the undigested IgGs were then recovered from the immobilized. pepsin gel using a serum separator. The crude digest is then decanted into a clean tube.

In order to enhance recovery of F ab fragments the immobilized pepsin desirably is then washed with 1.5 of milliliters of the ImmunoPure IgG binding buffer. The wash is then added to the crude digest.

The antibody fragments were then recovered using a protein A column. This is effected by opening an immobilized protein A column. Care is taken to avoid air bubbles from being drawn into the gel. The storage solution which contains 0.02 sodium azide is discarded.

The immobilized protein A column was then equilibrated using twelve milliliters of binding buffer contained in ImmunoPure Preparation Kit . The column was then transferred to a 17 100 mn test tube contained in the kit labeled F ab to collect eluate.

Three milliliters of the crude digest was then applied to a column and are allowed to flow completely into the gel. The use of AffinityPak columns is desirable as these columns stop flowing automatically when the level reaches the top frit.

The column is then washed using six milliliters of binding buffer. The eluate which contains F ab fragments was then collected. This eluate also contains small Fc fragments that can no longer bind protein A which are not bound to the Protein A column . However the substantial portion thereof was eliminated by dialysis.

Dialysis was effected by taking the F ab containing eluate and dialyzing the eluate against pH 7.4 phosphate buffered saline using dialysis tubing with a molecular weight cut off of 50 000 so as to eliminate the small Fc fragment containments Spectra Pur. Catalog 132 128 .

This resulted in a F ab fraction having an optical density of 280 nm of 0.707 6 ml . After dialysis and concentration with Centricon 50 concentrators Amicon Catalog 4225 the 2C8 F ab product was assayed for protein content using a BCA protein assay Pierce Catalog 23224 . The protein content was found to be 3.76 mg per milliliter.

The 2C8 F ab S were assayed for IgE inhibitory activity and were found to be substantially incapable of inhibiting IgE production in the same in vitro assays described previously. These results are contained in . In fact the F ab was found to antagonize the suppressive effects of induced IgE on the monoclonal antibody 2C8. These results are in .

The PRIMATIZED gamma 1 and gamma 4P versions of primate monoclonal 6G5 were both evaluated for their effect on inhibition of induced IgE production in vivo in the SCID mouse model described previously. p5E8G1N was found to be as efficient as primate 5E8 in inhibiting induced IgE. See . While neither provide 6G5 nor the primatized p6G5G4P were effective at inhibiting induced IgE in vivo primatized p6G5G1 inhibited induced IgE production. See . These results further substantiate our conclusion that an active Fc region is significant to the ability of an anti human CD23 antibody to effectively inhibit induced IgE production.

The subject anti human CD23 antibodies which comprise human gamma 1 constant domains because of their ability to effectively inhibit IgE production are effective in treating any disease wherein inhibition of IgE production is therapeutically desirable. Such diseases include by way of example allergic diseases autoimmune diseases and inflammatory disease.

Specific conditions which are potentially treatable by administration of the subject anti CD23 human gamma 1 constant domain containing antibodies include the following 

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis Allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis autoimmune hemolytic anemia Acanthosis nigricans Allergic contact dermatitis Addison s disease Atopic dermatitis Alopecia areata Alopecia universalis Amyloidosis Anaphylactoid purpura Anaphylactoid reaction Aplastic anemia Angioedema hereditary Angioedema idiopathic Ankylosing spondylitis Arteritis cranial Arteritis giant cell Arteritis Takayasu s Arteritis temporal Asthma Ataxia telangiectasia Autoimmune oophoritis Autoimrnune orchitis Autoimrnune polyendocrine failure Behcet s disease Berger s disease Buerger s disease bronchitis Bullous pemphigus Candidiasis chronic mucocutaneous Caplan s syndrome Post myocardial infarction syndrome Post pericardiotomy syndrome Carditis Celiac sprue Chagas s disease Chediak Higashi syndrome Churg Strauss disease Cogan s syndrome Cold agglutinin disease CREST syndrome Crohn s disease Cryoglobulinemia Cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis Dermatitis herpetifomis Dermatomyositis Diabetes mellitus Diamond Blackfan syndrome DiGeorge syndrome Discoid lupus erythematosus Eosinophilic fasciitis Episcieritis Erythema elevatum diutinum Erythema marginatum Erythema multiforme Erythema nodosum Familial Mediterranean fever Felty s syndrome Fibrosis pulmonary Glomerulonephritis anaphylactoid Glomerulonephritis autoimmune Glomerulonephritis post streptococcal Glomerulonephritis post transplantation Glomerulopathy membranous Goodpasture s syndrome Graft vs host disease Granulocytopenia immune mediated Granuloma annulare Granulomatosis allergic Granulomatous myositis Grave s disease Hashi moto s thyroiditis Hemolytic disease of the newborn Hemochromatosis idiopathic Henoch Schoenlein purpura Hepatitis chronic active and chronic progressive Histiocytosis X Hypereosinophilic syndrome Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Job s syndrome Juvenile dermatomyositis Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis Juvenile chronic arthritis Kawasaki s disease Keratitis Keratoconjunctivitis sicca Landry Guillain Barre Strohl syndrome Leprosy lepromatous Loeffler s syndrome lupus Lyell s syndrome Lyme disease Lymphomatoid granulomatosis Mastocytosis systemic Mixed connective tissue disease Mononeuritis multiplex Muckle Wells syndrome Mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis Multiple sclerosis Myasthenia gravis Mycosis fungoides Necrotizing vasculitis systemic Nephrotic syndrome Overlap syndrome Panniculitis Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria Pemphigoid Pemphigus Pemphigus erythematosus Pemphigus foliaceus Pemphigus vulgaris Pigeon breeder s disease Pneumonitis hypersensitivity Polyarteritis nodosa Polymyalgia rheumatic Polymyositis Polyneuritis idiopathic Portuguese familial polyneuropathies Pre eclampsia eclampsia Primary biliary cirrhosis Progressive systemic sclerosis Scleroderma Psoriasis Psoriatic arthritis Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis Pulmonary fibrosis Raynaud s phenomenon syndrome Reidel s thyroiditis Reiter s syndrome Relapsing polychrondritis Rheumatic fever Rheumatoid arthritis Sarcoidosis Scleritis Sclerosing cholangitis Serum sickness S zary s syndrome Sjogren s syndrome Stevens Johnson syndrome Still s disease Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis Sympathetic ophthalmia Systemic lupus erythematosus Transplant rejection Ulcerative colitis Undifferentiated connective tissue disease Urticaria chronic Urticaria cold Uveitis Vitiligo Weber Christian disease Wegener s granulomatosis Wiskott Aldrich syndrome.

Of these the preferred indications treatable or presentable by administration of anti CD23 antibodies include allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis atopic dermatitis eczema Job s syndrome asthma and allergic conditions chronic inflammatory diseases and conditions.

The amount of antibody useful to produce a therapeutic effect can be determined by standard techniques well known to those of ordinary skill in the art. The antibodies will generally be provided by standard technique within a pharmaceutically acceptable buffer and may be administered by any desired route. Because of the efficacy of the presently claimed antibodies and their tolerance by humans it is possible to administer these antibodies repetitively in order to combat various diseases or disease states within a human.

One skilled in the art would be able by routine experimentation to determine what an effective non toxic amount of antibody would be for the purpose of effecting allergic diseases and inflammatory conditions. Generally however an effective dosage will be in the range of about 0.05 to 100 milligrams per kilogram body weight per day.

The antibodies of the invention may be administered to a human or other animal in accordance with the aforementioned methods of treatment in an amount sufficient to produce such effect to a therapeutic or prophylactic degree. Such antibodies of the invention can be administered to such human or other animal in a conventional dosage form prepared by combining the antibody of the invention with a conventional pharmaceutically acceptable carrier or diluent according to known techniques. It will be recognized by one of skill in the art that the form and character of the pharmaceutically acceptable carrier or diluent is dictated by the amount of active ingredient with which it is to be combined the route of administration and other well known variables.

The route of administration of the antibody of the invention may be oral parenteral by inhalation or topical. The term parenteral as used herein includes intravenous intramuscular subcutaneous rectal vaginal or intraperitoneal administration. The intravenous form of parenteral administration is generally preferred.

The daily parenteral and oral dosage regimens for employing compounds of the invention to prophylactically or therapeutically induce immunosuppression will generally be in the range of about 0.05 to 100 but preferably about 0.5 to 10 milligrams per kilogram body weight per day.

The antibody of the invention may also be administered by inhalation. By inhalation is meant intranasal and oral inhalation administration. Appropriate dosage forms for such administration such as an aerosol formulation or a metered dose inhaler may be prepared by conventional techniques. The preferred dosage amount of a compound of the invention to be employed is generally within the range of about 10 to 100 milligrams.

The antibody of the invention may also be administered topically. By topical administration is meant non systemic administration and includes the application of an antibody or fragment thereof compound of the invention externally to the epidermis to the buccal cavity and instillation of such an antibody into the ear eye and nose and where it does not significantly enter the blood stream. By systemic administration is meant oral intravenous intraperitoneal and intramuscular administration. The amount of an antibody required for therapeutic or prophylactic effect will of course vary with the antibody chosen the nature and severity of the condition being treated and the animal undergoing treatment and is ultimately at the discretion of the physician. A suitable topical dose of an antibody of the invention will generally be within the range of about 1 to 100 milligrams per kilogram body weight daily.

While it is possible for an antibody or fragment thereof to be administered alone it is preferable to present it as a pharmaceutical formulation. The active ingredient may comprise for topical administration from 0.001 to 10 w w e.g. from 1 to 2 by weight of the formulation although it may comprise as much as 10 w w but preferably not in excess of 5 w w and more preferably from 0.1 to 1 w w of the formulation.

The topical formulations of the present invention comprise an active ingredient together with one or more acceptable carrier s therefor and optionally any other therapeutic ingredients s . The carrier s must be acceptable in the sense of being compatible with the other ingredients of the formulation and not deleterious to the recipient thereof.

Formulations suitable for topical administration include liquid or semi liquid preparations suitable for penetration through the skin to the site of where treatment is required such as liniments lotions creams ointments or pastes and drops suitable for administration to the eye ear or nose.

Drops according to the present invention may comprise sterile aqueous or oily solutions or suspensions and may be prepared by dissolving the active ingredient in a suitable aqueous solution of a bactericidal and or fungicidal agent and or any other suitable preservative and preferably including a surface active agent. The resulting solution may then be clarified by filtration transferred to a suitable container which is then sealed and sterilized by autoclaving or maintaining at 90 100 C. for half an hour. Alternatively the solution may be sterilized by filtration and transferred to the container by an aseptic technique. Examples of bactericidal and fungicidal agents suitable for inclusion in the drops are phenylmercuric nitrate or acetate 0.002 benzalkonium chloride 0.01 and chlorhexidine acetate 0.01 . Suitable solvents for the preparation of an oily solution include glycerol diluted alcohol and propylene glycol.

Lotions according to the present invention include those suitable for application to the skin or eye. An eye lotion may comprise a sterile aqueous solution optionally containing a bactericide and may be prepared by methods similar to those for the preparation of drops. Lotions or liniments for application to the skin may also include an agent to hasten drying and to cool the skin such as an alcohol or acetone and or a moisturizer such as glycerol or an oil such as castor oil or arachis oil.

Creams ointments or pastes according to the present invention are semi solid formulations of the active ingredient for external application. They may be made by mixing the active ingredient in finely divided or powdered form alone or in solution or suspension in an aqueous or non aqueous fluid with the aid of suitable machinery with a greasy or non greasy basis. The basis may comprise hydrocarbons such as hard soft or liquid paraffin glycerol beeswax a metallic soap a mucilage an oil of natural origin such as almond corn arachis castor or olive oil wool fat or its derivatives or a fatty acid such as stearic or oleic acid together with an alcohol such as propylene glycol or macrogels. The formulation may incorporate any suitable surface active agent such as an anionic cationic or non ionic surface active such as sorbitan esters or polyoxyethylene derivatives thereof. Suspending agents such as natural gums cellulose derivatives or inorganic materials such as silicaceous silicas and other ingredients such as lanolin may also be included.

It will be recognized by one of skill in the art that the optimal quantity and spacing of individual dosages of an antibody or fragment thereof of the invention will be determined by the nature and extent of the condition being treated the form route and site of administration and the particular animal being treated and that such optimums can be determined by conventional techniques. It will also be appreciated by one of skill in the art that the optimal course of treatment i.e. the number of doses of an antibody or fragment thereof of the invention given per day for a defined number of days can be ascertained by those skilled in the art using conventional course of treatment determination tests.

Without further elaboration it is believed that one skilled in the art can using the preceding description utilize the present invention to its fullest extent. The following are therefore to be construed as merely illustrative examples and not a limitation of the scope of the present invention in any way.

A pharmaceutical composition of this invention in the form of a capsule is prepared by filling a standard two piece hard gelatin capsule with 50 mg. of an antibody or fragment thereof of the invention in powdered form 100 mg. of lactose 32 mg. of talc and 8 mg. of magnesium stearate.

A pharmaceutical composition of this invention in a form suitable for administration by injection is prepared by stirring 1.5 k by weight of an antibody or fragment thereof of the invention in 10 k by volume propylene glycol and water. The solution is sterilized by filtration.

The antibody or fragment thereof of the invention is dispersed in a small volume of the vehicle to produce a smooth homogeneous product. Collapsible metal tubes are then filled with the dispersion.

The polawax beeswax and lanolin are heated together at 60 C. A solution of methyl hydroxybenzoate is added and homogenization is achieved using high speed stirring. The temperature is then allowed to fall to SOOC. The antibody or fragment thereof of the invention is then added and dispersed throughout and the composition is allowed to cool with slow speed stirring.

The methyl hydroxybenzoate and glycerin are dissolved in 70 ml. of the water at 75 C. The sorbitan monolaurate polysorbate 20 and cetostearyl alcohol are melted together at 75 C. and added to the aqueous solution. The resulting emulsion is homogenized allowed to cool with continuous stirring and the antibody or fragment thereof of the invention is added as a suspension in the remaining water. The whole suspension is stirred until homogenized.

The methyl and propyl hydroxybenzoates are dissolved in 70 ml. purified water at 75 C. and the resulting solution is allowed to cool. The antibody or fragment thereof of the invention is then added and the solution is sterilized by filtration through a membrane filter 0.022 Am pore size and packed aseptically into suitable sterile containers.

For an aerosol container with a capacity of 15 20 ml mix 10 mg. of an antibody or fragment thereof of the invention with 0.2 0.5 k of a lubricating agent such as polysorbate 85 or oleic acid and disperse such mixture in a propellant such as freon preferably in a combination of 1 2 dichlorotetrafluoroethane and difluorochloromethane and put into an appropriate aerosol container adapted for either intranasal or oral inhalation administration. Composition for Administration by Inhalation For an aerosol container with a capacity of 15 20 ml dissolve 10 mg. of an antibody or fragment thereof of the invention in ethanol 6 8 ml. add 0.1 0.2 k of a lubricating agent such as polysorbate 85 or oleic acid and disperse such in a propellant such as freon preferably in combination of 1 2 dichlorotetrafluoroethane and difluorochloromethane and put into an appropriate aerosol container adapted for either intranasal or oral inhalation administration.

The antibodies and pharmaceutical compositions of the invention are particularly useful for parenteral administration i.e. subcutaneously intramuscularly or intravenously. The compositions for parenteral administration will commonly comprise a solution of an antibody of the invention or a cocktail thereof dissolved in an acceptable carrier preferably an aqueous carrier. A variety of aqueous carriers may be employed e.g. water buffered water 0.4 k saline normal saline 0.3 glycine and the like. The use of normal saline is preferred. These solutions are sterile and generally free of particulate matter. These solutions may be sterilized by conventional well known sterilization techniques. The compositions may contain pharmaceutically acceptable auxiliary substances as required to approximate physiological conditions such as pH adjusting and buffering agents etc. The concentration of the antibody or fragment thereof of the invention in such pharmaceutical formulation can vary widely. Such concentrations will be selected primarily based on fluid volumes viscosities etc. according to the particular mode of administration selected. Generally suitable intravenous concentrations range from about one to one hundred milligrams per milliliter.

Thus a pharmaceutical composition of the invention for intravenous injection could comprise 10 mL normal saline containing 40 50 mg of an anti human CD23 antibody of the invention. Methods for preparing parenterally administrable compositions are well known or will be apparent to those skilled in the art and are described in more detail in for example 15th ed. Mack Publishing Company Easton Pa. hereby incorporated by reference herein.

The antibodies of the invention can be lyophilized for storage and reconstituted in a suitable carrier prior to use. This technique has been shown to be effective with conventional immune globulins and art known lyophilization and reconstitution techniques can be employed.

Depending on the intended result the pharmaceutical composition of the invention can be administered for prophylactic and or therapeutic treatments. In therapeutic application compositions are administered to a patient already suffering from a disease in an amount sufficient to cure or at least partially arrest the disease and its complications. In prophylactic applications compositions containing the present antibodies or a cocktail thereof are administered to a patient not already in a disease state to enhance the patient s resistance.

Single or multiple administrations of the pharmaceutical compositions can be carried out with dose levels and pattern being selected by the treating physician. In any event the pharmaceutical composition of the invention should provide a quantity of the subject anti CD23 antibodies sufficient to effectively treat the patient.

It should also be noted that the antibodies of this invention may be used for the design and synthesis of either peptide or non peptide compounds mimetics which would be useful in the same therapy as the antibody. See e.g. Saragovi et al. 253 792 795 1991 .

From the foregoing it will be appreciated that although specific embodiments of the invention have been described herein for purposes of illustration various modifications may be made without diverting from the scope of the invention. Accordingly the invention is not limited by the appended claims.

