---

title: Customer information system
abstract: A system is provided for managing incoming communications placed in response to advertising, online content, and/or special service numbers. Information extracted from incoming communications can be received by a system server and cross-referenced with a database to obtain cross-referenced customer information pertaining to previous customer communications in the form of online communications, telephone calls, and/or in person customer meetings. The cross-referenced customer information can be passed to a client workstation and displayed to the user in the form of an industry-specific template formatted in accordance with the business needs of the user. The template can be automatically populated with the cross-referenced customer information. The user can view and update the customer information, thereby maintaining a retrievable record of the communication. With regard to the multi-housing industry in particular, customer information can be displayed in the form of a guest card template and/or a service card template.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07684550&OS=07684550&RS=07684550
owner: OC Concepts, Inc.
number: 07684550
owner_city: Costa Mesa
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050428
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. application Ser. No. 10 847 537 filed May 17 2004 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 505 572 which claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 471 917 filed May 20 2003 all of which are incorporated herein by reference.

Many industries rely on advertising to attract a steady flow of qualified customers. Advertising campaigns may cost thousands of dollars and utilize various media such as newspapers magazines yellow pages television and direct mailings. In the multi housing industry for example advertising expenses are second only to capital expenditures. Hence both advertisers and marketing firms are highly motivated to verify the cost effectiveness of advertising media and advertising campaigns.

Nevertheless many conventional methods of advertising fail to successfully utilize technology to conduct a sufficiently cost effective operation. For example in the traditional model for renting apartment units in the multi housing industry a potential customer may provide preliminary information to a sales office representative over the telephone in person and or through electronic communications. The representative may be forced to manually write down the customer s information onto a guest card which is used to maintain a record of the communication. Given the nature of such a manual system it can become difficult and or nearly impossible for a sales office representative to efficiently keep track of the potentially large number of communications received by the rental office. In the case of a repeat customer it may be desirable for the representative to quickly retrieve information concerning one or more prior communications made by the customer. Unfortunately manual based systems have inherent limitations involved in physically locating and pulling relevant paper files all of which costs valuable time.

Accordingly there exists a need for a comprehensive customer information system which provides a streamlined approach to processing incoming communications that are placed in response to advertisements. It would be desirable for such a system to maintain records of past communications and provide an efficient way to retrieve such records in realtime.

The present invention roughly described is directed to a system for managing customer information. In various embodiments the system can include a system server one or more client workstations and a database. In certain embodiments the database is configured to store customer information pertaining to communications received by the system including electronic communications interactions with walk in customers and or telephone calls that are received by the system. Information extracted from the incoming communications can be received by the system server and cross referenced with the database to obtain cross referenced customer information pertaining to previous communications of the same customer. The cross referenced information can be passed to a client workstation for review by a user of the system.

When the user selects an incoming communication the cross referenced information can be displayed to the user on the client workstation. The user can update the cross referenced customer information and enter additional information pertaining to the communication thereby maintaining a retrievable record of the incoming communication. The record can be subsequently recalled as cross referenced customer information upon a subsequent communication by the customer.

In certain applications the system can be used by advertisers to manage incoming communications made in response to special service numbers and or online content. Customer information can be displayed to a representative of the advertiser i.e. a user in the form of an industry specific template formatted in accordance with the business needs of the user. The template can be automatically populated with the cross referenced customer information and displayed on the client workstation. With regard to the multi housing industry in particular customer information can be displayed in the form of a guest card template and or a service card template.

The system can be configured for use with electronic communications made in response to online content such as advertising and or other content. In various embodiments such electronic communications can comprise email messages responses to online forms and or other electronic communications made in response to such online content.

Additional functionality can be provided for integrating customer information received in person from walk in customers by reading a magnetic card provided by such walk in customers. Other functionality can be provided for managing authorized users managing advertising sources campaigns generating reports records monitoring transactions performed by the system server monitoring the client workstations and other functionality described herein.

Customer information of a caller customer walk in customer and or online customer can include but need not be limited to any information extracted from an incoming telephone call and or electronic communication any previously stored information relating to a customer personal information of the customer any information entered by a user of system relating to the customer during and or after a telephone call meeting and or electronic communication with the customer. For example when system is used in the context of the multi housing industry customer information can include personal information regarding the customer i.e. name address telephone number etc. the substance of previous conversations communications between the customer and a user i.e. a sales office representative of system any previous preferences communicated from the customer to a user i.e. what type of apartment home is desired by the customer and any other information which may be useful to conducting rental transactions. Similarly calls meetings and or electronic communications may be initiated by customers having service requests directed toward the managing entity of a rental property. In such applications the customer information processed by system can be directed toward information relevant to service transactions.

A user of system can conduct a telephone conversation with a caller customer while simultaneously and or subsequently interacting with a client workstation to review enter recall and or update current and or previously stored customer information associated with the caller customer or the caller customer s telephone number. As a result the system can provide users with the functionality to create an electronic record of a telephone conversation placed by a caller customer and include in that record any applicable customer information that may be desirable to review and or cross reference with future calls at a later date.

Although the present disclosure generally refers to one or more caller customers interacting with user by telephone various embodiments of the present invention can also provide functionality for integrating information received from one or more walk in customers that physically appear in person to user through walk ins scheduled appointments or otherwise. For example any information provided by a walk in customer to user in person can be considered customer information. Such customer information received in person from walk in customer can be entered by user into client workstation and can therefore be handled by system in the same manner as customer information received pursuant to a telephone call placed by a caller customer .

Various embodiments of the present invention can also provide functionality for integrating information received from one or more online customers that submit customer information through a customer computer device over network . Such customer information received from online customers can be handled by system in the same manner as customer information received pursuant to a telephone call placed by a caller customer .

As a result system can provide users with the ability to cross reference customer information received in relation to caller customers with customer information received in relation to walk in customers and or online customers and vice versa. Therefore if a caller customer has previously appeared before user as a walk in customer and or online customer or vice versa the customer information associated with the customer or the customer s telephone number can be conveniently cross referenced and displayed to user in connection with the user s further interactions with the customer.

As illustrated in system can include system server telephony server and client workstation . Telephony server receives telephone calls placed by caller customer from customer telephone over voice network . It will be appreciated that voice network can be any of the various networks known in the art to facilitate voice transmission including but not limited to a conventional public switched telephone network PSTN a wireless telephone network a network employing a voice over Internet protocol VoIP and or others known in the art.

In various embodiments telephony server can extract Automatic Number Identification ANI information Dialed Number Identification Service DNIS information and or other information from incoming telephone calls. As a result of this extraction system can be provided with the name and telephone number associated with customer telephone indicated by the ANI information and or a special service number called by caller customer indicated by the DNIS information .

Telephony server passes the extracted information to system server through computer network and forwards the telephone calls to the appropriate destination number at user telephone . Optionally telephony server can connect to system server directly not shown . Moreover the functionality of the telephony server can be optionally integrated into system server as further described herein. If such an implementation is desired the system server can communicate directly with the voice network rather than through telephony server .

System server can use the extracted customer information to recall any previously stored customer information associated with the customer or the customer s telephone number format all of the customer information and send the formatted customer information to a corresponding client workstation for display. In various embodiments system server can listen for any incoming requests from client workstations or telephony servers that have registered with system server .

As further illustrated in one or more blackbox servers for example two load balanced servers can be provided in communication with system server and network . Blackbox server can provide a queuing system for customer information in the event that communication between voice network and computer network fails. In the event of such communication failure customer information received by blackbox server can remain in a queue maintained by the blackbox server until communication is restored. Once communication is restored incoming calls and electronic communications referenced by the queue of the blackbox server can be immediately sent to system server for processing.

Blackbox server can be configured so it can be seen by telephony server providing a gateway for telephony server to communicate with system server . Blackbox server can receive customer information through web services over http and send the customer information to system server using private communications through communication path and or through network .

In various embodiments communication with system server can be facilitated by Microsoft Messaging Queue Services MSMQ where the web services inject extracted customer information to MSMQ. System server can be configured to listen for incoming MSMQ messages and as they come in and then be processed by server application of system server .

If an online customer desires to receive additional information from the advertiser the online customer may choose to fill out an online form provided by the content and or send an email message to an email address provided by the content . For example in the context of the multi housing industry the online customer may choose to fill out a form with some customer information indicating various personal information of the online customer and or various preferences the online customer may have in relation to rental properties.

The online form and or email message submitted by the online customer from customer computing device can be received by an electronic communication server which extracts customer information from the submission. In one embodiment electronic communication server can be implemented in accordance with Microsoft Exchange Server technology. Electronic communication server can be configured to forward the extracted customer information to system server through web services and MSMQ technology as previously discussed.

Client workstation interacts with system server over computer network to permit a user to view the customer information forwarded from system server including the extracted customer information and previously stored customer information as well as to add and or modify customer information as desired. It will be appreciated that computer network can be any of the various networks known in the art to facilitate data transmission including but not limited to a wide area network WAN the Internet a virtual private network VPN and or others known in the art.

In various embodiments communication between system server and client workstation can be facilitated by .NET remoting technology available from Microsoft Corporation through TCP or HTTP. In one embodiment the interaction is configured using a TCP port with a binary formatter. However other embodiments employing custom communication methods are also contemplated. System server can also interact with a public database such as an online telephone white pages and or other information repositories known in the art to obtain additional customer information such as an address associated with the customer or the customer s telephone number.

In another aspect of the present invention system provides functionality for generating reports and implementing various administrative tools as further described herein.

As is known in the art advertisers often use special service numbers to determine the effectiveness of advertising. By placing different special service numbers in advertisements advertisers can determine the effectiveness of a given advertisement by monitoring calls made to the particular special service number associated with the advertisement.

System can be used by an advertiser in order to efficiently handle telephone calls initiated by caller customers in response to advertisements. For example a caller customer i.e. a potential customer may review an advertisement that is listed in a distributed media publication . It will be appreciated that media may be any advertising medium known in the art including but not limited to printed publications and or electronic i.e. online publications. Advertisement provides a special service number for the caller customer to use in contacting the advertiser.

If the caller customer desires to contact the advertiser the caller customer can initiate a call by dialing the special service number using the customer s telephone . After the special service number is dialed the call is routed through voice network to telephony server which is associated with the special service number . As previously described telephony server extracts customer information from the call and passes the extracted information to system server . Telephony server also routes the call to user telephone . As also previously described system server can recall additional customer information and forward the extracted and recalled customer information to client workstation .

User can receive the call when it is routed to user telephone . Typically user will be a person associated with the advertiser such as a sales office representative who is responsible for responding to incoming customer telephone calls. User has access to client workstation which is in communication with system server over computer network . Client workstation provides a user interface such as a graphical user interface to user which permits user to interact with the client workstation and view customer information forwarded by system server .

User user telephone and client workstation can be situated at an office of an advertiser. For convenience of illustration only one client workstation user and user telephone are shown in . However it will be appreciated that a plurality of client workstations and or user telephones can be employed in one or more offices with various associated users . In order to facilitate communication between system server and different offices a unique OfficeID identifier can be associated with each office and used in communications between client workstation and system server .

As illustrated server can communicate with computer network through web server . Optionally the functionality of telephony server can be incorporated into system server through a telephony application programming interface TAPI engine . For example TAPI engine can respond to incoming calls and transfer such calls to a user telephone . As a result server can communicate with voice network through TAPI engine . In one embodiment TAPI engine is an amTAPI Pro V1.12 available from Allen Martin. It will be appreciated that various technology known in the art can be used to facilitate communication between TAPI engine and voice network . For example a telephony card can be employed which provides T1 communication between TAPI engine and a central office local switch which is in communication with the Internet and PSTN. In one embodiment a Vantage PCI 4L telephony card available from Brooktrout Technology can be employed having a T1 voice line and the modem has a DSL data line. Thus depending on the implementation employed in a given embodiment of system incoming telephone calls can be routed through system server using TAPI engine and or routed through telephony server thereby relieving system server of the overhead of routing telephone calls. A client DLL application program interface API not shown can also run on system server to facilitate communication between system server and other components of system . In one embodiment the client DLL application can be required to register with system server by passing a ServerGuid data structure.

As also shown in the middle tier data processing layer comprises data rules and a facade . Data is an engine configured to retrieve data for the database and provide the data to different layers. Rules incorporates logic such as whether the password is correct or not. Facade is an interface to bring data to the user interface. The user interface either goes through facade to data directly or goes through facade to rules to data depending on whether there is logic involved or not. The top level is a framework for all server applications.

A browser also running on client workstation can communicate with computer network permitting client workstation to exchange data with system server . It will be appreciated that various technology known in the art can be used to facilitate communication between browser and computer network including DSL telephone line cable and others. For example a modem can be provided which provides communication between browser and the computer network.

Data from client application and browser can be displayed to a user on a monitor in communication with client workstation . Such data can include but need not be limited to a list of incoming calls and or electronic communications a call communication specific card containing customer information that is displayed in response to an item in the list and or various reports requested by the user.

A magnetic card reader can also be provided in communication with client application of client workstation . In various embodiments client application and client workstation can be configured to receive magnetically encoded customer information read by card reader . For example in the case of a walk in customer various customer information such as the customer s name address and or date of birth can be obtained by swiping the customer s driver s license through the reader . It is also contemplated that card reader can be used to facilitate credit card payments made by walk in customers while visiting office .

As further illustrated in customer information can be displayed for each incoming electronic communication from online customers including email address i.e. email address of online customer online advertisement through which the online customer s communication originated any other information provided by the online customer in the electronic communication and or other information as appropriate.

Referring again to a user of client workstation can select the incoming call step causing the current customer information associated with the call to be displayed on monitor as further described with respect to below. In step the user answers the incoming call through user telephone . During the ensuing telephone conversation with caller customer the user can review the customer information that was provided by system server step . The user can also input additional customer information and or modify existing information during the telephone call thereby creating an accurate record of the telephone call and relevant information concerning caller customer step . When the conversation between caller customer and user has finished the call will terminate step . At step the user saves the customer information.

It will be appreciated that the templates of are provided for purposes of example and that other templates including user configurable and industry specific templates are further contemplated by the present invention. In various embodiments the templates can provide fixed variable and manual input fields. The fixed fields can include customer information that is extracted and automatically calculated during a call from a caller customer such as the special service number dialed the date and the time of the call and the duration of the call or customer information that is extracted and automatically calculated from an electronic communication from an online customer . The variable fields can contain the customer s name number and if available from a white pages search the address and the name of the person taking the call or electronic communication. The manual input fields can enable the user to enter pertinent and personal information about the customer during and or after the telephone call or after receiving the electronic communication.

As shown in a guest card template has a front card and a back card that provide information in a format useful for recording customer information for the multi housing industry or other guest related industries such as the automotive leasing real estate and property management industries. The back page allows further documenting of the history of previous calls placed by the caller . The front and back cards have fixed variable and manual input fields as described above. The manual input fields can include an e mail address a notes category apartment requirements and home needs marketing feedback apartment shown information and rental feedback . The e mail address is linked to the user s computer e mail service to conveniently allow the user to send preset text as email to the caller customer by clicking an email button assuming a valid email address is entered. The preset text can use the first name and last name fields to make it more personalized and may automatically link to the back page rental feedback . The notes provide an on going log that helps the user develop and maintain a relationship with the caller customer . The rental feedback allows the user to review the move in date criteria or the reason why the caller customer is not leasing by retrieving the guest card from the system .

An alternative guest card template is shown in with a plurality of screen shots of a front side of the card illustrated in and a screen shot of a back side of the card illustrated in .

As set forth in a plurality of fields can be provided for identifying various customer information associated with a given customer. Such information can include but need not be limited to personal identification information i.e. name address telephone numbers email address and or other information as well as additional customer information identifying various rental property criteria desired by the customer i.e. date apartment needed price range number of occupants pets type of apartment home and or other information . The advertising campaign giving rise to the customer s inquiry can also be included as well as other information as desired.

A plurality of user selectable tabs can further be provided in the lower portion of the alternative guest card template. Through a comparison of it will be appreciated that by selecting different tabs different information can be displayed. For example by selecting the Notes tab a user can enter notes concerning the user s interaction with the customer and also view previously entered notes associated with the customer . Similarly by selecting the Field Changes tab the user can view a list of changes made to the guest card that have been tracked by system server .

By selecting the Call Log tab the user can view a list of recorded telephone calls received from a particular caller customer as well as the ANI and source associated with the previous calls . As such system can be configured to provide appropriate communication with a voice response system and or other technology to permit user to listen to the recorded calls by selecting a recorded call listed under the Call Log tab.

As set forth in a Send To Community button can also be provided for sending the guest card to another office. For example if a particular rental property community associated with a given office does not have any available rental units that meet the customer s desired criteria the user can send the customer s information in the guest card to an office associated with another rental property community. As a result a user of a client workstation in the office of the other community can receive a new entry in the list of incoming communications to that office. The new entry can correspond to the customer information sent by the first office . The new entry can further be tagged as a transfer communication indicating that the user of the office should contact the customer referenced by the entry.

A user accessing a guest card in any of the sample forms of can further access a back side of the card. As illustrated in additional customer information can be identified on the back side of the card including but not limited to various comments entered by the user regarding the user s interaction with the customer as well as various reminders for following up with the customer at another time.

As shown in a service request template provides information in a format useful for organizations with extensive maintenance repair and installation functions. The manual input fields may for example identify the location of a repair a repair type e.g. bathroom plumbing a priority class e.g. emergency history of the apartment and or tenant the service request needed and maintenance appointments dates and time. The e mail field notifies tenants when work begins and is completed and provides a satisfaction survey after completion of the work. Other fields include special tenant instructions and access permissions for service and management personnel and an optional staff paging selection which notifies personnel of emergencies and or new work orders.

A plurality of user selectable tabs can further be provided in the lower portion of the alternative service request template. Similar to the tabs illustrated in it will be appreciated that by selecting different tabs different information can be displayed. For example by selecting the Notes Field Changes or Matching Clients tabs various information pertaining to the service request can be displayed in the manner previously discussed herein with respect to the alternative guest card template. In addition a Matching Cards tab can be provided. Upon selecting such tab the user can view a list of other service cards having similar information stored by system . Upon selecting a particular card listed under the Matching Clients tab system can fill the current service card with the customer information associated with the card selected from the list. As a result information for repeat service requests can be quickly and easily entered into the current service card.

At step telephony server receives an incoming telephone call from caller customer directed toward a special service number . It will be appreciated that step can occur in response to step of . Telephony server then extracts certain customer information from the incoming telephone call including ANI information and DNIS information step . In step telephony server uses the DNIS information to get a destination number to which the call should be transferred. Telephony server then attempts to transfer the call to the destination number step .

In step telephony server forwards the extracted customer information to system server and the call status. The call status identifies the present disposition of the telephone call and may be configured to indicate new incoming call call answered call busy call not answered call terminated because busy and premature call termination. The customer information can be forwarded to system server in any suitable manner such as through a COM interop to a .NET DLL a standalone .NET DLL or a WebService. The data can be passed in the form of a TelephonyCaller object and received by the client DLL of system server . Additional information may also be passed including the destination number associated with the special service number and or a SessionID associated with the particular telephone call.

If the call is answered by user at user telephone step then telephony server connects customer telephone to user telephone step . Otherwise telephony server terminates the call step .

At step system server then cross references the DNIS received as part of the customer information with the system server database to obtain an OfficeID associated with the destination number a CallerID reference associated with the particular caller a CardType and an IconName. System server also cross references the ANI received as part of the customer information with the system server database to retrieve previous customer information associated with the caller customer walk in customer or the caller s walk in customer s telephone number step . In various embodiments such information can include the caller s personal information i.e. first name last name etc. and or any previously stored customer information. In various embodiments as a result of cross referencing steps and the following information can be incorporated into the Caller object CallerID CardType IconName FirstName and LastName.

At step system server logs appropriate customer information and or other data into system server database . In certain embodiments the following can be logged OfficeID SessionID ANI DNIS destination number and call status.

At step system server broadcasts the customer information and SessionID to all client workstations associated with the OfficeID retrieved by system server . In various embodiments this can be achieved by system server passing an EventMessage object which includes a MessageObject which includes a Caller object and a MessageType which includes a CallerMessage . It is contemplated that various MessageTypes can be employed to provide flexibility in the information passed from the system server to the client workstation . For example in addition to the CallerMessage the MessageType may also provide for a News object thereby permitting the system server to pass news items to client workstation .

In various embodiments the EventMessage can be sent using .NET remoting technology. When .NET remoting is used the system server looks up all client workstations that are logged in and finds the .NET remoting references to those client workstations . The system server then invokes a method on each client workstation using the .NET remoting reference for each client workstation and passes a message as a parameter to the invoked method.

At step system server receives updated and or additional customer information from client workstation . It will be appreciated that step can occur in response to step of . In step the system server stores the updated and or additional customer information in system server database .

Upon subsequent launches of client application registration can be achieved by passing to system server the OfficeID assigned to the office in which client workstation is situated. The system server checks database to determine the number of licenses associated with the OfficeID. If no licenses are available then system server prompts the client workstation that all available licenses have been used and or that additional licenses must be purchased. However if a license is available then system server registers the client workstation and passes back a unique ClientID to client workstation . Once a successful registration is established between client workstation and system server the client workstation can remotely instantiate any publicly available object on the system server and use its methods.

At step client workstation receives data from system server . It will be appreciated that step can occur in response to step of . In various embodiments step can cause a method to be invoked on client workstation with the data passed as a parameter of the invoked method.

In response to the data received in step client workstation displays an appropriate user interface on monitor to properly display the data. It will be appreciated that the data received in step can correspond to various types of messages with each message corresponding to a different action or no action to be taken by client workstation . In response to the data received in step client workstation can determine the type of message received step and take an appropriate action or no action corresponding to the message type steps and .

For example if a News message is identified in step then the client workstation can display the news information included in the News message step . As another example if a Check For Updated Office Info message is identified in step then client application can be configured to respond to such message by checking for updated office information on a relevant server of system and make appropriate updates to the client application . It will be appreciated that such actions could be performed in the background without user perceiving the actions.

If a Caller message including customer information is identified in step then client application of client workstation raises an event to the user interface layer which in turn populates an entry in a call list with customer information included in the Caller message step .

As explained above a user can select a call appearing in the call list step of see also the screen shot of . In response to such a step the client workstation requests any additional customer information associated with caller from system server step . In various embodiments step can be achieved by client application calling a method using .NET remoting. Client workstation receives the requested customer information from system server and automatically populates an appropriate template for example a guest card or a service card as illustrated in with the customer information step . It will be appreciated that the populated template provides a convenient way for user to view relevant customer information during a telephone call see step of . The entry for the selected call can be removed from all call lists of all client workstations having the OfficeID corresponding to the call step . From the discussion above with respect to it will be appreciated that in various embodiments the entry for the selected call can remain in the call list with its call status indicated by the list.

At step client workstation receives customer information input to the template by the user operating the client workstation . It will be appreciated that step can occur in response to step of . Client workstation then requests system server to save the customer information in database step . This can be achieved by the client application calling a method on system server using remoting technology and passing the template containing the customer information to system server . It will be appreciated that step can occur in response to step of . In various embodiments an EmployeeID associated with user can be saved with the customer information.

It will be understood that the functionality including but not limited to the performance of the various steps described herein provided by system and user in relation to caller customer can also be provided in relation to walk in customer where relevant. For example upon meeting with a walk in customer a user may enter certain customer information pertaining to the walk in customer i.e. the customer s name into client workstation through an appropriate template i.e. a blank guest card blank service card or other template . The customer information can be forwarded by client workstation to system server which cross references the customer information with database to obtain previously entered customer information pertaining to the walk in customer . The system server can forward such cross referenced information back to client workstation . Client workstation can automatically populate the template with the cross referenced customer information for display to the user . As a result the user can be provided with any customer information previously stored by system pertaining to walk in customer regardless of whether such customer information was obtained from the walk in customer in person or from a call placed by a caller customer .

As illustrated in the example of the menu can provide a plurality of selectable menu items for accessing various information and or functionality provided by system such as customer records reports opening of cards printing of cards administrative tools preferences and or exiting the menu.

In particular if user selects Admin Tools or Reports and the user is an administrator then the user can access functionality for generating reports and implementing administrative tools. In various embodiments such functionality can be provided through a browser based interface displayed by client workstation and or a browser based interface displayed on any other appropriate computing device in communication with system server over computer network .

If user selects Exit then the client workstation prompts the user as to whether the user wants to close the client application and takes appropriate action to either close client application or allow it to continue to run on client workstation depending on the user s response.

Additional user selectable menu items not shown can also be provided such as a Hide item when selected the menu can disappear and the client application will continue to run on client workstation indicated by an icon remaining in the system tray and or Blank Guest Card or Blank Service Card items when selected the client workstation will display an appropriate blank guest card or blank service card to user the user can enter customer information into the blank card and then save the customer information to system server in accordance with steps and of previously described herein .

As illustrated in the webpage provides an interface for viewing advertising source information for use for example in advertising campaigns which includes the associations between special service numbers i.e. phone numbers and distributed media i.e. sources used by an advertiser as well as the type of card template to be used by client workstation for displaying customer information when responding to the various phone numbers. The webpage further provides an interface for viewing adding and removing different users i.e. office representatives associated with a given office . In other embodiments an appropriate interface can be provided for accessing various questions and answers not shown to provide user with information helpful to the user s interaction with system . For example such questions and answers could be provided to aid the user in filling out a guest card template or other template used by system .

At step the system server retrieves the source information associated with the office from database . The source information is returned to client workstation step where it is displayed to user step . In various embodiments the source information can be displayed in HTML format as illustrated in pdf format or any appropriate format known in the art.

The user can optionally add delete and or modify the source information if provided for in the user interface displayed by client workstation step . If the source information is changed then client workstation sends the updated source information to system server step and system server stores the updated source information in database step .

Although the steps of have been described in relation to a user interacting with client workstation it will be appreciated that computing device can also be used in place of client workstation for performing the appropriate steps.

At step the system server retrieves the office representatives information associated with the office from database . The office representatives information is returned to client workstation step where it is displayed to user step . In various embodiments the office representatives information can be displayed in HTML format as illustrated in pdf format or any appropriate format known in the art.

The user can optionally add delete and or modify the office representatives information if provided for in the user interface displayed by client workstation step . It will be appreciated that such functionality is provided in the interface illustrated in . If the office representatives information is changed then client workstation sends the updated office representatives information to system server step and system server stores the updated office representatives information in database step .

Although the steps of have been described in relation to a user interacting with client workstation it will be appreciated that computing device can also be used in place of client workstation for performing the appropriate steps.

At step the system server retrieves the appropriate record report information associated with the office from database generating the appropriate record report from information in database as necessary. The source information is returned to client workstation step where it is displayed to user step . In various embodiments the source information can be displayed in HTML format pdf format or any appropriate format known in the art.

Although the steps of have been described in relation to a user interacting with client workstation it will be appreciated that computing device can also be used in place of client workstation for performing the appropriate steps.

In another aspect of the present invention monitoring functionality can be provided by system to permit a developer to monitor the performance and operation of system . For example functionality can be provided for viewing data pertaining to all client workstations currently online creating reports on activities and connections to system server and or viewing a live transaction feed from system server for all activities between client workstation and system server and between telephony server and system server . Such functions can be accessed by a developer through computing device .

The online customer can then enter customer information through customer computing device in response to the online content step . For example the online customer may choose to fill out an online form provided by the content and or send an email message to an email address provided by the content . At step the online customer initiates the sending of the customer information as an electronic communication such as an email message online form associated with online content and or other communications. The online customer can later receive a response from a user of the system step such as by receiving an email message telephone call and or other communication.

In response the user can select the electronic communication from the list step and access the electronic communication step . The user can then review the customer information provided by system server pertaining to the electronic communication step conduct communications with the online customer step and input additional customer information and or modify existing information thereby creating an accurate record of the communications and relevant information concerning online customer step . The user can then save the customer information in step .

At step electronic communication server receives an electronic communication initiated by customer computing device through network . It will be appreciated that step can occur in response to step of . Electronic communication server then extracts customer information from the electronic communication step and sends the extracted information to system server through network and or through communication path step .

At step system server cross references the extracted customer information with the system server database to obtain an OfficeID associated with an email address to which the electronic communication was referenced a CallerID reference associated with the particular customer a CardType an IconName and previous customer information associated with the online customer . In various embodiments such information can include the online customer s personal information i.e. first name last name etc. and or any previously stored customer information.

At step system server logs appropriate customer information and or other data into system server database . At step system server broadcasts the customer information and an associated SessionID to all client workstations associated with the OfficeID retrieved by system server .

At step system server receives updated and or additional customer information from client workstation . It will be appreciated that step can occur in response to step of . In step the system server stores the updated and or additional customer information in system server database .

At step user receives customer information from a walk in customer visiting the office in which the user is situated. The user then enters the customer information into client workstation step which then sends the entered information to system server where it is compared to other customer information maintained by the system . If similar and or matching customer information is found by the system server such information can be provided to client workstation where it can be reviewed by the user step . Accordingly it will be appreciated that by reviewing such information received from system server the user can identify customer records corresponding to previous communication interactions that the walk in customer has had with users of the system as a caller customer walk in customer and or online customer .

The user can then conduct further communications with the walk in customer step and input additional customer information and or modify existing information thereby creating an accurate record of the communications and relevant information concerning walk in customer step . The user can then save the customer information in step .

It will be appreciated that the scope of the present invention is not limited by the particular embodiments set forth herein. Other appropriate variations whether explicitly provided for or implied are contemplated by the present disclosure. For example the system can be used in conjunction with various additional components including an interactive voice response system IVR SQL database voice recorder and web server to provide functionality for recording and tracking incoming telephone calls to special service numbers . When an incoming call is picked up by a user the user can be informed of the advertising source distributed media associated with the special service number by way of a telephone message played to the user immediately before the call is handed over to the user . It is also contemplated that system can be implemented to rely on such additional components for obtaining customer information.

It is also contemplated that instant messaging technology can be employed for routing customer information between the various applicable components of system .

It is also contemplated that system can provide functionality for automatically updating one or more of the various software components employed by system .

It is also contemplated that customer information stored processed and or otherwise used by system can be made available to be accessed by and or linked from other software within and or outside of system . For example it is contemplated that certain embodiments of the present invention can permit software applications of third party vendors to access customer information of system .

It is also contemplated that system can provide for and or support the encryption of communications between various components of the system and or other systems.

In addition it is contemplated that system can be used in a wide variety of industries including but not limited to real property management the automotive industry real estate hotel management mass merchandising vendor management and any other industry where the functionality described herein may be desirable.

It is further contemplated that system can be used in connection with broker based sales environments and related transactions.

