---

title: Self-leveling laser horizon for navigation guidance
abstract: The present invention includes an artificial horizon device including a sensor unit with a movable platform, at least one actuator linked to the platform, and one or more sensors located on the platform for sensing the position orientation of the platform relative to an external mass or the motion of the platform. The horizon device also includes a processing unit signally connected to the sensors and the at least one actuator. The processing unit is adapted to receive signals from the sensors and send signals to the actuators to move the platform to a horizontal orientation. The horizon device also includes either a display unit comprising an indicator of a horizon line which substantially corresponds to the horizontal orientation of the platform or a secondary device.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07908041&OS=07908041&RS=07908041
owner: Munro & Associates, Inc.
number: 07908041
owner_city: Troy
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050429
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Applications Nos. 60 566 261 filed on Apr. 29 2004 and 60 606 803 filed on Sep. 2 2004 both incorporated by reference.

The present invention relates to an artificial horizon device and more particularly to an artificial horizon device with improved peripheral visibility.

Artificial horizon devices have been used extensively in private commercial and military applications to assist in the manual navigation of vehicles. However these devices have drawbacks. Typically these devices have been placed on the control panel in a discrete location within the central field of vision for the operator. Given the space constraints on the control panel horizon devices have been limited in size often no more than a few inches across. The limited size makes them difficult to see and requires that the pilot focus directly on the horizon device to obtain visual information.

Further known horizon devices have typically been units that float in a liquid such that as the plane shifts gravity pulls the unit to the horizontal e.g. a gimbal or utilized mechanical gyroscopes e.g. spinning gyroscopes . These types of devices are limited in that they do not provide an output that may be used by secondary devices in the vehicle.

Combination devices strapped down to the vehicle including accelerometers and gyroscopes utilize complicated algorithms to de convolute the cross correlated sensor signals that result from such a device. Further these device require the pressure and temperature control of the sensors to provide accurate measurements.

The present invention includes an artificial horizon device including a sensor unit with a movable platform at least one actuator linked to the platform and one or more sensors located on the platform for sensing the position orientation of the platform relative to an external mass or the motion of the platform. The horizon device also includes a processing unit signally connected to the sensors and the at least one actuator. The processing unit is adapted to receive signals from the sensors and send signals to the actuators to move the platform to a horizontal orientation. The horizon device also includes either a display unit comprising an indicator of a horizon line which substantially corresponds to the horizontal orientation of the platform or a secondary device. The invention also includes methods of determining an artificial horizon.

The present invention includes artificial horizon devices for use in a vehicle whether it is an operator controlled vehicle or an autonomous vehicle. The devices may be a component of a larger system incorporated into a vehicle or a stand alone device. The device may be provided as part the original equipment of a vehicle or as an aftermarket add on device. The device may be portable temporarily or permanently installed on the vehicle.

The operation of the horizon device may be manually or automatically controlled. For example the horizon device may be turned on and calibrated as part of the vehicle start up procedures. Alternately the horizon device may turn on upon the occurrence of particular visibility conditions e.g. darkness fog or the like weather conditions e.g. wind precipitation or the like motion of the vehicle e.g. particular combinations of pitch roll and yaw rates vehicle position e.g. latitude longitude and altitude combinations thereof or the like. For example upon the occurrence of turbulence in an aircraft the horizon device may turn on automatically. Alternately when the vehicle receives data from a weather radio indicating that the vehicle is approaching inclement weather the horizon device may use that data to turn itself on.

As shown schematically in the artificial horizon device comprises three components a sensor unit a processing unit and preferably a display unit . The sensor unit functions to provide an output signal corresponding to the sensor measurements of the unit. The display unit functions to provide a humanly perceptible indicator of the output signals of the sensor unit. A variety of secondary devices may be used in place of the display unit. The processing unit coordinates the output signals of the sensor unit and operates the sensor unit the display unit and any secondary devices.

The sensor unit includes one or more sensors mounted on a platform . The platform is operably connected to two or more actuators at least one of which is connected to a base . The processing unit may be signally connected to the one or more sensors the actuators the display unit and any secondary devices. A communications link between the processing unit and the sensor unit is an example of a suitable signal connection. The display unit includes at least one indicator .

In another embodiment as seen in the horizon device has the processing unit and display unit mounted on the platform within the sensor unit . Here a wireless communications link could be used to provide instructions from the processing unit to the actuators or secondary devices. A rechargeable battery could be used as a power supply for the processing unit the display unit the actuators and sensors on the platform.

The one or more sensors mounted on the platform may be motion sensors orientation sensors and combinations thereof. The sensors may be global local or combinations thereof where a global sensor measures a characteristic e.g. platform orientation relative to an external mass e.g. the Earth moon sun planetary object etc. while a local sensor measures a characteristic relative to the vehicle e.g. the motion or orientation of the platform relative to the vehicle .

Exemplary motion sensors include accelerometers gyroscopes speedometers vehicle tracking sensors or the like. For example an accelerometer may be used to measure the acceleration of the platform relative to an external mass whereas a gyroscope may be used to measure the rate of the pitch roll yaw or all three of the platform relative to the external mass.

Exemplary orientation sensors include those that determine the orientation of the platform relative to the vehicle. One or more joint angle sensors may be used to measure the orientation of the platform relative to the vehicle. Alternately one or more encoders potentiometers resolvers linear variable differential transducers LVDT may be used. Also the actuators may operate as orientation sensors.

Preferably the sensors are solid state devices based on MEMS technology as these are very small are light weight and have the necessary accuracy while not being cost prohibitive. Each utilized sensor provides a suitable output signal containing the information measured by the sensor. The sensor output signal may be in any data format useable by the processing unit but typically will be digital. Furthermore wireline or wireless communication links may be utilized to transfer signals between the sensor unit and the processing unit. Preferably a wireless RF link is utilized.

Preferably a complement of a two axis accelerometer or two accelerometers and two gyroscopes are used as the sensors in the sensor unit. If the vehicle exercises banking movements e.g. slow turning rate at a constant roll angle then an additional gyroscope is desirable. In another aspect of the artificial horizon device additional sensors may be used on the base. For example a dual axis accelerometer may be used on the base to be used in the calculation of the compensation factor and more particularly a source of information to be utilized by a Kalman filter.

The platform may be any substrate to which one or more sensors may be mounted including a platform made of one or more other sensors. Preferably the platform is made of a relatively inert material whose size and shape do not significantly change in the ambient operating conditions of the horizon device. For example the platform is preferably dimensionally stable between about 40 C. and about 200 C. and between about 0.01 psi and about 500 psi. The size and shape of the platform is not critical but suitably will be sized and shaped to maximize maneuverability of the platform given the space constraints of the particular application. For example a small light weight square platform would be suitable for a portable device. All a small light weight platform would be desirable to increase the maneuverability of the platform by smaller actuators.

Preferably the platform includes two axes of rotation that are perpendicular and lie in the plane of the platform. In one embodiment the platform is a unitary piece where one axis cannot move independently of the other axis. As seen in rotating the platform about axis will cause the position of axis to move e.g. translate through space . In another embodiment a bifurcated platform is utilized where one axis can move independently of the other axis. As seen in rotating a first portion of the platform about a first axis will not cause the position of a second portion with a second axis of the platform to move. Here rotation of one platform portion about an axis does not cause the other platform portion to also move.

The axes of rotation assist in defining the preferable placement of sensors on the platform and relative to one another. The accelerometers are preferably placed in the plane of the platform. If the accelerometers are not placed in the plane of the platform they are preferably placed in a plane that is parallel to the plane of the platform such that the distance between the planes is minimized. The gyroscopes are each preferably placed on an axis of rotation although each may be placed so as to be aligned with a line that is parallel to the axis of rotation. For a sensor unit including a third gyroscope it is preferably placed on an axis of rotation that is orthogonal to the other axes of rotation. Alternately the third gyroscope may be places so as to be aligned with a line that is parallel to the axis of rotation.

One or more actuators connect the platform to the base. The actuators may support some or all the weight of the platform move the platform relative to the base or both. The actuator may be any device that causes the platform to move in one or two dimensions. Preferably at least two independent actuators are utilized for each platform where one actuator each is responsible for rotation about an axis of rotation e.g. one each of pitch and roll . Multiple redundant reserve actuators may also be used. The actuators are signally connected to the processing unit for receiving instructions from the processing unit for sending data to the processing unit or both. Preferably the range of motion provided by of each the actuators is unbounded such that an actuator may cause the platform to rotate thought 360 about an axis of rotation. Such an unbounded range of motion is particularly useful in combination with sensors that are not connected by wireline to other components of the horizon device. Bounded ranges of motion are also contemplated such as between about 90 and about 90 left and right i.e. roll or between about 90 and about 90 up and down i.e. pitch . Of course a combination of bounded and unbounded ranges of motion may also be used. Furthermore limit switches may be used to bound otherwise unbounded ranges of motion. For example instructions from the processing unit may act as limit switches or a device such as a potentiometer may be used.

For example the actuators may be a motor a hydraulic actuator a pneumatic actuator an electro mechanical actuator and combinations thereof. Suitable motors include servo motors stepper motors or the like. Electro mechanical actuators include devices that mechanically flex upon the application of electromagnetic energy. Electromechanical actuators may be made of a piezoelectric material an electrostrictive material a magnetostrictive material a piezoresistive material an elasto optic material an anisotropic material and combinations thereof.

The actuators may be directly connected to the platform e.g. through an axle or may be indirectly connected to the platform such as through a mechanical linkage e.g. gears belts chains etc. . Preferably the connection between the actuators and the platform permits an unbounded range of motion though connections that do not permit unbounded ranges of motion are also contemplated.

In a unitary platform embodiment the actuators are preferably both mounted to the base although other configurations are also possible e.g. one mounted on the other or the like . A gear may be used to link the actuators to the platform. In a bifurcated platform embodiment preferably one actuator is mounted to the base and the other is mounted to one of the portions of the platform although other configurations are also possible e.g. both mounted to the platform or the like . Belts or gears may be used to link the actuators to the portions of the platform.

Selection of the actuator is application dependent in that a quick actuator e.g. a high wattage motor however space considerations of the horizon device preferably lead to selection of a small actuator. Thus a quick small actuator would be preferred.

The base is any substrate to which the one or more actuators platforms or platform portions may be mounted. The base generally is connected to the vehicle either directly or indirectly or is part of the vehicle. The connection between the base and the vehicle may be substantially rigid but the base may also be isolated such as through a rubber material from vibrations or temperature differences generated or transmitted through the vehicle. As seen in the figures the base may be part of the sensor unit but this is not necessarily the case as it may be separate from the sensor unit processing unit display unit or any secondary devices.

The horizon device further comprises a processing unit for receiving output signals from components in the sensor unit e.g. sensors or actuators other components of the horizon device e.g. the display unit secondary devices of the vehicle e.g. navigation system or the like. The processing unit may also be utilized for providing output signals e.g. instructions reported information or the like to the components of the sensor unit horizon device e.g. the display unit or secondary devices e.g. navigation system .

In one particular aspect the processing unit uses a closed loop feedback control scheme to take in the motion sensor output signals and to issue output signals to instruct the actuators on how to move the platform. The processing unit uses the motion sensor output signals to determine the current orientation i.e. the pitch and roll of the platform relative to the external mass e.g. the earth . From knowing the current orientation of the platform the processing unit instructs the actuators to move the platform so that it is horizontal relative to the external mass i.e. the platform s pitch and roll are continually adjusted to both be zero relative to the external mass. In this way the platform will always align with the horizon from the vehicle operator s viewpoint. For example if the vehicle rolls to the right by 45 then the platform with roll to the left by 45 and if the nose of the vehicle pitches down by 15 then the platform with pitch up by 15 . By continually contradicting the motion of the vehicle the platform continually tracks the horizon and serves as a proxy for the horizon.

In one embodiment of the control scheme a Kalman filtering technique is utilized. Kalman filtering iteratively predicts the next platform orientation while refining successive predictions with each iteration. Kalman filtering may use four basic calculations 1 predicting the next platform orientation based on the current platform orientation e.g. initial conditions 2 comparing the predicted orientation with the actual orientation from the available sensor output information 3 correcting the prediction with the differences between predicted orientation and actual orientation of the platform and 4 calculating actuator outputs to control the platform to the next platform orientation. The output from the Kalman filter may then be passed to actuators to move the platform.

The processing unit may be located throughout the vehicle and preferably within the operational center of the vehicle e.g. the cockpit . The processing unit may be physically local to the sensor unit or remote therefrom. In one embodiment the sensor unit processing unit and display unit are integrated into a single housing. Most preferably the processing unit is mounted on the platform of the sensor unit. In another embodiment the sensor processing and display units are separate devices contained in a plurality of housings. Multiple redundant reserve processing units may also be used.

The processing unit may update its platform orientation determination comparison platform adjustment or all three at any rate appropriate for the speed of the vehicle. For example the update rate may be less than about 1 more than about 1 more than about 5 more than about 10 more than about 15 more than about 20 more than about 25 more than about 50 more than about 75 more than about 100 more than about 250 more than about 500 more than about 750 or more than about 1000 times per second if needed by the application e.g. for a fighter jet . Intervening numbers in these ranges are also specifically contemplated within this invention.

As part of the closed loop feedback control scheme a compensation factor may be utilized to reduce the effects of changes in the observed gravity due to motion of the vehicle on the platform orientation. In one embodiment the effects of changes in observed gravity are substantially eliminated through the use of the compensation factor. For example during a banked turn the direction of the observed gravity vector i.e. from the centrifugal force deviates from the normal gravity vector i.e. straight down . Further the magnitude of the observed gravity vector will deviate from the magnitude of the normal gravity vector. Without the compensation factor the processing unit would adjust the platform orientation to be horizontal to the observed gravity vector. For certain applications and certain vehicles this would not reflect the true horizon but it would correspond to the observed horizontal of the vehicle rendering the output signal to a display unit or a secondary device inaccurate. For example vehicles that are moving relatively quickly e.g. more than about 10 m s may benefit from the use of a compensation factor. For these types of applications the compensation factor may be used as an alternative to or in addition to the output of motion or positions sensors in adjusting the platform orientation. The compensation factor may also be used in the Kalman filtering technique to adjust the prediction of platform orientation.

The direction of the normal gravity vector aspect of the compensation factor may be determined from a zero point e.g. the platform orientation immediately before the initiation of the banked turn from other initial conditions from GPS information or other navigations information. The magnitude of normal gravity vector may be an output from one or more the utilized sensors e.g. accelerometer gyroscope or the like immediately before the initiation of the vehicle motion in question. Alternately the normal gravity direction and magnitude aspects of the compensation factor may be determined by monitoring the attitude of the vehicle for a period of time before the initiation of the vehicle motion. The time period that needs to be monitored to provide the compensation factor may be less than about 0.25 more than about 0.5 more than about 0.75 more than about 1.0 more than about 2.0 more than about 3.0 more than about 4.0 more than about 5.0 more than about 10 more than about 15 more than about 20 more than about 25 more than about 50 or more than about 100 seconds. Intervening time periods in these ranges are also specifically contemplated within this invention. As the length of the time period increases the accuracy of the compensation factor also increases. The compensation factor may be recalculated continuously intermittently on demand or in all three manners. The compensation factor may be applied continuously intermittently on demand or in all three manners. Also the compensation factor may be applied to the control scheme at any time whether or not the observed gravity vector deviates from the normal gravity vector.

The direction and magnitude of the normal gravity vector may also be calculated from the turning rate and the speed of the vehicle. The turning rate can be measured from a yaw rate sensor e.g. a gyroscope or from GPS information and the speed of the vehicle would be available as an external sensor input to the processing unit. The turning rate and vehicle speed may be used to calculate the lateral acceleration of the vehicle which in turn may be subtracted from the output signal from the accelerometer for the roll motion to give the normal gravity. Other suitable methods of determining the observed or true gravity vector may also be used. For example a value retrieved from library of localized gravity vectors e.g. as available through GPS may be used as the normal gravity vector.

Furthermore the compensation factor may also be used to limit or eliminate errors e.g. drift in the baseline output of the one or more sensors caused by existing conditions. For example elevated or depressed temperatures pressures or humidity may cause sensors output to drift from their baseline and the compensation factor may be used to correct for this.

In addition to communicating with the actuators the processing unit is also used for communicating an output signal to the display unit or to one or more secondary devices. The output signal may be utilized by the display unit to provide a humanly perceptible indicator discussed more fully below. The output signal of the processing unit may also be utilized by the one or more secondary devices as an input signal. In this instance the output signal is not usually humanly understandable but this is not necessarily the case. The information of the output signal may be combined with information of the secondary device which in turn may be communicated to a display unit or another secondary device. This may be done any number of times to create an ever increasingly comprehensive data set that may be fed to a display unit or another secondary device.

The processing unit output signal may be transmitted by wireline or wirelessly to the sensor unit to the display unit or to secondary devices using any suitable data format. In one embodiment the output signal may be transmitted to one or more control stations located remotely from the vehicle. For example in the case of an aerial unmanned vehicle the processing unit may send a signal to a ground control station operated by a human. In another embodiment the output signal may be transmitted to other vehicles to support inter vehicle functionality such as convoying collision avoidance or other functionality designed to improve coordinated action among multiple vehicles.

The processing unit may also be used for receiving an input signal from secondary devices such as those discussed above. The types of information that may be received include local or global geographic coordinate information e.g. GPS data vehicle speed e.g. air speed of an aircraft yaw rate data vehicle status data temperature altitude humidity air pressure or any other type of external or environmental information that may be used to compensate for error in the sensors or adjust the overall system performance or the like. Vehicle status data may include information about the operability of other sensors or systems on the vehicle e.g. whether a redundant horizon device is operable whether a redundant display unit is operable whether vehicle control devices e.g. engines transmissions yokes steering wheels or flight control surfaces e.g. rudders ailerons or the like are operable or the like. Vehicle status data may also include information regarding objects in the vicinity of the vehicle such as other vehicles obstacles e.g. building animals etc. or the like. The sensor input signal may be transmitted by wireline or wirelessly using any suitable data format.

In addition the processing unit may further comprise micro controllers external memory power amplifiers signal conditioning units transmitters receivers input output ports power supply circuitry or the like. The processing unit may also include software encompassing the control algorithms for the function of the processing unit sensor unit display unit secondary device combinations thereof or the like.

The display unit of the artificial horizon device provides one or more humanely perceptible indicators to the operator. The purpose of the indicator is to counteract the operator s sensory confusion during vehicle operation by showing the operator the horizon. Humanly perceptible means that any of the human senses may detect the indicator. Visual auditory and tactile indicators are preferred but odor and taste indicators are also contemplated. Combinations of sense indicators are also contemplated as are multiple redundant or reserve indicators for a single sense. A visual indicator may be visible in the operator s main field of vision the operator s peripheral field of vision or both. Otherwise the indicator is located so that the operator can sense the indicator e.g. within earshot of an audible indicator e.g. an ear piece or touching the operator for a tactile indicator e.g. in the seat . In one preferred embodiment the indicator is located on a heads up display for the operator for example on the windshield of the vehicle on the interior surface of a visor or eyeglasses on a personal video display device attached to a helmet or eyeglasses of the operator or the like.

In one embodiment of a display unit with a visual indicator a light device e.g. a laser projects at least one light line representing the horizon in a heads ups manner for the operator. As seen in in an aircraft cockpit a light line is preferably displayed by a display unit on the windshield as well as on the side windows such that the light line has a length that crosses both the operator s main and peripheral fields of vision. In one embodiment the display unit is mounted behind the operator and so that the horizon is displayed at roughly eye level for the operator.

The light device may be located on the same platform used in the sensor unit. In this way as the platform orientation is adjusted the light line for the operator is also adjusted. In another embodiment the light device is mounted on a platform separate from the sensor unit platform. Here the sensor unit platform would as the master and the display unit platform would act as a slave tracking the movement of the master.

In another embodiment of a visual display unit a plurality of light bars is located on or near the windshield of the vehicle. The light bars are generally vertically aligned and preferably located on the frame of the windshield as seen in . Each light bar comprises a plurality of lights e.g. incandescent bulbs LEDs or the like that are individually controllable. The lights preferably have an oblong shape with the long side corresponding to the horizontal. The horizon is indicated by illuminating individual lights on the light bars as indicated by the solid lights in . As the horizon shifts due to vehicle movement the illumination of lights shifts to match the location of the horizon. In this embodiment the lights are predominantly in the operator s peripheral field of vision.

In one embodiment the visual indicator utilizes color to provide additional information. For example a green light may be use to indicate that the vehicle is operating normally within prescribed parameters e.g. the aircraft is flying levelly. A yellow light may be used to indicate that the vehicle is operating normally but close to exceeding the prescribed parameters while a red may be used to indicate that the vehicle is operating outside prescribed parameters. For example in the light line embodiment a single light device may be used to generate each color of light. Alternately a filter or other mechanism may be used to change the color of the light line. In the light bar embodiment the lights near the middle of the light bars may be of one color while the lights near the ends of the light bars may be of another color. The particular color of the lights is not critical nor is the number as four five or more colors may be utilized.

A display unit with a visual indicator may incorporate various devices to facilitate optical communication of the light to the operator e.g. fiber optical cables filters mirrors lens prisms or the like .

In addition to the horizon line the display unit may also display information conveying information about the status of the vehicle e.g. the pitch or roll of the vehicle may be indicated with a separate light line or with a separate set of lights on the light bars. Alternately the pitch and roll may be displayed numerically on a heads up display or near the light bars. The display unit or the indicator may also include a directional indicator such that in addition to the horizon the up direction is displayed. A directional indicator is particularly useful because the operator s sense of gravity may become so impaired that up cannot be accurately determined. The directional indicator may take for example the form of an arrow pointing in the desired direction. For the light bar embodiment the directional indicator may take the form of different colored lights representing the up direction. Other indicators e.g. auditory tactile etc. may be used as the directional indicator in combination with the visual indicator.

In one embodiment of a display unit with a tactile indicator the operator s seat backrest head rest arm rest or combinations thereof may vibrate or apply pressure in response to the information provided by the sensor unit. Also the operational controls e.g. yoke steering wheel or the like may vibrate or apply pressure. The vibration or pressure may be present or absent to indicate that the vehicle is operating normally within prescribed parameters. A mild vibration or pressure may be used to indicate that the vehicle is operating normally but close to exceeding the prescribed parameters while a strong vibration or pressure may be used to indicate that the vehicle is operating outside prescribed parameters. Further position of the vibration or pressure may also be used to indicate where the horizon is for example a vibration or pressure under the right thigh or right hand of the operator may indicate that the operator needs to turn to the right to correct or adjust the position of the vehicle or vice versa. In addition to vibration and pressure temperature differences may also be used as a tactile indicator.

In one embodiment of a display unit with an auditory indicator one or more speakers e.g. ear pieces may emit sound in response to the information provided by the sensor unit. The sound may be present or absent to indicate that the vehicle is operating normally. A mildly loud sound may be used to indicate that the vehicle is operating normally but close to exceeding the prescribed parameters while a louder sound may be used to indicate that the vehicle is operating outside prescribed parameters. The sound may include bells beeps rings tones voices combinations thereof or the like. Additional information may be conveyed by combining sounds together a rapid series of tones may convey urgency while voices may be used to instruct the operator in appropriate actions e.g. Turn left. . Furthermore stereo sound may be used to convey information. A tone only in the right ear may indicate that the operator needs to turn to the right to correct or adjust the position of the vehicle or vice versa.

The display unit may be located throughout the vehicle and preferably within the operational center of the vehicle e.g. the cockpit . The display unit may be physically local to the processing unit or sensor unit or remote therefrom. In one embodiment the sensor unit and display unit are integrated into a single housing. Most preferably the display unit is mounted on the platform of the sensor unit. In another embodiment the sensor processing and display units are separate devices contained in a plurality of housings. Multiple redundant reserve display units may also be used. The indicator is usually projected or otherwise provided to the operator at a location remote from the display unit although this is not necessarily the case. For example the display unit may be located behind the pilot in an aircraft while the light line indicator is projected on the windshield.

A secondary device may be any device or system located on or off the vehicle that may utilize information from the processing unit. As discussed above output from the processing unit to any secondary device is usually not humanly understandable but this is not necessarily the case. Exemplary secondary devices include navigation systems e.g. attitude reference system ARS or attitude heading reference systems AHRS devices on the control panel or dashboard third party display systems e.g. primary flight display PFD autopilot systems e.g. flight controls tracking systems redundant horizon devices warning systems e.g. anti roll over alarms electronic stability devices or the like data logging devices telemetry devices or the like for the vehicle. For example the horizon device may provide attitude information to replace or backup another ARS on the vehicle. Also the horizon device may provide attitude information that may be combined with other heading information to provide an AHRS. In another embodiment the secondary device may be an autonomous vehicle.

The horizon device further comprises at least one power supply for the operation of the sensor unit processing unit display unit or combinations thereof. The power supply may be a battery or a power generator or the like. Any battery type may be used for example a wet cell battery a dry cell battery a rechargeable battery a disposable battery or the like. The battery may be local to the horizon device or local to the vehicle. More particularly the battery may be located on the platform the base or both. In one preferred embodiment no wires are used to connect a battery on the platform to the rest of sensor unit to the processing unit or to the display unit. For example a current passed through a first inductive loop coil will cause electricity to flow in a second inductive loop coil located nearby. Although only small amounts of electricity will be induced it will be sufficient to wirelessly recharge a battery. Other techniques for wireless recharging of batteries may also be suitable. Recharging of the battery may be continuous intermittent or on an as needed basis. In one embodiment each of the sensor unit processing unit and display unit include their own battery and may further include multiple redundant or reserve batteries.

Any power generator may be used for example power generators that convert mechanical solar or thermal energy to electricity are suitable. Thus alternators solar cells or thermoelectric devices may be suitable power generators.

The power source is electrically connected to the other components of the horizon device be it be through a wireless or wireline connection. In one preferred embodiment multiple redundant or reserve power supplies are utilized for the horizon device or its components.

In addition the artificial horizon device may also include one or more user interface devices. User interface devices permit the operator to turn on or off the device or otherwise alter the function or position of the horizon device or its components. The user interface devices may be located on the sensor unit the processing unit the display unit or elsewhere and alter functions remote from the user interface device. For example a knob on the sensor unit may adjust the position of the horizon line projected from the display unit. Also a user interface device may be used to customize the location of the horizon line or strength of the indicator to the operator s preferences. For example with a visual indicator the display unit may include a mechanism to adjust the location to customize the horizon for each operator s eye level. The volume of an auditory indicator may be adjustable to suit the operator via a user interface device. Suitable user interface devices include buttons knobs switches sliders touch displays voice activated commands the like and combinations thereof.

As seen in a horizon device may schematically be represented as follows. In this embodiment the horizon device includes two portions a platform portion and a base portion with the functionality of the sensor processing and display units divided among the two portions. The platform portion includes a two axis accelerometer and a pair of gyroscopes one for each rotational axis. An electronic control unit ECU may take in signals from the accelerometer and the gyroscopes as well as signals received at the antenna from components on the base or from secondary devices. The ECU also operates a laser diode located on the platform. A rechargeable battery acts as a power supply for the components on the platform. A coil allows the battery to be recharged wirelessly.

The base includes a pair of actuators connected to the platform. An ECU may take in signals from a user interface secondary devices and the antenna . The ECU also issues signals to the actuators to move the platform. A coil provides electricity to recharge the battery on the platform.

In this embodiment the antennae and coils permit the platform to have an unbounded range of motion because the platform is not burdened with wireline connections to the base.

As seen in a horizon device is depicted. In this embodiment the horizon device includes a bifurcated platform upon which a laser line device is mounted. Actuators move the platform in response to commands from the processing unit not shown located under a base . The actuators are mounted on the base and mechanically linked to the platform by at least belts . A split platform is used in this embodiment with actuator causing one portion of the platform to pitch and actuator causing another portion of the platform to roll. An accelerometer not shown and gyroscopes not shown are mounted on the platform.

The present invention also includes methods of determining the artificial horizon. The method includes measuring the platform orientation relative to an external mass and adjusting the platform orientation so that the platform is horizontal to the external mass.

In one embodiment the measuring step includes measuring an angle theta between an orientation axis e.g. observed gravity of the platform and a normal gravity vector. For example a platform in vehicle has an orientation axis that is normal to a plane of the platform or parallel to the plane of the platform. By knowing both the direction of orientation axis and gravity vector the angle theta is also known.

In this method the adjusting step includes moving the platform to minimize the angle theta such that the orientation axis and the gravity vector are co linear or parallel. Actuation of the actuators may be used to adjust the platform orientation. By adjusting the orientation axis to the gravity vector the platform aligns to be horizontal to the external mass and acts as a proxy or artificial horizon for the actual horizon.

In another embodiment the method of determining the artificial horizon includes comparing an orientation relative to an external mass of a platform in a vehicle at a first time to an orientation of the platform at a second time. This may be done by calculating the rate of change of the orientation of the platform or the derivative of position i.e. velocity and also be calculating the rate of change of the velocity of the platform or the derivative of velocity i.e. acceleration . If the orientations deviate from each other then the method also includes adjusting the orientation of the platform to partially or wholly eliminate the deviation. The adjustment may be carried our by the actuators.

In another embodiment the method of determining the artificial horizon includes monitoring the motion of the vehicle or the platform relative to the external mass. Sensors on the platform on the base or in secondary devices may be used to provide information on the movement of the vehicle or platform. In the adjusting step actuating the actuators is used to counteract the motion of the vehicle or platform. As vehicle rolls right the platform rolls left by an equal amount as the vehicle pitches down the platform pitches up by an equal amount.

The methods may further include displaying the artificial horizon by displaying the desired indicator applying a correction factor to the gravity vector predicting platform orientations communicating with secondary devices the like and combinations thereof.

The artificial horizon device may used in any vehicle preferably with a power supply and more preferably motorized vehicles. Un motorized vehicles e.g. gliders may also be suitable vehicles if the horizon device or vehicle includes it own power supply. The horizon device is particularly useful in vehicles that have general freedom in their movements such as sub marine vehicles subterranean vehicles fixed and rotary wing aircraft or the like. The horizon device may also be used in vehicles with more limited freedom in their movements such as marine vehicles and surface vehicles such as automobiles and trains. While primarily useful in humanly operated vehicles the horizon device nevertheless may find applications in vehicles such as aerials drones or mobile robots.

Operator means any person who has the ability or authority to operate the vehicle and preferably is located in or on the vehicle e.g. driver pilot co pilot navigator passenger or the like . In one embodiment the operator of a remotely controlled vehicle is located separately from the vehicle and communicates with the vehicle wirelessly.

It will be further appreciated that functions or structures of a plurality of components or steps may be combined into a single component or step or the functions or structures of one step or component may be split among plural steps or components. The present invention contemplates all of these combinations. Unless stated otherwise dimensions and geometries of the various structures depicted herein are not intended to be restrictive of the invention and other dimensions or geometries are possible. Plural structural components or steps can be provided by a single integrated structure or step. Alternatively a single integrated structure or step might be divided into separate plural components or steps. In addition while a feature of the present invention may have been described in the context of only one of the illustrated embodiments such feature may be combined with one or more other features of other embodiments for any given application. It will also be appreciated from the above that the fabrication of the unique structures herein and the operation thereof also constitute methods in accordance with the present invention. The present invention also encompasses intermediate and end products resulting from the practice of the methods herein. The use of comprising or including also contemplates embodiments that consist essentially of or consist of the recited feature.

The explanations and illustrations presented herein are intended to acquaint others skilled in the art with the invention its principles and its practical application. Those skilled in the art may adapt and apply the invention in its numerous forms as may be best suited to the requirements of a particular use. Accordingly the specific embodiments of the present invention as set forth are not intended as being exhaustive or limiting of the invention. The scope of the invention should therefore be determined not with reference to the above description but should instead be determined with reference to the appended claims along with the full scope of equivalents to which such claims are entitled. The disclosures of all articles and references including patent applications and publications are incorporated by reference for all purposes.

