---

title: Cationic liposomes for gene transfer
abstract: The present invention relates to synthetic cationic lipids, liposome formulations and the use of such compounds to introduce functional bioactive agents into cultured cells.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07067697&OS=07067697&RS=07067697
owner: Vanderbilt University
number: 07067697
owner_city: Nashville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050811
---
This application is a continuation of and claims the benefit of U.S. application Ser. No. 10 224 706 filed Aug. 20 2002 which status is allowed. U.S. application Ser. No. 10 224 706 is a divisional of and claims the benefit of U.S. application Ser. No. 09 447 688 filed Nov. 23 1999 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 656 498. U.S. application Ser. No. 09 447 688 claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Nos. 60 109 950 filed Nov. 25 1998 and 60 110 970 filed Dec. 4 1998. U.S. application Ser. Nos. 10 224 706 09 447 688 60 109 950 and 60 110 970 are each incorporated herein by this reference in their entireties.

This invention was made with government support under Grant Nos. NIH 5 P50 HL 19153 NIH 5 RO1 HL 45151 and NIH 5 RO1 AI 31900 awarded by the National Institutes of Health to Vanderbilt University. The U.S. Government has certain rights in the invention.

This invention relates to synthetic cationic lipid compounds liposome formulations and the use of such compounds via lipofection to introduce functional bioactive agents biologically active substances to cultured cells.

Lipofection or transfection a process of introducing functional nucleic acids into cultured cells by using positively charged liposomes was first described by Philip Felgner et al. a decade ago and later shown by K. L. Brigham as applicable in vivo to experimental animals. See Felgner et al. 84 74113 7417 1987 and K. L. Brigham et al. 298 278 281 1989 . Cationic lipids have become an increasingly important tool for many in vitro gene transfer applications including several recent human gene therapy trials. As non viral synthetic DNA carriers cationic lipids are particularly attractive because they are non immunogenic simple to use can deliver DNA of a broad range size and can be manufactured in large quantity. Although lipofection is quite efficient in vitro under serum free conditions its use in vivo when delivered as DNA lipid complex lipoples via intravenous or airway routes was limited to the presence of proteins and polysaccharides in the body fluids and mucus that strongly inhibit the transfection efficiency. Recent efforts to search for more efficient lipids and or improved DNA liposome formulations have resulted in dramatic increases of in vivo transfection efficiency. See Solodin I. et al. 34 13537 13544 1995 Templeton N. S. et al. 15 7 647 652 1997 Thierry A. R. et al. 92 9742 9746 1995 Li S. et al. 4 891 900 1997 Liu Y. et al. 15 2 167 173 1997 Liu F. et al. 4 6 517 523 1997 and Song Y. K. et al. 8 1585 1594 1997 .

Using a few well known cationic lipids researchers have carefully studied key parameters that affect transfection efficiency of intravenously administered lipoplex in mouse. See also Hong K. et al. 400 233 237 1997 . These studies have shown that a 2 16 fold excess of cationic liposome over DNA were necessary for high level gene expression in lungs and other organs liposomes composed of 1 2 dioleyl 3 N N N trimethyl amino propane chloride DOTMA were significantly more active than that composed other cationic lipids. See Song et al. Liposomes prepared from pure cationic lipid such as DOTMA or 1 2 dioleoyl 3 trimethylammonium propane DOTAP or mixtures of a cationic lipid and cholesterol or Tween 80 could mediate more efficient gene transfer than those formulations composed of a cationic lipid and a neutral phospholipid 1 2 dioleoyl sn glycero 3 phosphotidylethanolamine DOPE and the lipoplex prepared from extruded multilamellar liposomes were more active than those prepared from sonicated small unilamellar liposomes. See Hong et al. Liu Y et al. Liu F. et al. Song et al. and Li S. et al. With these improvements the level of reporter gene expression in lungs after intravenous administration of optimized lipoplex were estimated 100 to 1000 fold more efficient than those prepared according to previously reported studies using DOTMA DOPE liposomes and less lipid to DNA ratios. However the improvements were also associated with noticeable toxicity of varying degrees of lipid DNA treated animals due to toxic effect of large excess of cationic lipids or lipoplexes themselves. Therefore searching for cationic lipids with less toxicity and formulations that function at reduced lipid to DNA ratios seem to be reasonable approaches to the problem of lipofection related toxicity. We report the synthesis of a novel series of cationic lipids and test of their in vivo transfection activity in mice.

High level transfection in vivo in lungs and several other organs using lipoplex have been reported by a number of groups as cited in the text above. One of the conclusions drawn from these studies is that relatively high lipid to DNA ratios is required to achieve high levels of transfection in vivo Hong K. et al. Liu Y. et al. Liu F. et al. and Li S. et al. Besides the high charge ratios other factors such as the use of cholesterol instead of DOPE as helper lipid Hong K. et al. Templeton N. S. et al. Liu Y. et al Song Y. K. et al. and Li S. et al. multilamellar liposomes of about 200 nm in size rather than small unilamellar liposomes Liu Y. et al. and the use of polycations and polymers in the cationic lipid DNA complexes also contribute to the high level transfection Hong K. et al. and Li S. et al. . The least mentioned factor in these studies was the side effects that are associated with these high level transfections in vivo.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide cationic lipids which are less toxic in pharmaceutical formulations and function at reduced lipid to DNA ratios than existing cationic lipids.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide a liposome with or without a helper lipid which is less toxic than prior art liposomes.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide cationic liposome pharmaceutical formulations which enhance intracellular delivery of DNA to a less toxic extent than previously described lipophilic compounds.

It is also an object of this invention to provide a lipoplex that has a transfection activity which is higher than transfection activity of the prior art liposome.

It is also an object of this invention to provide improved lipid and liposome formulation for treating a disease in a mammal via transfection.

It is a further object of the present invention to provide cationic liposome formulations which demonstrate superior efficacy.

In accordance with the purpose s of this invention as embodied and described herein this invention in one aspect relates to novel cationic lipids and their use in pharmaceutical formulations for the intra cellularly delivery of bioactive agent.

The novel N 2 3 dioleoyloxy propyl L lysinamide LADOP cationic lipid has lysine as a head group and two long fatty chains as lipid anchors linked through biodegradable diester and amide bonds. Liposome DNA complexes prepared with a plasmid containing a luciferase reporter gene delivered either intravenously or intratracheally to mice demonstrated high level expression of the transgene. The magnitude of transgene expression was related to the ratio of lipid to DNA high level of transgene expression occurred when lipid DNA charge ratios reached 1 8 to 1 24. The duration of the transgene expression in lungs of mice treated with liposome DNA complex delivered intravenously was transient disappearing by 48 hours after transfection. However a second intravenous transfection at 48 hours after the first injection resulted in almost identical gene expression and duration.

The LADOP cationic lipid is a very efficient molecule as a result of careful design. The overall structure offers a bilayer forming lipid with good membrane fluidity. Therefore the novel lipid can actively transfer genes without a commonly required helper lipid DOPE. LADOP has a stable amide bond linkage between the head group and the lipid anchor to ensure stability in solution. It has two cationic charges while lysl PE has only one net charge per molecule. The diester bonds in LADOP render the lipid biodegradable. This feature has been demonstrated in our in vivo studies in which the animals tolerated repeated intravenous doses of DNA LADOP complex well and transgene expression patterns of the first injection and second injection shortly after were identical both in magnitude and duration. In two recent reports a twenty day interval between treatments was needed for effective repeat administration using DOTMA and DOTAP two formulations that have been widely used. The fact that the novel LADOP cationic compound mediated efficient transfection both intravenously and intratracheally together with features such as simplicity of synthesis and formulation and minimal toxicity make this a very attractive and useful reagent for in vivo gene delivery and ultimately gene therapy.

Another aspect of the invention relates to lysine amide cationic compounds of the general formula III 

The novel cationic lipid is a lysine amide cationic lipid. This novel cationic lipid has long fatty chains and a cationic charged head group which can be categorized into three groups based on the chemical structures of the head group. The three different head groups represented by formula II are 1 bis imidoamide head groups 2 head groups having two to 8 amino groups generated from propylamino repeat units and 3 head groups having varied numbers of lysl residues linked by amide bonds through alpha or epsilon amino groups in asymmetric and symmetric configurations.

These new cationic lipids are micelle forming lipids in their salt form and have excellent DNA condensation abilities and capability of forming small complexes with DNA. In vitro test revealed that most of these lipids have high transfection activity on cells in general. However the two lipids belonging to group three with three to five lysine groups symmetrically and spaciously distributed over the molecules are 2 to 5 times more potent than those lipids with similar numbers of lysine groups distributed in dendritic tree shape or linear pattern. These novel compounds clearly demonstrate the important relationship of structure and transfection activity of a cationic lipid.

The novel cationic compound is a heterocyclic cationic lipid. Included within this aspect of the invention are several monovalent double chain cationic lipids. Namely 3 N methyl 1 2 dioleylpropandiol morpholino chloride MMET and 3 N methyl 1 2 dioleoylpropandiol morpholino chloride MMES . The novel cationic lipids represented by formula III has a simple ammonium or an ammonium located at the base of a ring structure as a head group which is linked to two long mono unsaturated fatty chains as lipid anchors. These lipids contain several types of bonds which link the head groups and lipid anchors including biodegradable diester bonds stable diether bonds alkyl bonds or mixed bonds.

The liposomes composed of a single cationic lipid or a mixture of cationic lipid and non charged helper lipids such as cholesterol at 1 1 ratio were prepared and used to complex DNA at charge ratios of from 0.75 16 . Liposome DNA complexes prepared with a plasmid containing a luciferase reporter gene were administered intravenously to mice. After 12 hours luciferase activity was demonstrated at high levels in lung liver spleen and other organs. The magnitude of transgene expression was related the ratio of lipid to DNA and was determined by the lipid composition and the type of helper lipids. For liposomes prepared from single cationic lipids transgene expression occurred when lipid DNA ratios reached 1 4 and peaked at ratio of 1 16. Among these lipids the transfection activity of the compound MMET was much higher than the prior art liposomes composed of DOTMA and or DOTAP or DOTMA cholesterol. These prior art complexes caused toxicity to the mice especially at higher doses.

The novel cationic compound is a benzyl compound. The novel cationic lipid represented has a benzyl group attached to a nitrogen atom which is linked to two long mono unsaturated fatty chains as lipid anchors. These lipids contain several types of bonds which link the head groups and lipid anchors including biodegradable diester bonds diether bonds alkyl bonds or mixed bonds.

Each of these cationic lipids may be used in pharmaceutical formulations in the form of liposomes with a bioactive agent biologically active agent either alone or in combination with other lipid substituents.

In another aspect the invention relates to pharmaceutical compositions comprising the aforementioned inventive compounds in combination with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. Examples of pharmaceutically acceptable carriers include aqueous solutions and complex delivery systems as further described herein. Preferably the pharmacologically acceptable carrier is a liposome.

The invention also encompasses pharmaceutically acceptable esters and salts of such compounds as will be explained in detail infra.

Additional advantages of the invention will be set forth in part in the description which follows and in part will be obvious from the description or may be learned by practice of the invention. The advantages of the invention will be realized and attained by means of the elements and combinations particularly pointed out in the appended claims. It is to be understood that both the foregoing general description and the following detailed description are exemplary and explanatory only and are not restrictive of the invention as claimed.

The accompanying drawings which are incorporated in and constitute a part of tis specification illustrate several embodiments of the invention and together with the description serve to explain the principles of the invention.

The present invention may be understood more readily by reference to the following detailed description of preferred embodiments of the invention and the Examples included therein and to the Figures and their previous and following description.

Before the present compounds compositions and methods are disclosed and described it is to be understood that this invention is not limited to specific synthetic methods specific pharmaceutical carriers or to particular pharmaceutical formulations or administration regimens as such may of course vary. It is also to be understood that the terminology used herein is for the purpose of describing particular embodiments only and is not intended to be limiting.

It must be noted that as used in the specification and the appended claims the singular forms a an and the include plural referents unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. Thus for example reference to a pharmaceutical carrier includes mixtures of two or more such carriers and the like.

Ranges are often expressed herein as from about one particular value and or to about another particular value. When such a range is expressed another embodiment includes from the one particular value and or to the other particular value. Similarly when values are expressed as approximations by use of the antecedent about it will be understood that the particular value forms another embodiment.

In this specification and in the claims which follow reference will be made to a number of terms which shall be defined to have the following meanings 

References in the specification and concluding claims to parts by weight of a particular element or component in a composition or article denotes the weight relationship between the element or component and any other elements or components in the composition or article for which a part by weight is expressed. Thus in a compound containing 2 parts by weight of component X and 5 parts by weight component Y X and Y are present at a weight ratio of 2 5 and are present in such ratio regardless of whether additional components are contained in the compound.

A weight percent of a component unless specifically stated to the contrary is based on the total weight of the formulation or composition in which the component is included.

The term alkyl as used herein refers to a branched or unbranched saturated hydrocarbon group of 1 to 24 carbon atoms such as methyl ethyl propyl n propyl isopropyl n butyl isobutyl t butyl octyl decyl tetradecyl hexadecyl eicosyl tetracosyl and the like. Preferred alkyl groups herein contain from 1 to 23 carbon atoms.

The term alkenyl as used herein refers to a branched or unbranched unsaturated hydrocarbon containing from 2 to 24 carbon atoms and at least one carbon to carbon double bond.

The term aryl refers to aromatic rings e.g. phenyl substituted phenyl and the like as well as rings which are fused e.g. napthyl phenanthrenyl and the like. An aryl group thus contains at least one ring having at least 6 atoms with up to five such rings being present containing up to 22 atoms therein with alternating resonating double bonds between adjacent carbon atoms or suitable heteratoms. The preferred aryl groups are benzyl tolyl or phenyl.

The term fatty long chain herein refers to a branched or unbranched saturated or unsaturated hydrocarbon chain of alkyl groups containing from 1 24 carbon atoms. Preferred fatty long chains contain from 4 to 18 carbons.

By the term effective amount of a compound as provided herein is meant a nontoxic but sufficient amount of the compound to provide the desired regulation of gene expression. As will be pointed out below the exact amount required will vary from subject to subject depending on the species age and general condition of the subject the severity of the disease that is being treated the particular compound used its mode of administration and the like. Thus it is not possible to specify an exact effective amount. However an appropriate effective amount may be determined by one of ordinary skill in the art using only routine experimentation.

By pharmaceutically acceptable is meant a material that is not biologically or otherwise undesirable i.e. the material may be administered to an individual along with the selected compound without causing any undesirable biological effects or interacting in a deleterious manner with any of the other components of the pharmaceutical composition in which it is contained.

The term heterocyclic ring refers to a monocyclic aromatic having 5 to 8 ring atoms or a bicyclic aromatic group having 8 to 10 atoms containing a at least one heteroatom O S. or N in which a carbon or heteroatom is the point of attachment. Examples of preferred heterocyclic rings are pyrrole and morpholine.

The term heteroatom means O S or N selected on an independent basis. The invention also encompasses pharmaceutically acceptable nontoxic ester amide and salt derivatives of those compounds of formula I containing a carboxylic acid moiety.

The term protecting group means that the group is in its modified form to preclude undesired side reactions at the protected site. Suitable protecting groups for the compounds of the present invention will be recognized from the present application taking into account the level of skill in the art and with reference to standard textbooks such as Green T. W. et al. Protective Groups in Organic Synthesis Wiley New York 1991 . A preferred protecting group in this invention is t butoxycarbonyl BOC .

Pharmaceutically acceptable salts are prepared by treating the free acid with an appropriate amount of a pharmaceutically acceptable base. Representative pharmaceutically acceptable bases are ammonium hydroxide sodium hydroxide potassium hydroxide lithium hydroxide calcium hydroxide magnesium hydroxide ferrous hydroxide zinc hydroxide copper hydroxide aluminum hydroxide ferric hydroxide isopropylamine trimethylamine diethylamine triethylamine tripropylamine ethanolamine 2 dimethylaminoethanol 2 diethylaminoethanol lysine arginine histidine and the like. The reaction is conducted in water alone or in combination with an inert water miscible organic solvent at a temperature of from about 0 C. to about 100 C. preferably at room temperature. The molar ratio of compounds of structural formula I to base used are chosen to provide the ratio desired for any particular salts. For preparing for example the ammonium salts of the free acid starting material a particular preferred embodiment the starting material can be treated with approximately one equivalent of pharmaceutically acceptable base to yield a neutral salt. When calcium salts are prepared approximately one half a molar equivalent of base is used to yield a neutral salt while for aluminum salts approximately one third a molar equivalent of base will be used.

Ester derivatives are typically prepared as precursors to the acid form of the compounds as illustrated in the examples below and accordingly may serve as prodrugs. Generally these derivatives will be lower alkyl esters such as methyl ethyl and the like. Amide derivatives CO NH CO NHR and CO NR where R is lower alkyl may be prepared by reaction of the carboxylic acid containing compound with ammonia or a substituted amine.

The compounds of the invention may be readily synthesized using techniques generally known to synthetic organic chemists. Suitable experimental methods for making and derivatizing aromatic compounds are described for example in the references cited in the Background section herein above the disclosures of which are hereby incorporated by reference for their general teachings and for their synthesis teachings. Methods for making specific and preferred compounds of the present invention are described in detail in Examples below.

The compounds of the invention defined by the structures disclosed herein including the pharmacologically acceptable esters or salts thereof are useful as transfection agents.

The compounds of the invention may be conveniently formulated into pharmaceutical compositions composed of one or more of the compounds in association with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. See e.g. latest edition by E. W. Martin Mack Pub. Co. Easton Pa. which discloses typical carriers and conventional methods of preparing pharmaceutical compositions that may be used in conjunction with the preparation of formulations of the inventive compounds and which is incorporated by reference herein.

Cationic lipid mediated transfections can be effectively carried out over a range of cell densities and in a variety of cells. For example transfection into COS.7 cells can be carried out at cell densities from 5 000 cells well to highly confluent cells at 40 000 cells well. The successful transfection of highly confluent cells indicates that cell division is not required for either expression or functional delivery of DNA.

The cationic lipids of the invention can be advantageously used either alone or in combination with other known cationic lipids such as for example DOTMA or DOTAP in any procedure comprising the use of liposomes or lipid vesicles to deliver substances intracellularly either in vitro or in vivo. The cationic lipids can also be used in combination with neutral lipids for example cholesterol. Formulations and methods of formulating lipid vesicles are well known and examples are provided herein.

Contemplated uses comprise transfection procedures corresponding to those presently known and using amphipathic lipids including commercial cationic lipid preparations such as Lipofectin and using conventional cationic lipid technology and methods. Accordingly the lipid compositions disclosed herein can be used to facilitate the intercellular delivery of DNA or mRNA sequences coding for therapeutically active polypeptides as described in detail in U.S. patent applications Ser. Nos. 326 305 and 467 881 which are hereby incorporated by reference. They can be similarly used for the liposomal delivery of the expressed gene product the polypeptide or protein itself. Thus cationic lipid mediated delivery of DNA and mRNA polynucleotides or proteins can provide therapy for genetic disease by supplying deficient or absent gene products to treat any genetic disease in which the defective gene or its product has been identified such as Duchenne s dystrophy Kunkel L. and Hoffman 45 3 630 643 1989 or cystic fibrosis Goodfellow P. Nature 341 6238 102 3 Sep. 14 1989 .

The cationic lipid mediated intracellular delivery described above can also provide immunizing polypeptides to the cell either by delivering a polynucleotide coding for the immunogen or the immunogen itself.

The transfection procedures described herein may be carried out by direct injection of cationic lipids together with DNA RNA or proteins into cells of an animal in vivo. However it has been recently shown that cationic lipids are particularly effective at facilitating in vitro transfection of cells. Therefore the present therapies can be alternatively carried out by in vitro transfection of some of the cells of an animal using cationic lipid delivery methods and reintroduction of the cells into the animal. The ability to transfect cells at high efficiency with cationic lipids thus provides an alternate method for immunization. The gene for an antigen is introduced by means of cationic lipid mediated delivery into cells which have been removed from an animal. The transfected cells now expressing the antigen are reinjected into the animal where the immune system can now respond to the antigen. The process can be enhanced by co injection of either an adjuvant or lymphokines or a gene coding for such lymphokines to further stimulate the lymphoid cells.

Other therapeutically important polynucleotides suitable for cationic lipid mediated delivery are negatively charged novel oligonucleotides including antisense polynucleotide sequences useful in eliminating or reducing the production of a gene product as described by Tso P. et al 570 220 241 1987 . Many of these oligonucleotide species are inefficiently captured by encapsulation into liposomes of negatively charged lipids according to ordinary current methods. These oligonucleotides are captured within the present cationic liposomes with efficiencies approaching 100 . Also within the scope of the invention is the delivery by means of the cationic lipids disclosed of ribozymes or catalytic RNA species either of the hairpin type as described by Hampel et al. 18 2 299 304 1990 or the Hammerhead type described by Cech. T. and Bass B. 55 599 629 1986 . These antisense nucleic acids or ribozymes can be expressed replicated in the transfected cells.

The DNA sequences used in these methods can be those sequences which do not integrate into the genome of the host cell or those which do integrate into the genome of the host. These may be non replicating DNA sequences or specific replicating sequences genetically engineered to lack the genome integration ability.

Therapeutic polynucleotides provided by the invention can also code for immunity conferring polypeptides which can act as endogenous immunogens to provoke a humoral or cellular response or both. The polynucleotides employed according to the present invention can also code for an antibody. In this regard the term antibody encompasses whole immunoglobulin of any class chimeric antibodies and hybrid antibodies with dual or multiple antigen or epitope specificities and fragments such as F ab Fab Fab and the like including hybrid fragments. Also included within the meaning of antibody are conjugates of such fragments and so called antigen binding proteins single chain antibodies as described for example in U.S. Pat. No. 4 704 692 the contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference.

Thus an isolated polynucleotide coding for variable regions of an antibody can be introduced in accordance with the present invention to enable the treated subject to produce antibody in situ. For illustrative methodology relating to obtaining antibody encoding polynucleotides see Ward et al. 341 544 546 1989 Gillies et al. 7 799 804 1989 and Nakatani et al. loc. Cit. 805 810 1989 . The antibody in turn would exert a therapeutic effect for example by binding a surface antigen associated with a pathogen. Alternatively the encoded antibodies can be anti idiotypic antibodies antibodies that bind other antibodies as described for example in U.S. Pat. No. 4 699 880. Such anti idiotypic antibodies could bind endogenous or foreign antibodies in a treated individual thereby to ameliorate or prevent pathological conditions associated with an immune response e.g. in the context of an autoimmune disease.

The invention provides the delivery of either an antisense polynucleotide or ribozyme as described above and having as its target the rev site of the HIV genome October 1988 pp. 56 57 . Matsukura M. et al. 86 4244 4248 1989 describe a 28 mer phosphorothioate compound anti HIV anti rev transactivator specific for the site. Other antisense molecules include those targeted to essential genes of other pathogens or to genes of the subject that express a detrimental product.

Where the polynucleotide is to be DNA promoters suitable for use in various vertebrate systems are well known. For example for use in murine systems suitable strong promoters include RSV LTR MPSV LTR SW40 IEP and metallothionein promoter. In humans on the other hand promoters such as CMV IEP may advantageously be used. Cell specific promoters can also be used to permit expression of the gene only in the target cell. For example certain genes are highly promoted in adults only in particular types of tumors. Similarly tissue specific promoters for specialized tissue e.g. lens tissue of the eye have also been identified and used in heterologous expression systems. All forms of DNA whether replicating or non replicating and which are expressible are within the methods contemplated by the invention.

With the availability of automated nucleic acid synthesis equipment both DNA and RNA can be synthesized directly when the nucleotide sequence is known or by a combination of PCR cloning and fermentation. Moreover when the sequence of the desired polypeptide is known a suitable coding sequence for the polynucleotide can be inferred.

When the polynucleotide is mRNA it can be readily prepared from the corresponding DNA in vitro. For example conventional techniques utilize phage RNA polymerases SP6 T3 or T7 to prepare mRNA from DNA templates in the presence of the individual ribonucleoside triphosphates. An appropriate phage promoter such as T7 origin of replication site is placed in the template DNA immediately upstream of the gene to be transcribed. Systems utilizing T7 in this manner are well known and are described in the literature e.g. in Current Protocols in Molecular Biology 3.8 vol. 1 1988 .

In addition the present invention includes the use of mRNA that is chemically blocked at the 5 and or 3 end to prevent access by RNASE. This enzyme is an exonuclease and therefore does not cleave RNA in the middle of the chain. Such chemical blockage can substantially lengthen the half life of the RNA in vivo. Two agents which may be used to modify RNA are available from Clonetech Laboratories Inc. Palo Alto Calif. C2 Amino Modifier Catalog 5204 1 and Amino 7 dUTP Catalog K1022 1 . These materials add reactive groups to the RNA. After introduction of either of these agents onto an RNA molecule of interest an appropriate reactive substituent can be linked to the RNA according to the manufacturer s instructions. By adding a group with sufficient bulk access to the chemically modified RNA by RNASE can be prevented.

Therapeutic uses of cationic lipids herein disclosed include the liposomal delivery of nucleoside or nucleotide analogues having an antiviral effect such as dideoxynucleotides didehydronucleotides nucleoside or nucleotide analogues having halo substituted purine or pyrimidine rings such as 5 trifluoromethyl 2 deoxyuridine or 5 flurouracil nucleoside or nucleotide analogues having halo and azido substituted ribose moieties such as 3 azido 3 deoxythymidine AZT nucleoside analogues having carbon substituted for oxygen in the ribose moiety carbocyclic nucleosides or nucleotide analogues having an acyclic pentose such as acyclovir or gancyclovir DHPG . The liposomal delivery of such analogues is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. The antiviral potency of these analogues is found to be increased when they are presented to the cells as phospholipid derivatives. These derivatives may be incorporated into the liposomal structure for administration to cells thereby forming a more stable liposomal complex which can deliver greater amounts of drugs to target cells with less toxicity. Effective antiviral lipid derivatives of nucleoside analogues comprise phosphatidyl 2 3 dideoxynucleosides 2 3 didehydronucleosides 3 azido 2 deoxynucleosides 3 fluorodeosynucleosides and 3 fluorodideoxynucleosides 9 D arabinofuranosyladenine araA 1 D arabinofuranosylcytidine araC nucleosides such as acyclovir and gancyclovir having an acyclic ribose group or the same nucleoside analogues as diphosphate diglyceride derivatives. Preferred species of lipid derivatives of antiviral or antiretroviral nucleoside analogues for the treatment of HIV infection using cationic lipid mediated liposomal delivery are phospholipid derivatives of 3 halopyrimidine dideoxynucleoside or a 2 3 didehydro 2 3 dideoxynucleoside for example phosphatidyl 3 azido 3 deoxythymidine pAZT or phosphatidyl 2 chlorodeoxyadenosine. Certain viral infections comprising herpes cytomegalovirus and hepatitis B infections are effectively treated with nucleoside analogues comprising acyclovir gancyclovir 1 2 deoxy 2 fluoro 1 D arabinofuranosyl 5 iodouracil FIAU . Phospholipid derivatives of these agents preferably the phosphatidyl and diphosphate diglyceride derivatives can be administered in these diseases using cationic lipid liposomal delivery systems according to the invention. Details of the structures synthesis and liposomal delivery of lipid derivatives of antiviral nucleosides are presented in U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 216 412 319 485 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 223 263 which are hereby incorporated by reference.

Among other therapeutically important agents that can be thus delivered are peptides comprising physiologic species such as interleukin 2 tumor necrosis factor tissue plasminogen activator factor VIII erythropoietin growth factors such as epidermal growth factor growth hormone releasing factor neural growth factor and hormones such as tissue insulin calcitonin and human growth hormone as well as toxic peptides such as ricin diphtheria toxin or cobra venom factor capable of eliminating diseased or malignant cells.

Use of the disclosed lipids is also contemplated for the encapsulation of various other agents to be delivered intra cellularly according to methods known to those skilled in the art and as described in Duzgunes N. 11 195 286 1985 . Materials to be delivered can be proteins or polypeptides especially negatively charged molecules monoclonal antibodies RNA stabilizing factors and other transcription and translation regulating factors antisense oligonucleotides ribozymes and any molecule possessing intracellular activity. Such encapsulation further protects the described agents from non productive sequestration by substances of the extracellular environment.

Several classes of drugs consisting of small organic molecules can be delivered in the formulations as described above. One such class comprises steroidal anti inflammatory agents which may be prepared in liposomal formulations for topical application. Drugs of this class comprise hydrocortisone fluocinolone acetonide available as Synalar Syntex Palo Alto Calif. 94303 fluocinonide available as Lidex Syntex Palo Alto Calif. 94303 and dexamethasone available as Decaderm Merck Sharpe and Dohme West Point Pa. 19486 .

Another group of drugs that can be delivered orally topically or systemically with the cationic lipid materials according to formulations of the invention are non steroidal anti inflammatory agents such as for example 1 acetylsalicylic acid aspirin Bayer piroxicam available as Feldene Pfizere New York N.Y. 10017 Z 5 fluoro 2 methyl 1 p alcohol methylsulfinyl phenyl methylene 1 H indene 3 acetic acid sulindac available as Clinoril Merck Sharpe and Dohme West Point Pa. 19486 2 2 6 dichloropheny 1 amino benzeneacetic acid monosodium salt diclofenae available as Voltaren Ciba Geigy Summit N.J. 2 4 difluoro 4 hydroxy 3 biphenylcarboxylic acid diflunisal available as Dolobid Merck Sharpe and Dohme 2 p isobutylphenyl propionic acid ibuprofen available as Advil Whitehall Laboratories Inc. New York N.Y. 10017 N 2 6 dichloro m tolyl anthranilic acid meclophenomate available as Meclomen parke Davis Morris Plains N.J. 07950 fenoprofen an arylacetic acid derivative available as Nalfon Dista Products Co. Indianapolis Ind. 46285 2 naphthaleneacetic acid 6 methoxy alpha methyl naproxyn available as Naprosyn Syntex Palo Alto Calif. 94303 1 methyl 5 4 methylbenzoyl 1H pyrrole 2 acetate dihydrate tolmetin available as Tolectin McNeil Pharmaceutical Spring House Pa. 19477 and derivatives and congeners thereof.

The cationic lipids of the invention can be used in pharmaceutical formulations to deliver therapeutic agents by various routes and to various sites in the animal body to achieve a desired therapeutic effect. Local or systemic delivery of the therapeutic agent can be achieved by administration comprising application or insertion of the formulation into body cavities inhalation or insufflation of an aerosol or by parenteral introduction comprising intramuscular intravenous intradermal peritoneal subcutaneous and topical administration. The polynucleotides may be delivered to the interstitial space of tissues of the animal body including those of muscle skin brain lung liver spleen bone marrow thymus heart lymph blood bone cartilage pancreas kidney gall bladder stomach intestine testis ovary uterus rectum nervous system eye gland and connective tissue. Interstitial space of the tissues comprises the intercellular fluid mucopolysaccharide matrix among the reticular fibers of organ tissues elastic fibers in the walls of vessels or chambers collagen fibers of fibrous tissues or that same matrix within connective tissue ensheathing muscle cells or in the lacunae of bone. It is similarly the space occupied by the plasma of the circulation and the lymph fluid of the lymphatic channels. The effect of the cationic lipids in these formulations is to enhance the potency and efficiency of the therapeutic agent contained therein by facilitating its intracellular delivery.

The present lipocomplexes may be conveniently delivered by injection into the tissues comprising these cells. They are preferably delivered to and expressed in persistent non dividing cells which are differentiated although delivery and expression may be achieved in non differentiated or less completely differentiated cells such as for example stem cells of blood or skin fibroblasts. In vivo muscle cells are particularly competent in their ability to take up and express polynucleotides. This ability may be due to the singular tissue architecture of muscle comprising multinucleated cells sarcoplasmic reticulum and transverse tubular system. Polynucleotides may enter the muscle through the transverse tubular system which contains extracellular fluid and extends deep into the muscle cell. It is also possible that the polynucleotides enter damaged muscle cells which then recover.

In all of the administration strategies presented herein an effective DNA or mRNA dosage will generally be in the range of from about 0.02 g kg to about 100 mg kg usually about 0.005 5 mg kg. However as will be appreciated this dosage will vary in a manner apparent to those of skill in the art according to the activity of the peptide coded for by the DNA or mRNA and the particular peptide used. For delivery of adenosine deaminase to mice or humans for example adequate levels of translation are achieved with a DNA or mRNA dosage of about 0.5 to 5 mg kg. From this information dosages for other peptides of known activity can be readily determined.

Topical formulations are those advantageously applied to the skin or mucosa. Target mucosa can be that of the gastrointestinal tract comprising the mouth nasopharynx and stomach or the vaginal or anorectal mucosa. Other target tissues can be the accessible surfaces and canal of the ear and the ocular tissues. Cationic lipids present in topical formulations can act to facilitate introduction of bioactive molecules into the target tissue such as the stratum corneum of the skin by perturbing the barrier properties of the protective membrane or by introducing perturbing agents or penetration enhancers such as Azone or by promoting the activity of these penetration enhancers. They may also be delivered into muscle or skin using a vaccine gun.

Other topical formulations comprising the cationic lipids are preparations comprising topical antibiotics such as clindamycin tobramycin neomycin gentamycin tetracycline erythromycin oxidants such as benzoyl peroxide antifungal agents such as clotrimazole miconazole nystatin lactoconzole econazole and tolnaftate retinoic acid for the treatment of herpes simplex and comprising antiviral nucleoside analogues such as acyclovir and gancyclovir. These nucleoside analogue formulations preferably comprise lipid derivatives of the antiviral agents particularly the phosphatidylglycerol derivatives as disclosed in U.S. application Ser. No. 373 088 and such may be incorporated into liposomes comprising one or more cationic lipids of the invention.

Other pharmaceutical formulations comprising the cationic lipids of the invention are topical preparations containing an anesthetic or cytostatic agent immunomodulators bioactive peptides or oligonucleotides sunscreens or cosmetics. Preparations for topical use are conveniently prepared with hydrophilic and hydrophobic bases in the form of creams lotions ointments or gels alternatively the preparation may be in the form of a liquid that is sprayed on the skin. The effect of the cationic lipids is to facilitate the penetration of the active antiviral agent through the stratum corneum of the dermis.

Similar preparations for ophthalmic use are those in which the pharmacologically effective agent is timolol betaxolol levobunaloa pilocarpine and the antibiotics and corticosteriods disclosed for topical applications.

The composition and form of pharmaceutical preparations comprising the cationic lipids disclosed in combination with a drug or other therapeutic agent can vary according to the intended route of administration.

Orally administered preparations may be in the form of solids liquids emulsions suspensions or gels or preferably in dosage unit form for example as tablets or capsules. Tablets may be compounded in combination with other ingredients customarily used such as tale vegetable oils polyols gums gelatin starch and other carriers. The lipid vesicles may be dispersed in or combined with a suitable liquid carrier in solutions suspensions or emulsions.

Parenteral compositions intended for injection either subcutaneously intramuscularly or intravenously can be prepared with as liquids or solid forms for solution in liquid prior to injection or as emulsions. Such preparations are sterile and liquids to be injected intravenously should be isotonic. Suitable excipients are for example water dextrose saline and glycerol.

Administration of pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the polynucleotides described herein is included within the scope of the invention. Such salts may be prepared from pharmaceutically acceptable non toxic bases including organic bases and inorganic bases. Salts derived from inorganic bases include sodium potassium lithium ammonium calcium magnesium and the like. Salts derived from pharmaceutically acceptable organic non toxic bases include salts of primary secondary and tertiary amines basic amino acids and the like. For a helpful discussion of pharmaceutical salts see S. M. Berge et al. 66 1 19 1977 the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference.

Polynucleotides for injection a preferred route of delivery may be prepared in unit dosage form in ampules or in multidose containers. The polynucleotides may be present in such forms as suspensions solutions or emulsions in oily or preferably aqueous vehicles. Alternatively the polynucleotide salt may be in lyophilized form for reconstitution at the time of delivery with a suitable vehicle such as sterile pyrogen free water. Both liquids as well as lyophilized forms that are to be reconstituted will comprise agents preferably buffers in amounts necessary to suitably adjust the pH of the injected solution. For any parenteral use particularly if the formulation is to be administered intravenously the total concentration of solutes should be controlled to make the preparation isotonic hypotonic or weakly hypertonic. Nonionic materials such as sugars are preferred for adjusting tonicity and sucrose is particularly preferred. Any of these forms may further comprise suitable formulatory agents such as starch or sugar glycerol or saline. The compositions per unit dosage wether liquid or solid may contain from 0.1 to 99 of polynucleotide material.

The units dosage ampules or multidose containers in which the polynucleotides are packaged prior to use may comprise an hermetically sealed container enclosing an amount of polynucleotide or solution containing a polynucleotide suitable for a pharmaceutically effective dose thereof or multiples of an effective dose. The polynucleotide is packaged as a sterile formulation and the hermetically sealed container is designed to preserve sterility of the formulation until use.

The cationic lipids of the invention may also be present in liquids emulsions or suspensions for delivery of active therapeutic agents in aerosol form to cavities of the body such as the nose throat or bronchial passages. The ratio of active ingredient to the cationic lipid and the other compounding agents in these preparations will vary as the dosage form requires.

Depending on the intended mode of administration the pharmaceutical compositions may be in the form of solid semi solid or liquid dosage forms such as for example tablets suppositories pills capsules powders liquids suspensions lotions creams gels or the like preferably in unit dosage form suitable for single administration of a precise dosage. The compositions will include as noted above an effective amount of the selected lipocomplex in combination with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and in addition may include other medicinal agents pharmaceutical agents carriers adjuvants diluents etc.

For solid compositions conventional nontoxic solid carriers include for example pharmaceutical grades of mannitol lactose starch magnesium stearate sodium saccharin talc cellulose glucose sucrose magnesium carbonate and the like. Liquid pharmaceutically administrable compositions can for example be prepared by dissolving dispersing etc. an active compound as described herein and optional pharmaceutical adjuvants in an excipient such as for example water saline aqueous dextrose glycerol ethanol and the like to thereby form a solution or suspension. If desired the pharmaceutical composition to be administered may also contain minor amounts of nontoxic auxiliary substances such as wetting or emulsifying agents pH buffering agents and the like for example sodium acetate sorbitan monolaurate triethanolamine sodium acetate triethanolamine oleate etc. Actual methods of preparing such dosage forms are known or will be apparent to those skilled in this art for example see referenced above.

Parental administration if used is generally characterized by injection. Injectables can be prepared in conventional forms either as liquid solutions or suspensions solid forms suitable for solution or suspension in liquid prior to injection or as emulsions. A more recently revised approach for parental administration involves use of a slow release or sustained release system such that a constant level of dosage is maintained. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 3 710 795 which is incorporated by reference herein.

According to the methods of the invention both expressible DNA and mRNA can be delivered to cells to form therein a polypeptide translation product. If the nucleic acids contain the proper control sequences they will direct the synthesis of relatively large amounts of the encoded protein. When the DNA and mRNA delivered to the cells codes for an immunizing peptide the methods can be applied to achieve improved and more effective immunity against infectious agents including intracellular viruses and also against tumor cells.

Beyond the therapies described the method of the invention can be used to deliver polynucleotides to animal stock to increase production of milk in diary cattle or muscle mass in animals that are raised for meat.

Since the immune systems of all vertebrates operate similarly the applications described can be implemented in all vertebrate systems comprising mammalian and avian species as well as fish.

The compounds DOPE DOTAP and cholosterol were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids. Oleyl alcohol oleyl bromide and oleyl chloride were purchased from Sigma. 3 morpholino 1 2 propanediol 3 pyrrolino 1 2 propanediol 2 bromoethanol morpholine sodium hydrate dioxine methanesulfonyl chloride trimethylamine and pyridine were purchased form Aldrich. PCMV a derivative of pcDNA3 expression vector Invitrogen Calif. containing firefly luciferase cDNA driven by the CMV promoter was a gift from Dr. Leaf Huang. Plasmid DNA was purified from DH51 Gibco BRL MD using standard alkaline lysis and two runs of CSCl ethidum bromide gradient centrifugation methods described in Sambrook J. et al. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press New York 1989 and kept in TE buffer pH 8.0. The purity of the plasmid DNA was determined by 260 and 280 nm absorbance and 0.8 agarose gel electrophoresis.

The following examples are set forth so as to provide those of ordinary skill in the art with a complete disclosure and description of how the compounds claimed herein are made and evaluated and are intended to be purely exemplary of the invention and are not intended to limit the scope of what the inventors regard as their invention. Efforts have been made to ensure accuracy with respect to numbers e.g. amounts temperature etc. but some errors and deviations should be accounted for. Unless indicated otherwise parts are parts by weight temperature is in C. or is at room temperature and pressure is at or near atmospheric.

The synthesis of 1 2 dioleyl 3 N N dimethylamino propane DODMA 1 2 dioleyl N 3 morpholino propane DOMP 1 2 dioleyl 3 pyrrolino propane DOPP was done in a manner similar to that previously described by Felgner 1994 . Briefly 3 dimethyl amino propanediol 3 morpholino 1 2 propanediol or 3pyrrolino 1 2 propanediol was alkylated with oleyl methanesulfate at 140 150 C. in dioxane for 48 hours in a pressure tube to give DODMA DOMP and DOPP respectively. After routine work up the crude tertiary amino lipids were purified with silica gel chromotograph using CHCl methanol. The purified tertiary amino lipids were then quaternized with methyl iodine or benzyl chloride at room temperature for 48 hours in the dark. After removing excess methyl iodine or benzyl chloride by evaporation the residuals were dissolved in chloroform and extracted with brine. Finally quaternary ammonium lipids were purified by column chromatography with silica gel using chloroform and step increased gradient of methanol to give DOTMA N 3 methyl 1 2 dioleyl 3 morpholinium propane chloride methyl morpholinium ether MMET N 3 benzyl 1 2 dioleyl 3 morpholinium propane BMET 3 methyl 1 2 dioleyl 3 pyrrolinium propane MPET and N 3 benzyl 1 2 dioleyl 3 pyrrolinium propane BPET .

N 3 methyl 1 2 dioleoyl 3 morpholinium propane methyl morpholinium ester MMES and N 3 methyl 1 2 dioleoul 3 pyrrolinum propane MPES were synthesized similarly to that previously described for DOTAP by Leventis R. et al. 1023 124 132. Briefly oleyol chloride in CHClwas added to 3 morpholino 1 2 propanediol or 3 pyrrolino 1 2 propanediol in TEA CHClat room temperature to give 1 2 dioleoyl 3 morpholino propane and 1 2 dioleoyl 3 pyrrolino propane respectively. The tertiary amino lipids were then purified by brine extraction followed by silica gel chromatography. The quaternization and purification of the tertiary amino lipids were done similarly to the dialky lipids described above.

Cationic liposomes of formulas I VI were prepared from pure cationic lipids or as equimolar mixtures of a cationic lipid and neutral lipids such as DOPE or cholesterol using extrusion or sonication methods. One hundred moles of a cationic lipid or one hundred moles each of a cationic lipid and a selected neutral lipid were dissolved in a round bottom flask. The organic solvent was then evaporated under vacuum at 45 C. to form a thin lipid film. The residual solvent was further removed under high vacuum for one hour. The lipid film was then suspended with 10 ml of endotoxin free distilled water Gibco BRL MD at room temperature for one hour and subsequently extruded using 0.8 m 0.4 m and 0.2 m pore size filters. The extruded multilammelar liposomes have sizes of 850 nm 350 nm and 280 nm in diameter respectively. Some of the extruded liposomes were further sonicated in a bath sonicator for 2 5 minutes to form unilamellar liposomes with a size of about 100 nm in diameter. The size of the liposomes were measured by 90 laser dynamic light scattering using a Zetamaster submicron particle analyzer.

For transfection in vivo normal CD 1 mouse was used as a model. The charge ration of lipid to DNA was used throughout the study assuming that 25 g of DNA contains about 75 nmoles of negative charges and one nmole of quaternary ammonium cationic lipid contains one nmole of positive charges. To prepare lipoplex for transfection 25 g or an indicated amounts of pCMV DNA was diluted in 100 l of distilled water endotoxin screened Gibco . The diluted DNA solution was added to a polystyrene tube containing an indicated amount of cationic liposomes in 100 l and was mixed immediately. The complexes were kept at room temperature for 30 minutes before being administered to the animals via tail vein.

Luciferase activity was measured in various organs including lung liver spleen and heart from transfected animals using a luciferase activity assay kit Promega Madison Wis. and a luminometer Moonlight 3010 . Organs were collected from the animals at 12 hours post transfection or at an indicated time after injection of lipoplex. About 0.2 g of liver were removed from the animal. One ml of 1 lysis buffer Promega Madison Wis. supplemented with 0.1 Triton X100 was added to collected organs. Each organ was homogenized for 10 20 seconds using a handheld homogenizer Dremel Racine Wis. as it top speed about 30 000 rpm . The samples were centrifuged in a microcentrifuge for three minutes. A 10 L of the cleared supernatant containing approximately 100 200 g proteins was measured for luciferase activity. Protein content in the supernatants was determined with BioRad dye reagent method using albumin as a standard. The luciferase activities were normalized to the relative light unit per milligram of extracted protein.

In vivo transfection activity of lipoplex is dependent on the structure of cationic lipid and the ration of lipid to DNA.

We have screened the in vivo activities of the present lipids. Among these lipids several showed promising in vivo transfection activity. B and C list the chemical structures of cationic lipids that were used in this study. Among them are two well known cationic lipids DOTAP and DOTMA both have identical trimethylammonium head groups glycerol interface structures and C18 1 lipid chains but differ in the chemical bonds. DOTAP has ester bonds that link the lipid chains whereas DOTMA has wether bonds. The new lipids belong to diester or diether bonds with different head groups LADOP has a lysyl head group that links to a dioleyol glycerol via an amide bond the head groups of MMES and MMET are methylated oxygen containing six member morpholinium ring structures and the head groups of MMES and MMET are methylated oxygen containing six member morpholinium ring structures and the head groups of MPES and MPET contains a methylated five member pyrrolinium ring structures. With the exception of the head group structures these new lipids are close analogues to DOTAP and DOTMA respectively. To study the significance of chemical structures related to the detailed chemical structures the interface structures and the space arms in particular several cationic lipids with methyl morpholinium or trimethylammonium head groups linked to double oleyl chains through different linker structures were also synthesized. compares the in vivo transfection activity of PCMV Luc complexed with cationic liposomes prepared from DOTAP and DOTMA in lungs 12 hours after i.v. administration with those obtained with three of our novel cationic lipids LADOP MMES and MMET. Different levels of luciferase activity were detected in all organs detected in all organs tested in the order of lung heart spleen liver. The lungs are 10 to 1000 fold higher than the rest of the organs. For the clearance of presentation only the specific luciferase activity in the lungs was presented in . It is clear that when liposomes composed of pure cationic lipids are used the in vivo transfection activity of the lipoplex is related to the charge ratios of cationic lipid and DNA following a trend that progressively increased luciferase activity was obtained with an increased charge ratios. The highest levels of luciferase activity were observed when 16 1 charge ratios were used. This is true for all five lipids tested regardless of their chemical structures At the ratio of 8 1 to 16 1 the transfection activity is ranked in the order of MMET DOTMA MMES DOTAP LADOP. At 16 1 ratios the lungs from animals treated with DNA and MMET or DOTMA liposomes resulted in luciferase activity as high as 10 7 light using units mg protein. Further increase of charge rations failed to increase the luciferase activity. A close look also revealed that both morpholinium lipid resulted in higher levels of luciferase activity in the lungs at lower charge ratios 4 1 . So it appears that at 4 1 ratios MMET and MMES which share a unique six member ring quaternary ammonium structure mediated higher levels of transfection than did their counterparts with simple trimethylammoniunm head groups DOTMA and DOTAP respectively although the difference is less at higher charge ratios.

Time course of luciferase gene expression in organs indicated that organs collected at 12 hours post transfection have approached the peak of gene expression which lasted about 24 hours. The activity started to decline afterwards and reduced about 1 of peak level by 96 hours post transfection .

The effect of helper lipids on in vivo gene transfection was evaluated using DOPE and cholesterol and two cationic lipids DOTMA and MMET. In these experiments liposomes were prepared by extrusion method from pure cationic lipids or 1 1 mole ratio of cationic lipid with DOPE or cholesterol. When 30 g pCMV Luc were used to transfect mice at various lipid to DNA ratios the compositions of the liposomes resulted in a drastic difference in the levels of transfection in the lung. It is evident that inclusion of DOPE in the transfection reduces the transfection activities of the cationic liposomes by a factor of 10 fold when compared to the liposome formed with cationic lipid alone. A 1 1 mixture of cationic lipid and cholesterol on the other hand enhances the transfection activities in lungs by 2 20 fold depending on the nature of the cationic lipids and the charge ratio used when compared to cationic lipids alone . Despite the fact that DOTMA cholesterol cationic liposomes are 2 10 fold more potent in transfection in the lungs than DOTMA liposomes the relationship between lipid DNA charge ratios and transfection are quite similar to each other. Both showed a gradual increase in transfection activities as the ratios are increased. On the other hand MMET cholesterol behaved very differently than MMET liposomes and liposomes containing DOTMA in that it reached the maximum transfection activity at lower charge ratios with MMET liposomes in although in this experiment the difference between DOTMA and MMET liposomes at 1 4 charge ratios is less prominent possibly due to the increased total dose of DNA used in this experiment.

Different lipid compositions also showed different toxicity to the treated animals. Table 2 below lists the number of animals that expired during the first 48 hours of the experiment period when escalating doses of the lipoplexes were given to a group of three animals. Lipoplex containing 25 g of DNA and DOTMA or MMET liposomes at 1 16 charge ratio or with a mixture of cholesterol DOTMA or cholesterol MMET at 1 4 charge ratios appear to be quite safe for CD 1 mice. Higher charge ratios of lipid to DNA and high doses of lipoplex were required to reach a lethal dose. As indicated in Table 2 liposomes composed of DOTMA DOPE or MMET DOPE caused the least toxicity. Liposomes containing cholesterol appeared to be the most toxic and the toxicity of DOTMA and MMET liposomes were somewhere in between. In general MMET containing liposomes were less toxic than the ones containing DOTMA.

To study the effect of the initial size of cationic liposomes on the transfection activity of cationic lipid DNA complexes we tested in vivo transfection activities of MMET cholesterol liposomes of different sizes prepared by different methods. Two charge ratios were used in the this study a 4 1 ratio that has been previously shown to be the most active and a further reduced charge ratio of 2 1. In both cases the increase of the sizes of lipoplexes was less than 50 of the sizes of the liposomes. The results are shown in . It is clear that at optimal ratios of 4 1 or higher liposomes with larger particle sizes prepared by the extrusion method 280 nm are 2 fold more active than the small liposomes with an initial size of 155 nm prepared by the sonication method. The difference becomes more drastic when a lower charge ratio 2 1 is used. There is an approximate 30 fold drop in the luciferase activity in lungs transfected with small liposomes at this ratio when compared to 4 1 ratio whereas when using liposomes of larger sizes lowered 2 1 charge ratios only resulted in a little more than 2 fold decrease. In fact the lungs transfected with lipoplex prepared from liposomes of 280 nm in size and 2 1 ratios achieved an excellent level of transgene expression of about 2 10RLU mg protein.

When we further determined the lower end of lipid to DNA ratio that was capable of transfection in vivo we found yet another interesting phenomena that the size of the MMET cholesterol liposomes were also important to the in vivo transfection particularly at a reduced ratios of 2 1 . It was shown that sonicated small liposomes of 155 nm in diameter had much reduced transfection activity when used as lipid DNA complexes at 2 to 1 ratios. The activity was restored if higher ratios of lipid to DNA were used. However when liposomes of 280 nm in diameter or greater were used a significant portion of the transfection activity was obtained even at a 2 1 ratio. With the combination of both improvements that is by using extruded MMET cholesterol of about 280 nm in diameter at a ratio as low as 2 1 we can achieve about 45 of the maximal transfection obtained using 1 4 charge ratios. Those modification allow us to transfect animals efficiently with minimal toxicity using MMET cholesterol cationic liposomes.

Out of the dozen or more analogues of MMET that were synthesized and tested most were active in transfection in vivo to the lungs when formulated with cholesterol at 1 1 mole ratios. However none of these were superior to MMET. Table 3 below shows the transfection activities of the other novel synthesized cationic lipids listed in B and C. The results can be summarized as follows 1 dioleyl morpholino propanediol the tertiary amino lipid precursor of MMET had only weak activity 2 N N di alkyl morpholinium derivatives were equally as active as the methyl morpholinium propanediol derivatives 3 further increase in the length of spacer between head group and lipid anchor to 8 atoms reduced the transfection activity of the lipids by about 30 fold 4 cationic lipids with methylpyrrolinium five member ring head groups were also active 5 substitution of N methyl morpholinium group with a N benzyl group reduce the activity by 5 fold and 6 changing the lipid chains from monounsaturated oleyl chains C18 1 to saturated chains C14 reduced the in vivo transfection activity by 10 fold. For the series of morpholinol lipids the exact linkage between morpholinium group and lipid portion is less critical as long as the space between the head group and the lipid anchors is not too far apart. For example lipids with 3 N 1 2 propandiol as backbone such as MMET and those with N N dialkyl lipids with or without ethylene spacer were all active.

Perhaps the most interesting finding in this study is the effect of cholesterol on the transfection activity and the optimal ratio of lipid to DNA to reach such a transfection level for MMET. Formulations containing cholesterol have been reported effective in vivo recently including DOTIM DOTAP DDAB and DOTMA cationic lipids Solodin I. et al. Templeton N. S. et al. Li S. et al. Hong K. et al. Liu Y. et al. and Song Y. K. et al. . Song and his colleagues reported that DOTMA cholesterol liposomes prepared in phosphorous buffered saline did not provide any enhanced transfection activity over liposomes prepared from DOTMA alone Song Y. K. et al. .

It has been found in our study however that liposomes containing equimolar cholesterol and DOTMA showed consistently 5 to 10 fold higher transfection activity over liposomes containing DOTMA alone. Similar enhancement of the transfection activity was also observed for MMET cholesterol over MMET liposome formulation. We suspect that it is because we used water to prepare the liposome which does not cause aggregation or membrane alteration on liposome by phosphate anion. Surprisingly MMET cholesterol behaved quite differently from that of DOTMA cholesterol when lower charge ratios were used to transfect mouse intravenously. MMET cholesterol reached the maximal transfection activity at a relatively low lipid to DNA ratio of 4 to 1 whereas DOTMA cholesterol did not reach the maximum until 16 to 1. We believe that this unique feature of MMET cholesterol could provide high levels of transfection while minimizing the toxicity therefore providing greater safety for in vivo transfection.

To a solution of 0.68 g 7.5 mmole 3 amino 1 2 propanediol in 20 ml dry methanol 1.1 ml 8 mmole triethylamine TEA in 10 ml methanol was added. At room temperature a solution of 3.1 g 7 mmole N N diBoc lysine N hydroxysuccinimide ester in CHCl 20 ml was added. The reaction was allowed to continue for 1 hour after which the solvents were evaporated. The solid was dissolved in 100 ml CHCland washed with brine 200 ml twice. The organic phase was collected and dried over sodium sulfate and the solvent was evaporated. The product was purified using 40 g silica gel to give diBoc lysyl3 amino 1.2 propandiol 2.51 g 5.54 mmole . To a solution of 0.65 g 1.5 mmole diBoc lysyl3 amino 1.2 propandiol in dry CH2Cl2 1 ml TEA and 1 ml oleic chloride 3 mmole was added. The reaction was allowed to continue for 4 hrs. After routine work up the product was purified with 20 g silica gel. The Boc protecting groups were then removed by trifluoroacetate TFA CH2Cl2. The solvents and the excess of trifluoroacetate was removed by evaporation to yield 2.2 g final product 1 2 dioleyl 3 N lysyl amino propane in trifluoroacetate saltform.

NMR spectrum data chemical shift 0.85 t CH 6H 1.24 s CH 50H 1.51 s CHCO 4H 1.97 s CHC 8H 2.24 s CHN 2H 2.85 W CHNCO 2H 3.48 q CH CO 1H 4.00 w CHOCO CHOCO 3H 5.02 w CO NH 1H 5.30 s CH CH 4H 7.59 8.49 w NH 6H .

To a soultion of 3 N morpholino 1 2 propandiol 161 mg 1 mmole in 5 ml DMSO 0.4 g KOH was added. After 20 minutes 1 g 3 mmoles of oleyl methanesulfonate in 2 ml DMSO was added. The reaction was performed under Ar2 at room temperature for 20 h. The reaction mixture was washed with brine in hexane and purified with silica gel. The yield of 1 2 dioleyl 3 N morpholino 1 2 propane was 540 mg as colorless oil. To convert 1 2 dioleyl 3 N morpholino 1 2 propane to MMET 330 mg of 1 2 dioleyl 3N morpholino 1 2 propane 0.5 mmole was dissolved in 5 ml methanol to which 500 l of CHI was added. The reaction was performed at room temperature at dark. The organic solvents were removed by a rotovapor. The residue were dissolved in 100 ml CHCl3 and washed with brine. The crude product was purified over silica gel to give 300 mg final product. NMR data chemical shift 0.84 t CH 6H 1.23 s CH 44H 1.51 m CHC O 4H 2.03 m CHC 8H 3.40 m CH O 6H 3.66 14 head group H 5.31 m CH 4H .

Synthesis of N N dioctadecyl 3 propyldiamine To a suspension containing 2 g of dioctadecylamine 4 mmole in 20 ml methanol and 20 ml CHCl was added 20 ml CH CHCN. The reaction was contineud for 24 h at room temperature. The solvents were removed under vacuum and the product was purified with silica gel. The product was then dissolved in 20 ml ether and 2 g of LiAlHwas added. The reduction was allowed for overnight at room temperature. The reaction was stopped with dilute NaOH in water at 0 C. The reaction mixture was filtered. The organic solvent was dried over sodium sulfate and evaporated to give 2.3 g white powder. NMR data CDCl chemical shift 0.86 t CH8H 1.24 64H CH s 1.49 2H N C CH C N m 1.59 2H NH m 2.39 6H CHN m 2.70 2H CHN t .

To 0.58 g 3N aminopropyl NN dioctadecylamine in 20 ml CHClwas added with 0.49 g 1.1 mmole di Boc lysine NHS ester in 20 ml CHCl. After 2 h the reaction was stopped and extracted with dilute NaOH in water dried over sodium sulfate. The product was purified on silica gel and deprotected with TFA CHClas in LADOP synthesis to give 0.5 g desired product.

NMR data CDCl 0.86 6H CH t 1.24 64H CH s 1.66 8H CH 2.01 4H NH 3.03 10H CHN 4.19 1H alpha Hon lysine group 7.99 1H HNCO .

To 1.41 g of the immediate 18 1 lys 2 mmole in 20 ml CHCl 0.56 ml TEA 4 mmole and 2.01 g CBZ Boc lysine NHS ester in 20 ml CHClwas added. The reaction was carried out at room temperature for 2 h. After routine work up the product was purified with silica gel to give 1.7 g white solid. The Boc groups were removed with TFA CHCland washed with dilute NaOH to give 1.3 g 18 1 lys3 CBZ2 1 mmole .

1.3 g of the intermediate 18 1 lys3 CBZ2 1 mmole and 0.42 ml TEA in 50 ml CHClwas added 4.2 g of CBZ Boc lysine NHS ester in 50 ml CHCl. After 2 h the reaction was stopped and worked up. The product was purified with silica gel. Purified product 0.83 g was treated with TFA CHClto remove Boc groups to give 0.8 g 18 1 lys5 CBZ4. From 520 mg of 18 1 lys5 CBZ4 the CBZ groups were removed by Pd Hin 10 ml ethanol with 0.5 ml acetic acid at room temperature under 1 atm for 2 h to give final product 0.44 g .

To 300 mg of 3 N N dimethylamino 1 2 propandiol 3 mmole and 500 ul of TEA in 10 ml dioxane 2.1 g of oleyol chloride in 10 ml CHCl 7 mmole was added. The reaction was carried out at room temperature for 2 h. After routine work up the product was purified with silica gel yielding 2.2 g of 1 2 dioleoyl 3 N N dimethylamion propane DODAP . To a solution of 619 mg 1 mmole of DODAP in 20 ml ethanol 1.26 g 10 mmole benzyl chloride was added and refluxed for 72 h under Ar2. The reaction was stopped and organic solvents evaporated. The product was purified on silica gel to give 120 mg of desired compound in chloride form.

To a solution of 1.4 g 2 dimethylaminoethyanethiol hrydrochloride 10 mmole in ethanol 463 mg of cholesteryl chloroacetate in 20 ml CHCland 1 ml TEA were added. The reaction was carried out at room temperature for 2 days. The resulting mixture was worked up as routine and the product was purified by silica gel yielding 210 mg of desired compound.

To a solution of 390 mg of 5 alpha cholestan 3 one in 10 ml ethanol and 170 mg 1 mmole carbonylmethyl N N N trimethyl ammonium chloride hydrazide in 10 ml methanol was added. The solution was heated slightly and 2 g of molecular sieves 4A and 5 l of HCl conc. was added. The reaction was carried out for overnight at room temperature under stirring. After filtration the solid was redissolved in 2 ml Methanol and 20 ml CHCl. The product was purified using silica gel to give 400 mg white crystal.

 Step 1 To 1.75 g of dioleyl sn glycerol in 13 ml CHCLand 0.78 ml TEA 1.16 g Bromoacetylbromide in 10 ml CHClwas added. The reaction was carried out at 4 C overnight. The reaction was stopped by dilution with 100 ml CH2Cl2 and washed twice with 100 ml diluted citric acid 0.1 M twice and once with water. The organic phase was dried over sodium sulfate then purified with silica gel to give 1.88 g 1 2 di oleoyl 3 betabromoacetyl sn glycerol as oil.

 Step 2 To 0.37 g 0.5 mmole 1 2 di oleoyl 3 2 bromoacetyl sn glycerol in 5 ml CHClwas added 0.07 g 0.5 mmole 2 dimethylaminoethanethiol hydrochloried and 0.1 g 1 mmole sodium carbonate in 5 ml methanol. The reaction was carried out at room temperature overnight. After routine work up the final product was purified using silica gel to give 0.2 g colorless oil.

To a solution of 100 mg of 1 2 O dioleoyl 3 2 dimethylaminoethyl thioacetyl sn glycerol in 5 ml methanol 100 l of CHI was added. The reaction was carried out at room temperature overnight at dark. After removal of solvents the product was obtained by silica gel purification.

To a solution of 1 g N N dioctadecyl 3 propyldiamine in 40 ml methanol 10 ml acrylnitrile was added. The reaction was carried out at room temperature for three days. The organic solvents was evaporated. The reaction mixture was purified on silica gel. About 0.7 g of di substituted amine was obtained remaining was mono substitute. The di substitute intermediate was dissolved in 10 ml ether and 0.1 g of LiAlHwas added at 0 C. The reaction was stopped after 2 h with diluted NaOH and extracted with 100 ml hexane and filtrated. The filtrate was washed twice with water and dried by sodium sulfate. After evaporation of organic solvents a yellowish oil was obtained which give a major spot on TLC that was reactive with flourescamine indicated primary amine. To facilitate the purification the crude amine was reacted with excess of Boc anhydrate and TEA in CHCl3 to give di Boc diamine as major spot on TLC. The boc substituted diamine was purified from silica gel. Finally this intermediate was deprotected with TFA CHCland washed with diluted NaCOand dried to give desired product.

Synthesis of 8 3 N N dioctadecylaminopropyl 4 8 12 triazapemntadecane 1 15 diamine 12a and 4 12 di 3 aminopropyl 8 3 N N dioctadecylaminopropyl 4 8 12 triazapentadecane 1 15 diamine 12b 

To a solution of 3 g of N N dioctadecyl 4 3 aminopropyl 4 azahexane 1 7 diamine Ex. 11 in methanol CHCl1 1 20 ml acyInitrile was added. The reaction was carried at 60 C for 40 minute then room temperature for 3 days. The mixture was purifed on silica gel to give di substituted and tetra substituted intermediates of N N dioctadecyl 4 3 aminopropyl 4 azahexane 1 7 diamine Ex. 11 . Follow the same reduction condition described above for the synthesis of N N dioctadecyl 4 3 aminopropyl 4 azahexane 1 7 diamine Ex. 11 8 3 N N dioctadecylaminopropyl 4 8 12 triazapemntadecane 1 15 diamine 12a was prepared from di substituted N N dioctadecyl 4 3 aminopropyl 4 azahexane 1 7 diamine Ex. 11 and 4 12 di 3 aminopropyl 8 3 N N dioctadecylaminopropyl 4 8 12 triazapentadecane 1 15 diamine 12b from tetra substituted N N dioctadecyl 4 3 aminopropyl 4 azahexane 1 7 diamine Ex. 11 .

To a solution of 0.9 g 1.3 mmole N N dioctadecyl 4 3 aminopropyl 4 azahexane 1 7 diamine Ex. 11 in 40 ml CHCl 1.2 g 2.7 mmoles of di Boc Lysine ester in 40 ml and 2 ml of TEA was added. The reaction was stopped at 2 h washed with diluted NaCOand water and dried over NaSO. The Bis Boc lysyl derivative of N N dioctadecyl 4 3 aminopropyl 4 azahexane 1 7 diamine was purified from the crude product by silica gel. The desired product N N bis 3 1 lysylaminopropyl N N dioctadecylpropyldiamine was obtained as HCl salt after treatment at room temperature for 1 h with 20 ml 1M HCl in ether followed by removal of excess of HCl and solvents.

To a solution of 706 mg 1 mmole of N lysyl 3 aminopropyl N N dioctadeylamine in 50 ml CHCland 0.28 ml 2 mmole of TEA976 mg 2.2 mmoles of di Boc lysine NHS ester in 50 ml CHClwas added. The reaction was carried out at room temperature overnight. After routine work up the crude product was purified with silica gel to give 0.65 g white solid of pure bis Boclysyl derivative of N lysyl 3 aminopropyl N N dioctadeylamine. The desired compound was obtained by deprotection of the bis Boclysyl derivative with 10 ml CHCl 10 ml TFA to give 0.45 g N 3 dioctadencylaminopropyl alpha epsilon bis lysyl lysylamide in TFA salt as white solid.

To a solution of 0.75 g 0.78 mmole of N 3 dioctadencylaminopropyl alpha epsilon bis L lysyl L lysylamide 18 1 lys3 in 50 ml CHCland 0.56 ml TEA 4 mmoles 2 g 4.4 mmoles of diBoc lysine NHS ester in 50 ml CHClwas added. After 2 h the reaction was stopped by washing with Brine water. The crude product was subjected to silica gel column purification to give 1.21 g white solid of tetra substitute of N 3 dioctadencylaminopropyl alpha epsilon bis L lysyl L lysylamide. The Boc groups was removed by the treatment of 100 ml 1 M HC in ether for 30 minutes. Evaporation of organic solvents under vacuum gave 0.82 g of white solid of N 3 dioctadencylaminopropyl alpha epsilon hepta L lysyl L lysylamide in the form of HCl salt.

To a solution of 2.31 g 4 mmoles of N N dioctadecyl 1 3 propyldiamine 18 1 in 50 ml of CHCland 0.8 ml of TEA 5.7 mmoles 2.51 g 4.2 mmoles of alpha Boc epislon CBZ L lysine NHS ester in 50 ml CHClwas added. After 1 h the reaction was stopped. After routine work up the product was purified with silica gel column separation to give 3.7 g white solid which was then treated with 10 ml TFA CHClfor 30 minutes at room temperature to give 3.3 yellowish oil after evaporation of solvents and TFA. The intermediate was dissolved in 50 ml CHClto which 4 ml TEA and 2.51 g 4.2 mmole of alpha Boc epislon CBZ L lysine NHS ester in 50 ml CHClwas added. The reaction was carried out overnight. The product was treated and purified essentially as above to give 3.78 g of alpha Boc epislon CBZ alpha L lysyl epislon CBZ lysylamide of N N dioctadecyl 3 propylamine. This cycle was repeated to generate oligolysylamide of N N dioctadecyl 3 propylamine with n 2 7 in lysyl numbers whose epislon NH2 groups were protected by CBZ groups. The final step involved the removal of CBZ groups from epislon NHgroups of lysyl residue by H Pt treatment in ethanol solution for 2 h at 1 atm to give N 3 N N dioctadecylaminopropyl alpha L di tri tetra penta and hexa L lysinamide respectively.

To 1.66 g of oleyl bromide 5 mmole 174 mg 2 mmoles of morpholine was added. The mixture was stirred for 4 h at room temperature. After that 318 mg of NaCO 3 mmoles and 10 ml ethanol was added and the mixture was refluxed for four days. The desired compound dioleylmorpholinium chloride was obtained after silica gel column purification in an yield of 131 mg.

To 213 l 3 mmoles of 2 bromoethanol 363 l 3 mmoles of N 2 hydroxyl morpholin was added to 10 ml dioxane in a presure tube. The reaction was initiated for 3 days at 130 C. After that the organic solvents and excess of reactant was removed by high vacuum. To prepare desired compound the intermediate 950 mg 3.7 mmoles was dissolved in 20 ml CHCl to which 2.64 ml TEA and 2.4 g 8 mmoles of oleoyl chloride in 20 ml CHClwas added. After reaction overnight at room temperature the reaction was stopped. The reaction mixture was washed with brine. The crude product was purified with silica gel column to yield 226 mg of desired compound.

Synthesis of poly 2 dimethylaminotetramethylene aminocarbonyl 1 5 pentanediamine 1 16 hexadecadiamide

To a solution of N.N dimethylpropanediamine in CHCl 1.1 mol equivalent of diBoclysine NHS ester and 1 mol equivalent of TEA was added. The reaction was allowed for 2 h at room temperature. After routine work up the intermediate was purified by silica gel column. The N di Boc lysyl N N dimethylpropanediamine were treated with CHCl TFA to remove Boc groups to yield lysyl N N dimethylpropanediamine. To prepare the desired polymer to a solution of the above lysyl derivative in dimethylforamide and 2 mol equ of TEA was added followed by equal volume of a solution of equ mol of 1 16 hexadecaneic dichloride was added dropwise with stirring. The reaction was carried out in room temperature for overnight. After removal of solvent the product was purified by repeat acid dissolution base precipitation followed by centrifugation. Finally the polymer was dried under high vacuum.

Throughout this application various publications are referenced. The disclosures of these publications in their entireties are hereby incorporated by reference into this application in order to more fully describe the state of the art to which this invention pertains.

It will be apparent to those skilled in the art that various modifications and variations can be made in the present invention without departing from the scope or spirit of the invention. Other embodiments of the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from consideration of the specification and practice of the invention disclosed herein. It is intended that the specification and examples be considered as exemplary only with a true scope and spirit of the invention being indicated by the following claims.

