---

title: Multi-functional yarns and fabrics having anti-microbial, anti-static and anti-odor characterisitics
abstract: The present invention is directed to yarns and fabrics that exhibit anti-static, anti-odor, and anti-microbial properties. The yarn is comprised of several groups of predetermined fibers. One of these groups of predetermined fibers comprises fibers that exhibit anti-microbial, anti-odor and anti-static characteristics. In one embodiment, the yarn comprises a first plurality of fibers, a second plurality of fibers that are different from the fibers of the first plurality, and a third plurality of fibers that are different from the fibers of the first and second pluralities. In one embodiment, the fibers which exhibit anti-microbial, anti-odor and anti-static properties are metallic coated fibers. Other fibers used to form different embodiments of the yarns include cotton, nylon, polyester, wool, meta-aramid fibers, para-aramid fibers, and stretch fibers.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08771831&OS=08771831&RS=08771831
owner: The United States of America as Represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 08771831
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051223
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by the U.S. Government for Governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon.

Prior art fabrics used to manufacture military combat uniforms are typically made from yarns that are comprised of a staple blend of cotton and nylon fibers. This blend of cotton and nylon fibers supports dyeing and printing techniques that use a combination of acid and vat dyes to impart a camouflage pattern. This camouflage pattern provides both visual and near infrared camouflage protection. The aforesaid yarns made from the blend of cotton and nylon fibers are combined with lightweight thin fabric construction to produce fabrics that provide comfort durability and UV resistance. Other fabrics such as flame retardant fabrics are made from blends of NOMEX synthetic fiber meta aramid fiber KEVLAR synthetic fiber para aramid fiber and P140 electrostatic dissipative fiber and also provide a level of visual and near infrared camouflage protection. However these aforesaid prior art fabrics do not provide anti odor anti microbial or electrostatic dissipation performance in a single complete fabric.

Prior art techniques have provided underwear or undergarments having anti static and or anti odor and or anti microbial agents. These undergarments are worn under the military BDU Battledress Uniform or ACU Advanced Combat Uniform . However the practice of wearing undergarments under the outer military uniform increases heat stress on the wearer and creates great discomfort. In relatively hot environments such as the tropics or desert many soldiers do not wear underwear underneath their BDU or ACU. The underwear contributes to increased heat stress and discomfort. In addition soldiers usually do not have access to clean underwear. Furthermore soldiers lack the space to store clean underwear since in battlefield situations clothing is typically a low priority item compared with munitions fuel food and water. Thus soldiers typically have only the clothes on their back. Furthermore soldiers do not want to wear the same close fitting dirty underwear on a daily or weekly basis and therefore choose not to wear underwear or undergarments.

Other prior art techniques include treating combat uniform fabrics with anti microbial treatments. However some of these prior art treatments are not durable and wear out after repeated laundering.

New yarns and fabrics are needed in order to address the deficiencies and problems associated with prior art protective clothing and related prior art techniques for making such clothing.

Bearing in mind the problems and deficiencies of the prior art clothing and techniques it is an object of the present invention to provide yarns and fabrics that exhibit anti microbial or anti bacterial properties.

It is another object of the present invention to provide yarns and fabrics that exhibit anti odor properties which substantially prevent the production of body odor.

It is a further object of present invention to provide yarns and fabrics that exhibit anti static properties.

Thus the present invention is directed to multi functional yarns and fabrics that 1 exhibit anti static anti odor and anti microbial or anti bacterial properties and 2 can be used to make a stand alone garment that performs the functions of separate garments. A significant advantage of the yarns and fabrics of the present invention is that these yarns and fabrics eliminate the need for separate undergarments underwear or inner layers of clothing while still providing anti microbial anti odor and anti static functions. The yarns and fabrics of the present invention can be used to fabricate a single stand alone garment that is suitable for hot weather environments such as the tropics or desert or a single stand alone garment that is suitable for cold weather environments.

Thus in one aspect the present invention is directed to a yarn that comprises a blend of a plurality of fibers that include a plurality of fibers which exhibit anti microbial anti static and anti odor characteristics. In one embodiment the yarn comprises a blend of a plurality of nylon fibers a plurality of cotton fibers and the plurality of fibers having anti microbial anti static and anti odor properties. This blend may also contain a plurality of stretch fibers. In an alternate embodiment this yarn comprises a blend of a plurality of polyester fibers a plurality of cotton fibers and a plurality of fibers having anti microbial anti static and anti odor properties. This blend may also contain a plurality of stretch fibers. In a further embodiment this yarn comprises a blend of a plurality of NOMEX synthetic fiber meta aramid fibers a plurality of KEVLAR synthetic fiber para aramid fibers and the plurality of fibers having anti microbial anti static and anti odor characteristics. This blend may also contain a plurality of stretch fibers.

In another aspect the present invention is directed to a yarn comprising a blend of a plurality of NOMEX synthetic fiber meta aramid fibers a plurality of KEVLAR synthetic fiber para aramid fibers a plurality of wool fibers and a plurality of fibers having anti microbial anti static and anti odor characteristics. This blend may also contain a plurality of stretch fibers.

In all of the foregoing embodiments it is preferred that the fibers which exhibit the anti microbial anti odor and anti static properties are configured as metallic coated fibers. In one embodiment this metallic coating is a silver coating.

The present invention also encompasses fabrics made at least in part from the yarns described in the foregoing description.

Other objects features benefits and advantages of the present invention will be apparent from the ensuing description.

The present invention is directed to yarns and fabrics that exhibit anti static anti odor and anti microbial characteristics. Although the ensuing description is in terms of the aforesaid yarns and fabrics being used to fabricate military clothing and garments it is to be understood that these yarns and fabrics can be used to fabricate other types of protective clothing for personnel in other fields e.g. medical construction petroleum hazardous waste chemical etc. Furthermore the yarns and fabrics of the present invention can also be used to fabricate protective recreational and sports clothing.

In accordance with the invention predetermined types of fibers are blended together to form yarns which are used to fabricate clothing that exhibits anti microbial anti static and anti odor characteristics. In a preferred embodiment the fibers are military grade fibers. Several embodiments of the present invention are now discussed in detail.

Referring to there is shown a cross sectional view of the basic configuration of a woven fabric in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. Woven fabric generally comprises warp yarns and filling yarns . Warp yarns and filling yarns are arranged in a generally criss cross configuration. is only a partial view and therefore only portions of some of the warp yarns and filling yarns are shown. Each filling yarn comprises a plurality of fibers and that are blended together.

As will be shown by the ensuing description of several embodiments of the present invention each fiber and can be any one of several preferred fibers and each fiber is a fiber that exhibits anti microbial anti static and anti odor properties. Thus fibers and are blended together to provide a fabric that has anti microbial anti static and anti odor characteristics in accordance with the invention.

In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention each fiber is a nylon fiber each fiber is a cotton fiber and each fiber is a metal coated fiber that exhibits anti microbial anti odor and anti static properties. In a preferred embodiment each fiber comprises a fiber having a metallic layer on the surface thereof. Preferably fibers are configured as Noble Fiber X STATIC synthetic fibers. The aforesaid X STATIC synthetic fiber is a fiber having a layer of silver coated over the surface thereof. Sauquoit Industries of Scranton Pa. manufactures X STATIC synthetic fibers and markets such fibers as X STATIC I and X STATIC II synthetic fibers. X STATIC synthetic fibers have excellent anti bacterial anti odor electromagnetic shielding and electrostatic dissipation properties. However it is to be understood that other suitable fibers that exhibit anti bacterial anti odor and anti static properties may also be used. In another embodiment fibers are configured as copper coated fibers.

However these percentages are just examples and can be varied. Preferably there is at least 5 of X STATIC synthetic fibers. Fibers and are blended together by any suitable method or technique and then are woven knitted braided or fabricated by a non woven process to form a fabric or cloth. The fabric or cloth is then subsequently dyed and or printed or the fibers can be blended with dyed fibers prior to fabric formation. In the case of a military combat uniform the finished fabric or cloth is usually printed with a camouflage design. It is to be understood that each warp yarn also can be configured to have a blend of the same fibers used to form filling yarns .

In another embodiment each fiber is a NOMEX synthetic fiber meta aramid fiber each fiber is a KEVLAR synthetic fiber para aramid fiber and each fiber is a fiber that exhibits anti microbial anti odor and anti static properties. In a preferred embodiment each fiber is configured as the aforementioned X STATIC synthetic fiber. In one embodiment each filling yarn has the percentages of fibers shown in Table II 

However these percentages are just examples and can be varied. These fibers can be blended together by any of the aforementioned methods or techniques to form a fabric. The fabric is then subsequently dyed and or printed or the fibers can be blended with dyed fibers prior to fabric formation. In the case of a military combat uniform the finished fabric or cloth is usually printed with a camouflage design. Warp yarns may be formed from the blend of the same fibers used to form filling yarns in this embodiment.

In a further embodiment each fiber is a polyester fiber each fiber is a cotton fiber and each fiber is the preferred X STATIC synthetic fiber. In one embodiment each filling yarn has the percentages of fibers shown in Table III 

However these percentages are just examples and can be varied. These fibers can be blended together by any of the aforementioned methods or techniques to form a fabric. The fabric can then be subsequently dyed and or printed or the fibers can be blended with dyed fibers prior to fabric formation. In the case of a military combat uniform the finished fabric is usually printed with a camouflage design. Warp yarns may also be formed from this particular blend of fibers.

Referring to there is shown woven fabric in accordance with another embodiment of the present invention. Fabric generally comprises warp yarns and filling yarns . Warp yarns are arranged in a generally criss cross relationship with filling yarns . Each filling yarn comprises a plurality of fibers and . Fibers and are blended together to provide a garment having anti microbial anti static and anti odor properties. In one embodiment fibers are NOMEX synthetic meta aramid fibers fibers are KEVLAR synthetic para aramid fibers fibers are wool fibers and fibers are fibers that exhibit antimicrobial anti static and anti odor properties. In a preferred embodiment fibers are the aforementioned X STATIC synthetic fibers. In one embodiment each filling yarn comprises the percentages of fibers shown in Table IV 

Preferably a stretch fiber is preferably added to each of the blends described in the foregoing description. In one embodiment the stretch fiber may be LYCRA spandex fiber. In another embodiment the stretch fiber may be XLA Lastol fiber manufactured by Dow Chemical. Other suitable stretch fibers may be used.

These percentages are just examples and may be varied. Fibers and are blended together and any of the methods or techniques described above e.g. weaving knitting etc. may be used to form a fabric. The fabric is then dyed and or printed or blended with dyed fibers prior to fabric formation. In the case of a military combat uniform the finished fabric is usually printed with a camouflage design. Each warp yarn can be formed from this same blend of fibers which is used to form filling yarns .

Although particular apparel grade fibers have been described above such as cotton polyester nylon and wool other suitable apparel grade fibers can be used as well e.g. DACRON synthetic fiber Rayon fiber etc. High quality silk can also be used as one of the fibers.

With respect to all of the embodiments described in the foregoing description X STATIC II synthetic fiber conductive grade yarn optionally can be alternated or spaced between the fibers of the warp yarns and filling yarns to support electronic textile applications. In order to insulate the aforesaid fibers prevent shorts and reduce fraying the conductive yarns are coated or treated with a protective layer such as polyurethane and silicone. In another embodiment the conductive yarn is buried within a plied or plated yarn structure. In a further embodiment the conductive yarn is embedded within a fabric structure of all three yarns i.e. coated plated and embedded within a fabric structure. The finished fabric provides conductivity when the conductive yarns are integrated into a continuous fabric pathway.

The warp and filling yarns described in the foregoing description can be fabricated into any type of fabric for use in any type of garment such as but not limited to shirts pants shorts jackets underwear socks etc. These fabrics may be subsequently treated with permanent press and or soil release finishes for easy care and low maintenance. The fabric can also be subsequently treated with water and or oil repellants and insect repellants.

In a preferred embodiment the filling yarns are fabricated with any one of the fiber blends described in the foregoing description since in certain fabric constructions it is the filling yarns that mostly contact the wearer s skin. However as shown by the foregoing description the warp yarns can also be fabricated with the same blend of fibers used to form the filling yarns. Thus in one embodiment only the filling yarns are fabricated with any one of the blends of fibers described in the foregoing description. In another embodiment only the warp yarns are fabricated with any one of the blends of fibers described in the foregoing description. In a further embodiment both the warp and filling yarns are fabricated with any one of the blends of the fibers described in the foregoing description. In yet a further embodiment the warp yarn is formed from one of the blends of fibers described herein and the filling yarn is formed from another different blend of fibers described herein.

In a preferred embodiment the denier of the fibers used to form the filling and warp yarns is in a range of between about 1.8 and 2.5 denier. Preferably the denier of the filling yarn fibers is substantially equal to the denier of the warp yarn fibers. Such a configuration facilitates the transport of liquid moisture which collects on the filling yarns to the warp yarns. Thus when the denier of the filling yarn fibers is equal to the denier of the warp yarn fibers the inter fiber space in the filling yarn is also equal to the inter fiber space in the warp yarns. As a result when moisture collects on the filling yarns this moisture is quickly transferred from the filling yarns to the warp yarns due to capillary action.

Thus fabrics fabricated with the warp and filling yarns of the present invention provide multi functionality including visual and near infrared protection comfort durability UV resistance electrostatic dissipation anti odor performance and anti microbial performance.

The present invention provides many advantages and benefits over prior techniques and methods. For example clothing made from fabrics fabricated with the warp and filling yarns of the present invention provide anti static anti odor and anti microbial performance thereby eliminating the need for separate additional undergarments or underwear. The yarns of the present invention can be used to fabricate clothing that can be used as i undergarments in a layered clothing system for cold weather environments ii a single stand alone garment for use in cold weather environments and iii a single stand alone garment for use in hot weather environments. Thus rather than having multiple garments each providing a specific function the present invention provides clothing composed of a single fabric that provides multi functional performance the desired anti microbial anti static and anti odor characteristics improved durability and relatively longer wear life.

The principles preferred embodiments and modes of operation of the present invention have been described in the foregoing specification. The invention which is intended to be protected herein should not however be construed as limited to the particular forms disclosed as these are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive. Variations and changes may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. Accordingly the foregoing detailed description should be considered as exemplary in nature and not limiting the scope and spirit of the invention as set forth in the attached claims.

