---

title: System, method, and program for stacking multi-thickness sheets of media
abstract: Systems, methods, and programs for adjusting an output orientation of multi-thickness media input marking data, determine a number of sheets of the multi-thickness media that is to be alternated within an output stack, and adjust the output orientation of at least one sheet of multi-thickness media to be output based on the determined number of sheets of the multi-thickness media to be alternated.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07651088&OS=07651088&RS=07651088
owner: Xerox Corporation
number: 07651088
owner_city: Norwalk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050831
---
Many conventional marking devices are configured to obtain optimized results with standard sizes of sheets of media such as for example letter sized media 8.5 by 11 A4 media executive sized media A5 media legal sized media envelopes and the like. Specifically for example the media storage media transport and marking functions of these conventional marking devices are designed around these common media sizes such that these sizes of media can be most efficiently used within the devices. Accordingly special steps and or user assisted functions may be required for uniquely sized media.

Such marking devices typically include one or more input modules each of which may include one or more feeders into which blank media is loaded for imaging. Conventional feeders are usually adjustable for media size and generally feed from the top of the stack of media. The feeder generally includes an elevator on which the stack of media is loaded and which rises as media is fed off the top of the stack reducing the stack height. Thereby the stack is kept level with the feeding mechanism.

The primary function of the feeder is to advance media to the imaging process one sheet at a time at very precise intervals as dictated by the marking device process.

Conventional marking devices typically include one or more output modules performing various post imaging operations. Typically the last output module in the imaging and finishing process is a stacker where consecutive pages or sets of pages are automatically stacked one on top of the previous as part of the real time imaging and finishing process.

Some types of combined media for use in these conventional marking devices incorporate a smaller uniquely sized sheet of media fixed to at least a portion of a larger standard sized sheet of media. These types of media enable marking on the smaller uniquely sized sheet of media while utilizing the efficiently stored and transported standard sized sheet of media as a vehicle through the marking device. As a result fewer special steps and or user assisted functions are required for marking on the smaller uniquely sized sheet of media.

Conventional marking devices that are optimized for standard sized media are designed to begin marking on a leading portion of the sheet of media as it is transported through the device. As a result the smaller uniquely sized sheet of media is frequently fixed to the leading edge of the larger standard sized sheet of media. This allows for marking to begin on the leading portion of the combined media.

The above described conventional combined media as result of having a smaller sheet of media fixed to a leading portion in the vicinity of the leading edge of the combined media of the larger sheet of media has a thicker leading portion than trailing portion in the vicinity of the trailing edge of the combined media . Thus the leading portion has a thickness equivalent to the thickness of both the small sheet and the large sheet while the trailing portion has a thickness equal to only the large sheet.

As used herein the term leading edge is intended to describe the edge of a sheet of media that leads the sheet of media as it is transported through a marking device. Similarly the term trailing edge is intended to describe the edge of a sheet of media that is opposite the leading edge and trails the sheet of media as it is transported through the marking device. As used herein the terms feeder or media feed mechanism are intended to describe devices that feed unmarked media into a marking device. The terms stacker or media stacking mechanism are intended to describe devices that stack marked media after being marked by the marking device. It should be appreciated that the feeder and or stacker may be included in the marking device or may be separate devices attached to the marking device.

One example of the above described combined multi thickness media is Xerox Corporation s DocuCard media. For ease of explanation the following exemplary systems method and programs will be disclosed using DocuCard type media as an example of combined multi thickness media however it should be appreciated that the principles disclosed herein may be applied to any type of media with each sheet having at least two different thicknesses.

Conventional media stackers are designed such that media will not remained stacked if stacked media becomes non level with the stacking surface.

Conventionally however the above described combined multi thickness media is packaged and loaded into the feeder of marking devices with each sheet having the same orientation. Because each sheet has a same orientation the marking device may process each sheet in the same manner thus simplifying the marking process. Due to the orientation of the sheets the thicker portion of each sheet of the combined media is oriented above the thicker portion of the sheets below it and the thinner portion of each sheet of the combined media is oriented above the thinner portion of the sheets below it.

As a result when the combined multi thickness media has been marked transported through the marking device and stacked in the stacker the stack of output media becomes increasingly non level due to the difference in thickness between a portion of the stack corresponding to the thick portion of the media and a portion of the stack corresponding to the thin portion of the media. As the number of output sheets of combined multi thickness media increases the more non level the stack becomes. Eventually the slope is great enough that the down slope gravitational pull on the sheet exceeds the friction between sheets and the sheets start to slip off of the stack. Additionally the slope of the output stack may cause subsequently output sheets to collide and jam.

Currently in order to avoid jams or misfeeds in conventional general purpose marking devices users must limit the number of sheets of multi thickness media that are loaded into a media tray in order to reduce the overall thickness difference between a leading edge portion of the stack and the trailing edge portion of the stack both input and output.

Currently the stacker must be unloaded more frequently at lower than maximum possible stack height in order to avoid sheets from falling off the stack and or jams.

In view of at least the forgoing it is beneficial to provide systems methods and programs that allow for a large number of sheets of combined multi thickness media to be loaded in the feeder of a general purpose marking device and stacked in the stacker of a general purpose marking device without substantial expense and hardware modification.

Accordingly various exemplary implementations of the principles described herein provide a method of adjusting an output orientation of multi thickness media including inputting marking data determining a number of sheets of the multi thickness media that is to be alternated within an output stack and adjusting the output orientation of at least one sheet of multi thickness media to be output based on the determined number of sheets of the multi thickness media to be alternated.

Various exemplary implementations of the principles described herein provide a storage medium storing a set of program instructions executable on a data processing device and usable to adjust an output orientation of multi thickness media the instructions including instructions for inputting marking data instructions for determining a number of sheets of the multi thickness media that is to be alternated within an output stack and instructions for adjusting the output orientation of at least one sheet of multi thickness media to be output based on the determined number of sheets of the multi thickness media to be alternated.

Various exemplary implementations of the principles described herein provide a system for adjusting marking data for use with alternately stacked multi thickness media including a controller. The controller may input marking data determine a number of sheets of the multi thickness media that is to be alternated within an output stack and adjust the output orientation of at least one sheet of multi thickness media to be output based on the determined number of sheets of the multi thickness media to be alternated.

The difference in thickness between a portion of the stack corresponding to the small media and a portion corresponding only to the large media can cause a number of problems when attempting to load a plurality of sheets into a marking device or stack a plurality of marked sheets output from a marking device. For example by virtue of the slope created by the difference in thickness sheets on the top of the stack have a tendency to slide off the top of the stack. Additionally by virtue of the slope created by the difference in thickness sheets on the thicker end of the stack have a tendency to separate or fan out as a result of the slope and the stiffness of the media.

The slope and separation makes it difficult for a conventional media transport system to stack marked sheets output from a marking device.

For example as shown in when sheets of constant thickness media are output in a stacker the stack has a substantially constant thickness as well. When an output chute of the media transport path outputs a marked sheet of constant thickness media the output sheets form a substantially even stack.

However as shown in when sheets of multi thickness media including for example large media portion and small media portion are output in a stacker in a conventional manner the difference in thickness between a portion of the stack corresponding to the small media and a portion of the stack corresponding to only the large media causes the output stack to slope away from the output chute . As a result the output stack has an angle of incidence substantially corresponding to the slope of the stack. As the height of the stack increases the angle of incidence increases and thus the greater the separation or fanning of the sheets. This angle of incidence may cause the sheets to slide off of the stack. Additionally this angle of incidence may cause subsequently output sheets output in a direction of the dashed arrow in to collide with the separated or fanned sheets possibly knocking sheets off of the top of the stack or causing a jam within the media transport path.

In order to reduce the likelihood that a jam misfeed or stack collapse may result due to the stacking of the combined multi thickness media many users of marking devices have reduced the number of combined multi thickness media that are stacked in the marking device at any one time. This requires a user to more closely monitor the number of combined multi thickness media in the device and more frequently replenish the combined multi thickness media or to unload the stacker.

Accordingly it is beneficial to provide systems methods and programs that allow for a large number of sheets of combined multi thickness media to be stacked in the feeder of a general purpose marking device and for these sheets to be reliably stacked in the stacker after being marked. shows an example of a method of stacking combined multi thickness media that substantially reduces the unevenness of the stack. As shown in the orientation of output marked sheets may be adjusted such that a first amount of the output combined multi thickness media may be stacked in a same orientation with the thicker portion of each sheet stacked on a thicker portion of each sheet below it. Then a second amount for example having a substantially similar number of sheets as the first portion may be stacked on the first amount in an orientation such that a thicker portion of the second amount of combined multi thickness media may be stacked on the thinner portion of the first amount. Additional amounts of combined multi thickness media may be stacked in the same alternating fashion.

As a result of the configuration shown in some of the sheets combined multi thickness media will have the small media in the vicinity of the leading edge of the large media and some of the sheets of combined multi thickness media will have the small media in a vicinity of the trailing edge of the sheet of media. When taken together as shown in a stack including a large number of sheets may have a substantially similar thickness in the vicinity of the small media since the small media is located in both the leading edge and trailing edge portions of the stack.

By stacking the sheets of output combined multi thickness media in such a manner the angle of incidence of the output sheets is substantially horizontal. As shown in when sheets of combined multi thickness media are output from the output chute the output stack is properly aligned with a direction of transport from the feed chute . Thereby reducing the likelihood of a misfeed and or jam.

As discussed above combined multi thickness media is conventionally stacked in a same orientation e.g. as shown in in order to simplify the marking process and transport process. When conventionally stacked combined multi thickness media is transported through the marking device the small media is always in the same location relative to the marking device so that the image device does not need to adjust the position of the marked image with respect to the sheet of combined multi thickness media. The marked sheets of combined multi thickness media are then output from the marking device and stacked with a same orientation.

According to the stacking method shown in the location of the small media relative to the stack is not the same.

The number of sheets that will be alternated may be determined in any number of ways. For example the number of sheets that will be alternated may be defined by a user of the marking device. Accordingly the user may input the number of sheets that will be alternated into the device. The number of sheets that will be alternated may be predetermined and stored within the device or a program controller controlling the device. The number of sheets that will be alternated may be automatically determined based on one or more the characteristics of the corresponding marking operation.

Operation continues to step . In step it is determined whether the number of sheets that will be alternated has been marked and output to the stacker. For example a counter or sensor may keep track of the number of sheets that are marked on or transported past the sensor. If the number of sheets that will be alternated has not been marked and output to the stacker operation continues to step . If the number of sheets that will be alternated has been marked and output to the stacker operation jumps to step .

In step it is determined whether the making job is complete i.e. whether all sheets of media that are to be marked according to the marking operation have been marked. If the marking operation is complete operation jumps to step where operation of the exemplary method ends. If the marking operation is not complete operation returns to step .

In step the output orientation of the sheets to be output is adjusted and the alternating number is reset. For example assume that five sheets are to be alternated within the output stack. Once the fifth sheet is marked on e.g. determined in step the orientation of the next sheet to be output is adjusted such that the next sheet may be stacked on the first five output sheets in an orientation such that a thicker portion of the next sheet may be stacked on the thinner portions of the first five sheets. It should be appreciated that the output orientation may be adjusted within the media transport path either before or after marking by flipping the sheet upside down or by maintaining the sheet right side up and rotating the sheet such that the leading edge becomes the trailing edge. Operation returns to step .

It should be further appreciated that any number of sheets of combined multi thickness media may make up the groups of sheets whose orientation are alternated within the stack. For example as much as substantially half of the entire job may be alternated. Additionally each single sheet may be alternated. If a small number of sheets are alternated the stack will remain more uniform in thickness as marking operations increase the number of sheets in the stack. If a larger number of sheets are alternated the position and or orientation of the marked image relative to the sheet of combined multi thickness media will be changed less frequently.

The input output interface may be connected to one or more data sources over one or more links . The data source s can be a locally or remotely located computer a printer a scanner a facsimile device a xerographic device a multi functional imaging device a device that stores and or transmits electronic data such as a client or a server of a wired or wireless network such as for example an intranet an extranet a local area network a wide area network a storage area network the Internet especially the World Wide Web and the like. In general the data source can be any known or later developed source that is capable of providing image data to the input output interface .

The input output interface may be connected to one or more data sinks over one or more links . The data sink s can be a locally or remotely located inkjet printer locally or remotely located laser printer a facsimile device a xerographic device a multi functional imaging device a device that stores and or transmits electronic data such as a client or a server of a wired or wireless network such as for example an intranet an extranet a local area network a wide area network a storage area network the Internet especially the World Wide Web and the like. In general the data sink can be any known or later developed sink that is capable of storing image data to be marked or capable of marking images based on data output by the input output interface .

Each of the various links and may be any known or later developed device or system for connecting the data source s and or the data sink s respectively to the input output interface . In particular the links and my each be implemented as one or more of for example a direct cable connection a connection over a wide area network a local area network or a storage area network a connection over an intranet a connection over an extranet a connection over the Internet a connection over any other distributed processing network or system and or an infrared radio frequency or other wireless connection.

As shown in the memory may be physically functionally and or conceptually divided into a number of different memory portions including an alternating number portion and or a marking data portion . The alternating number portion may store the number of sheets that are to be alternated in the output stack of marked combined multi thickness media. The marking data portion may store input and or adjusted marking data.

The memory may be implemented using any appropriate combination of alterable or non alterable memory volatile or non volatile memory or fixed memory. The alterable memory whether volatile or non volatile can be implemented using any one or more of static or dynamic RAM a floppy disk and disk drive a writeable or re re writeable optical disk and disk drive a hard drive flash memory or the like. Similarly the non alterable or fixed memory can be implemented using any one or more of ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM an optical ROM disk such as CD ROM or DVD ROM disk and disk drive or the like.

The orientation adjusting circuit routine or application may input data indicating for example the number of sheets that are to be alternated in the output stack and the number of number of sheets of multi thickness media that will be used for a particular marking operation and may adjust the output format accordingly.

For example in operation data related to a marking operation may be input from the data source to the input output interface . Under control of the controller the data may be stored in the marking data portion of the memory . Alternatively the marking operation data may be input under control of the controller directly to the orientation adjusting circuit routine or application . Under control of the controller the orientation adjusting circuit routine or application may access the marking operation data and the data indicating the number of sheets that are to be alternated and adjust the orientations of the sheets of media in the output data for example according to the above described exemplary method. Under control of the controller the adjusted marking operation data may be stored in the marking data portion . Alternatively the adjusted marking data under control of the controller may be output directly to the data sink via the input output interface .

It should be appreciated that although the above described system may input marking data for an entire marking operation. The system may input marking data for each sheet of media individually and adjust the output orientation of the marking data for that sheet if necessary.

While the exemplary system has been described as physically functionally and or conceptually divided into a controller and an orientation adjusting circuit routine or application it should be appreciated that orientation adjusting circuit routine or application may be included in and or executed by the controller .

While various features have been described in conjunction with the examples outlined above various alternatives modifications variations and or improvements of those features and or examples may be possible. Accordingly the examples as set forth above are intended to be illustrative. Various changes may be made without departing from the broad spirit and scope of the underlying principles.

For example while the exemplary methods and systems described herein are described within the context of combined multi thickness media the methods and systems are applicable to any media that has a thickness variation between its leading edge portion and its trailing edge portion.

It will be appreciated that various of the above disclosed and other features and functions or alternatives thereof may be desirably combined into many other different systems or applications. Also various presently unforeseen or unanticipated alternatives modifications variations or improvements therein may be subsequently made by those skilled in the art which are also intended to be encompassed by the following claims.

