---

title: Detachable vehicle entertainment system for the armrest/console of a vehicle
abstract: A vehicle entertainment system includes a video system detachably mounted within an automobile arm rest/console, the armrest/console including an upper support surface. The video system includes an integrated housing supporting a video monitor and a video source.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07857382&OS=07857382&RS=07857382
owner: Audiovox Corporation
number: 07857382
owner_city: Hauppauge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050705
---
This application is based upon U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 672 883 filed Apr. 20 2005 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM INCORPORATED WITHIN THE CENTRAL ARMREST CONSOLE OF AN AUTOMOBILE .

The invention relates to a vehicle entertainment system. More particularly the invention relates to an entertainment system integrating a video source and video monitor within the central armrest console of an automobile wherein the video source and video monitor are detachably secured to the armrest console of the automobile.

Entertainment systems for automobiles are well known. As such many advances have been made in the development of entertainment systems that make the otherwise tedious task of riding in an automobile more bearable. In addition to the development of overhead systems pioneered by the present inventor a variety of systems and techniques for integrating entertainment systems within an automobile have been developed.

For example headrest entertainment systems have been developed and allow multiple individuals to view a variety of different video sources within the same vehicle. However some automobiles are not suited for the utilization of headrest entertainment systems and therefore are unable to take advantage of this advancement in technology. Similarly only larger vehicles can take advantage of the overhead systems commonly found in automobiles.

With this in mind alternate techniques for implementing entertainment systems within automobiles are needed. The present invention attempts to add to the choices consumers have by providing automobile entertainment system that may be integrated within the central armrest console of an automobile and selectively detached therefrom for use at remote locations.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide a vehicle entertainment system including a video system detachably mounted within an automobile armrest console. The armrest console includes an upper support surface. The video system includes an integrated housing supporting a video monitor and a video source.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the video source is a DVD player or hard drive.

It is another object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the video source is accessed from behind the video monitor.

It is a further object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the upper support surface is an armrest module and the video system is detachably secured to the armrest module.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the armrest module is selectively removable from the armrest console.

It is another object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the armrest console includes a cradle shaped and dimensioned for detachably supporting the video system and the video system includes electrical connectors shaped and dimensioned for selective engagement with electrical connectors formed within the cradle.

It is still another object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the cradle includes a connecting mechanism for selective attachment of the video system thereto.

It is also another object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the connecting mechanism includes a release button for selective release of the video system from the cradle.

It is yet a further object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the connecting mechanism includes a latch member for selective coupling of the video system to the cradle.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system including at least one docking station to which the video system may be selectively secured when not coupled to the armrest console.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide an armrest console incorporating vehicle entertainment system including an upper support surface with a video system detachably mounted therein. The video system includes an integrated housing supporting a video monitor and a video source.

Other objects advantages and salient features of the invention will become apparent from the following detailed description which taken in conjunction with the annexed drawings discloses a preferred but non limiting embodiment of the subject invention.

The detailed embodiments of the present invention are disclosed herein. It should be understood however that the disclosed embodiments are merely exemplary of the invention which may be embodied in various forms. Therefore the details disclosed herein are not to be interpreted as limiting but merely as the basis for the claims and as a basis for teaching one skilled in the art how to make and or use the invention.

With reference to and an automobile entertainment system is disclosed. The automobile entertainment system is composed of a series of video and audio components integrated within an armrest console of a traditional automobile. Although the present system is described herein for use within an automobile the system could readily be employed in various vehicles for example boats or planes without departing from the spirit of the present invention. In particular the entertainment system includes a video system mounted within an armrest module adapted for connection with the central armrest console of a traditional automobile.

The video system generally includes a housing in which a video monitor and video source are supported. The housing with the video monitor and video source is integrated with the armrest module which functions as both a support for the video monitor video source and the upper support surface of the armrest console . As will be discussed below in greater detail the video system in detachably secured to the armrest module allowing for use of the video system at various locations. Although the present invention is adapted for use in conjunction with the center armrest console of a vehicle the concepts underlying the present invention could readily be applied to other support storage and or console type structures for example within a door of a vehicle found within an automobile.

The armrest module is modular in design and is adapted for use with a variety of automobiles by simply changing the appearance and shape of the armrest module so it matches the armrest console . In particular many automobiles today include an armrest console with a storage compartment formed therein. The storage compartment is commonly accessed via a hinged upper support surface that is pivoted toward the rear seat of the automobile to expose the contents of the storage cavity formed within the armrest console . It is this upper support surface which is replaced by the present entertainment system for conveniently installing an entertainment system within an automobile. Although the armrest module of the present invention is disclosed in accordance with a preferred embodiment as replacing the upper support surface of a console those skilled in the art will appreciate that the present armrest module may be configured to function and resemble a complete armrest found in a vehicle.

By employing the present entertainment system a video system may be installed within a variety of vehicles regardless of the ceiling height or headrest dimensions by simply replacing the upper support surface of the factory installed armrest console with the present entertainment system . As those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the present armrest module is provided with a hinge structure adapted for ready attachment to the existing structure of the automobile. Further and as those skilled in the art will also certainly appreciate the hinge structure may be varied to suit the automobile for which the armrest module is designed.

In addition and although the present invention is disclosed herein as including a single monitor it is contemplated the system could be designed with dual monitors for viewing from opposite sides of the vehicle. Such a system could include distinct DVD players associated with each monitor or a single DVD player linked to both monitors.

In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the video source is a DVD player coupled to the video monitor for the transmission of video content thereto. That is the DVD player or other video source is integrated within the same housing as the video monitor . It is contemplated that a hard drive video source may also be integrated with the video monitor . As those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the hard drive will include inputs for receiving video content and outputs for transmitting video content to the video monitor both of which are well known to those skilled in the art. However and as discussed below in greater detail the video source may take a variety of forms without departing from the spirit of the present invention for example and not limited to satellite video systems and Bluetooth wireless based systems. In addition and as discussed below the video source may be housed at a location separate from the video monitor without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

The video system is pivotally and detachably mounted to the armrest module in a manner permitting storage and retrieval thereof More particularly the base of the video system is pivotally mounted to a cradle coupled to the armrest module in a manner that permits rotation of the video system about multiple axes. The cradle includes a first hinge that facilitates rotation of the video system from its storage position within a recess formed in the armrest module to an upstanding position for viewing thereof The cradle includes a second hinge that permits rotation of the video system about an axis substantially perpendicular to the axis of the first hinge . As such the second hinge allows for rotation of video system in a manner that facilitates both viewing and protection of the video monitor . Although a specific hinge structure is disclosed in accordance with a preferred embodiment various hinge structures could be employed without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

In particular the base of the video system is pivotally secured to the armrest module via the cradle at a position adjacent to the rear of the armrest module . When the video system is in its storage position within the recess of the armrest module it is oriented with the video screen facing downward and the back of the video system facing upward. As such the back of the video system functions as part of the armrest console when the video system is in its storage position.

When one wishes to watch a presentation on the video system from the back seat of the automobile the video system is lifted from the recess within the armrest module rotated upward about the first axis and then rotated approximately 180 degrees about the second axis such that the video screen faces the backseat of the automobile.

The video monitor DVD player and associated control components are mounted within the housing of the video system . In accordance with a preferred embodiment the video monitor is a TFT LCD screen. However it is contemplated that other monitor constructions for example plasma Ultra High Definition VGA touch screen VGA organic LED fabric based monitors e.g. flexible TFT etc. may be used without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

With regard to the DVD player it is structured as a top slot loading DVD player known to those skilled in the art. It is integrally molded within the housing and positioned for insertion of DVDs behind the video monitor . By mounting the DVD player in this way a stable structure is developed that is well adapted for the automobile environment.

While the DVD player is disclosed as being a slot loaded design with insertion behind the video monitor the DVD player could take a variety of other forms while still being integrated with the video monitor. For example and with reference to the DVD player may be integrated with the backside or rear surface of the video monitor housing that includes a top bottom first and second sides front surface and rear surface . DVDs are snapped into DVD player allowing for insertion of DVDs behind the video monitor when the video monitor housing is in an open position. The DVD player is further provided with a pivotalled mounted cover for selective access to the DVDs. The slot loaded design may also be varied to allow for slot loading on either the right or left side of the video system. In addition the DVD player may be designed with a built in TV tuner for providing the user with a choice of video sources.

Control of the video system including the video monitor DVD player and other components of the video system is facilitated by the provision of control buttons along the outer surface of the video system . In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the control buttons take the form of a multifunction controller permitting movement of a cursor shown upon various interfaces displayed upon the video monitor. In addition conventional control buttons may also be provided for control of traditional functions.

In addition to the provision of manual control buttons the video system may further include a remote control not shown such that an individual need not actually touch the video system to control the video content or the volume generated by the video system. Once again and as those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate a variety of remote control systems may be utilized without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

As briefly discussed above the video system is detachably secured to the armrest module . In particular the housing including the video monitor DVD player and other related components is detachably mounted to the cradle for selective placement within the recess of the armrest module . As such the video system may be removed from the automobile and used at a variety of locations apart from the automobile.

As will be discussed below in greater detail the video system may be used alone or in conjunction with a docking station . Once removed the video system may be used in other automobiles or within an individual s home. When used alone a battery pack may be connected to the video system and the video system can thereby become a portable entertainment system.

As discussed above a cradle shaped and dimensioned for receiving the video system is provided within the recess of the armrest module . As will be discussed below in greater detail similar cradles may be provided at other locations permitting use of the video system at other remote locations. It is contemplated that such a cradle would be much like the docking stations utilized with laptop computers wherein individuals are permitted to readily remove the laptop from a docking station for use at another location remote from the docking station.

More specifically the cradle utilized in the armrest module includes quick release electrical connections for the audio input audio output video input video output and power supply although one embodiment contemplates a system which connects only to a power supply . The video system similarly includes mating electrical connections for transmitting electricity and a v signals between the cradle and the video system . In particular when the video system is mounted upon the cradle the respective electrically connections mate to provide for the transmission of power and a v signals between the video system and the cradle . As those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate other readily removable electrical connections for other purposes may also be supplied if one determines they are so needed.

In addition to the electrical connections provided on the cradle the cradle also includes a connecting mechanism designed for selectively retaining the video system within the cradle . The connecting mechanism permits ready and selective attachment of the video system to the armrest module while preventing vibrations and other damaging movements that commonly occur in an automobile.

In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the connecting mechanism includes a release button and a latch member . The release button is actuated to rotate the latch member and permit removal of the video system from the cradle . Insertion of the video system within the armrest module is achieved by simply setting the video system within the cradle and applying sufficient force to the video system for overcoming the rotational force of the latch member to force the video system into a secure position. While a particular coupling structure is disclosed in accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention those skilled in the art will appreciate that a variety of selectively releasable coupling structures may be employed without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

The entertainment system further includes cables not shown extending through the armrest module . These cables ultimately link audio video and power to the cradle and video system . The cradle and video system are electrically connected to the remainder of the automobile via electrical communication lines extending through the armrest . For example and as will be discussed below in substantial detail a video input video output audio input audio output and power source may be respectively connected to the cradle for ultimate connection with the video system via the mating electrical connections of the respective cradle and video system .

Specific wiring arrangements and linking of various video systems within an automobile in accordance with preferred embodiments of the present invention are disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 920 425 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Aug. 18 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 895 111 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Jul. 21 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 895 110 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM LINKING MULTIPLE VIDEO SYSTEM FOR COORDINATED SHARING OF VIDEO CONTENT filed Jul. 21 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 895 086 entitled HOUSING FOR AN AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Jul. 21 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 895 099 entitled INSTALLATION APPARATUS FOR AN AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Jul. 21 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 920 431 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Aug. 18 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 920 430 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Aug. 18 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference.

In addition to contemplated hardwiring of the present video system within an automobile the system may be design for quick installation by a vehicle owner. With this in mind and as those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the present video system may be designed for simply plugging it into a power source for example a cigarette lighter commonly found in vehicles. In accordance with such and embodiment the video system would be provided with a pass through for access to wires linking the video system to a power source and or external speakers.

The present video system is provided with the ability to offer a variety of functionalities. These functionalities may be hardwired or programmed within the video system or the functionalities may be added in a modular manner via an expansion slot provided within the video system . Contemplated functionalities include but are not limited to satellite radio for example Serius XM Pictel phone satellite television for example DirecTV GPS guidance systems quick release battery packs memory cards wireless internet access for example Wi Fi Bluetooth digital video recorders digital video reception and recording digital video inputs video conferencing cellular digital cellular digital with a camera USB capabilities Blue sphere hot swap hard drive satellite video import card wireless video import card etc. Additional details regarding the implementation of such features are found in commonly owned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 153 364 entitled VEHICLE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM INCLUDING A DETACHABLE FUNCTIONAL MODULE HOUSED WITHIN A DETACHABLE VIDEO SYSTEM filed Jun. 16 2005 which is incorporated herein by reference.

Enhanced usage is further provided by the inclusion of RCA ports or other a v input outputs formed within the cradle and contained behind a cover which may be selectively opened to reveal the ports . The inclusion of these ports allows for ready attachment of the present video system to other remote a v sources for example game consoles portable digital music players etc. . The video system may also be provided with a flashlight controlled by an on off switch which runs off a battery not shown mounted within the video system . The video system may further be provided with both a 110 A outlet and a 12 V outlet for connection with other electronic devices requiring power.

In addition and in accordance with a preferred embodiment a broadcast television receiver is integrated with the video monitor and or the armrest module . More particularly and with reference to the housing is provided with a rear recess shaped and dimensioned for receiving a television receiver . The television receiver may therefore be wired for use in conjunction with the video monitor in a manner known to those skilled in the art.

The television receiver is further provided with a retractable antenna . The antenna is electrically connected to the television receiver for the transmission of over the air signals. In addition and as those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the antenna may be wired or wirelessly connected to the television receiver and take a variety of forms without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

As mentioned above the present video system is adapted for removal from the armrest module for use at a variety of other locations. In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the other locations are provide with a docking station including auxiliary cradles shaped and dimensioned for receiving and retaining the video system and coupling the video system to power sources and a v sources in a manner similar to the cradle used in conjunction with the armrest module.

For example and with reference to a docking station for use in conjunction with the dash of a conventional automobile is shown. The docking station includes an auxiliary cradle with electrical connections and a connecting mechanism not shown shaped and dimensioned for receiving and securely holding the video system and coupling the video system to power sources and a v sources in a manner similar to the cradle used in conjunction with the armrest module . The docking station is mounted upon the dash of an automobile and is wired for connection to a power source and a v sources not shown . In addition the dash docking station may include an integrated satellite receiver for providing satellite content to the passenger of the automobile by transmitting the satellite signal through the cradle and into the video system via the respective electrical connections of the cradle and the video system .

This embodiment is particularly useful where the video system includes functionality relating to the provision of GPS guidance information. With this in mind the driver will be able to selectively use the video system for accessing guidance information when needed and return the video system to the armrest module when guidance information is no longer needed.

With reference to a mobile docking station may also be provided. The mobile docking station also includes an auxiliary cradle with electrical connections and a connecting mechanism not shown shaped and dimensioned for receiving and securely holding the video system and coupling the video system to power sources and a v sources in a manner similar to the cradle used in conjunction with the armrest module. The docking station may include a battery pack a v inputs a v outputs Internet capability speakers cable input and or an integrated satellite receiver . These components are linked to the video system via the cradle which transmits the relevant signals to and from the video system via the respective electrical connections of the cradle and the video system .

With reference to yet a further embodiment of a docking station is disclosed. This docking station is adapted for static mounting within a household office or other locations for example beneath a kitchen cabinet . The docking station includes an auxiliary cradle with electrical connections and a connecting mechanism not shown shaped and dimensioned for receiving and securely holding the video system and coupling the video system to power sources and a v sources in a manner similar to the cradle used in conjunction with the armrest module. The docking station may include a battery pack a v inputs a v outputs Internet capability speakers cable input and or an integrated satellite receiver . These components are linked to the video system via the cradle which transmits the relevant signals to and from the video system via the respective electrical connections of the cradle and the video system .

As shown in when the video system is mounted beneath a kitchen cabinet as shown it may be necessary to mount the video system upside down when compared to its mounting within an automobile armrest module . With this in mind the video system is provided with the ability to rotate to the image shown on the video monitor so that the video system may be used in a variety of orientation. The possible rotation of the image shown on the video monitor is complimented by the multifunctional controller that adjusts to rotation of the image such that the controller is calibrated to function in accordance with the orientation of the screen image.

While the preferred embodiments have been shown and described it will be understood that there is no intent to limit the invention by such disclosure but rather is intended to cover all modifications and alternate constructions falling within the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims.

