---

title: Phosphate-free electrolyte for rechargeable lithium ion cells
abstract: A more efficient LiPFlithium-ion electrochemical system composed of a phosphate free, borate lithium salt electrolyte LiTPTB composed of LiBCFHin a ternary mixed organic solvent containing a 1:1:1 volume ratio of EC, DMC and EMC is provided. The borate salt of the LiTPTB electrolyte decomposes at temperatures above 110° C. and does not react with water and also has an oxidation potential of about 4.4 V versus lithium, making it suitable for use in high voltage lithium-ion cells and batteries. A 0.3 to 1.0 M molar concentration of LiTPTB composed of LiBCFHin a ternary mixed organic solvent containing a 1:1:1 volume ratio of EC, DMC and EMC is also provided.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07449263&OS=07449263&RS=07449263
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07449263
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050214
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used imported sold and licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America without the payment to us of any royalty thereon.

The invention relates generally to the field of lithium electrochemical power sources. In particular the present invention relates to a phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte for lithium ion electrochemical systems.

Presently both military and civilian users of electronic equipment require the use of rechargeable lithium ion batteries to provide power to numerous portable electronic devices such as cellular telephones laptop computers communication systems and digital instruments at an ever increasing pace. Lithium ion batteries provide a much needed source of power for portable electrically operated devices but they also pose a number of drawbacks and problems.

The typical lithium ion battery is composed of an anode or negative electrode of graphite and a cathode or positive electrode usually made from a transition metal oxide or sulfide compound. Rechargeable lithium ion batteries typically use electrolytes containing a lithium salt dissolved in an organic solvent. Prior art mixed organic solvent electrolytes were developed using lithium salts dissolved in mixtures of a high dielectric constant solvents such as Ethylene Carbonate EC and Propylene Carbonate PC with various volume ratios of low viscosity ester solvents such as Diethyl Carbonate DC and dimethyl carbonate DMC . The lithium salt of choice for these electrolyte solutions has been Lithium Hexafluorophosphate LiPF because LiPFprovides a high specific ionic conductivity and possesses wide electrochemical stability over the high operating voltage range of lithium ion cells of about 2.5 V to 4.3 V as compared with lithium but LiPFsuffers from a number of disadvantages shortcomings and limitations.

One significant problem with LiPFin the electrolyte solution is that it reacts with trace water present in the cells to produce hydrofluoric acid and other reaction products that react with the solvents to produce more water resulting in an overall continued decomposition of the salt. Another serious limitation with LiPFin the electrolyte is that it thermally decomposes at moderately low temperatures of about 65 C. and the reaction is accelerated at higher temperatures and even more rapid at temperatures above 65 C. The result is a significant loss of battery performance due to reduced cell capacity and poor cycle life. These two drawbacks of reactivity with trace water and low temperature thermal decomposition significantly limit the use and performance of lithium ion cells and batteries containing LiPFin higher temperature environments. Thus there has been a long felt need for LiPFlithium ion cells and batteries that do not decompose in the presence of water and have a higher temperature of stability thereby eliminating the hydrofluoric acid reaction products that typically degrade cell performance without suffering from the disadvantages shortcomings and limitations of prior art electrochemical systems.

Up until now there has been no LiPFsalt that does not suffer from the disadvantages limitations drawbacks and shortcomings of LiPFelectrolytes for lithium ion cells and batteries of trace water reactivity and low temperature thermal decomposition. The present inventors have discovered a new phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte composed of Lithium tetra phenyl 3 5 trifluoromethyl borate having the formula LiBCFH hereinafter referred to as LiTPTB in a ternary mixed organic solvent containing a 1 1 1 volume ratio of EC DMC and EMC that provides substantially improved cell performance for use in electrolytes for lithium ion cells and batteries.

It is an object of the present invention to provide a phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte.

It is another object of the present invention to provide a phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte LiTPTB composed of lithium tetra phenyl 3 5 trifluoromethyl borate LiBCFH.

It is still a further object of the present invention to provide a phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte LITPTB composed of LiBCFH that provides substantially improved cell performance characteristics for use in electrolytes for lithium ion cells and batteries.

To achieve the aforementioned objects and advantages and satisfy the long felt needs for a more efficient LiPFlithium ion battery the present invention provides a phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte LiTPTB composed of LiBCFHin a ternary mixed organic solvent containing a 1 1 1 volume ratio of EC DMC and EMC. The borate salt of the LiTPTB electrolyte decomposes at temperatures above 110 C. and does not react with water and also has an oxidation potential of about 4.4 V versus lithium making it suitable for use in high voltage lithium ion cells and batteries. Another embodiment of the present invention provides a phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte using an 0.3 to 1.0 M molar concentration of LiTPTB composed of LiBCFHin a ternary mixed organic solvent containing a 1 1 1 volume ratio of EC DMC and EMC.

This invention s LiTPTB compounds satisfy the long felt need for a LiPFphosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte providing substantially improved cell performance without trace water reactivity with LiPFlithium ion cells and batteries that do not decompose in the presence of water and have a higher temperature of stability thereby eliminating the hydrofluoric acid reaction products that typically degraded cell performance of prior art batteries. The present invention contemplates lithium salt electrolytes and lithium ion electrochemical systems such as lithium ion batteries with a phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte LiTPTB composed of Lithium tetra phenyl 3 5 trifluoromethyl borate LiBCFH.

The phosphate free borate lithium salt electrolyte of the present invention comprises lithium tetra phenyl 3 5 trifluoromethyl borate LiBCFH also known as LiTPTB in a ternary mixed organic solvent containing a 1 1 1 volume ratio of EC DMC and EMC. The inventors have discovered that the borate salt decomposes at temperatures above 110 C. and does not react with water to produce cell performance degrading acid products. The LiBCHHelectrolyte formula also has an oxidation potential of about 4.4 V versus lithium making it suitable for use in high voltage lithium ion cells and batteries. A preferred embodiment of this compound is a 0.3 to 1.0 M molar concentration of LiTPTB in a ternary mixed organic solvent containing a 1 1 1 volume ratio of EC DMC and EMC as the electrolyte solution in a lithium ion electrochemical cell. In this preferred embodiment the 0.3 M LiTPTB in 1 1 1 EC DMC EMC measured at 1 KHz at 25 C. achieved a specific conductivity of 3.46 mS cm. Referring now to the drawings charts the cyclic voltammogram oxidation sweep of 0.3 M LiTPTB in 1 1 1 volume ratio of EC DMC EMC at a 0.125 inch diameter glassy carbon working electrode versus lithium at a scan rate of 50 mV sec. The voltammogram was performed by sweeping the potential from the cell open circuit potential to 5.5 V versus lithium. These results show the electrolyte having a stable oxidation potential to about 4.4 V versus lithium.

The LiTPTB batteries and cells of the present invention may be fabricated by combining two intermediate salt or solvent solutions that precipitate the desired salt from the solution and then re crystallizing the salt to synthesize the desired salt.

In one example a lithium ion electrochemical cell was constructed with a graphite anode and a lithium nickel cobalt oxide LiNiCoOcathode. A layer of Celgard 2300 micro porous polymer separator film separated the electrodes electrically. The electrolyte was 0.3 M LiTPTB in 1 1 1 EC DMC EMC. is a chart depicting a typical charge discharge cycle illustrating a typical charge discharge cycle of that lithium ion cell. The cell was cycled using a MACOR test system at 0.5 mA cmbetween 2.5 and 4.1 volts at 25 C. The cell performance shows excellent reversible cycle life behavior for the electrolyte.

The molar concentration range is dependent upon the solubility of the salt in the solvent. In organic solvents the salts will generally be limited to about a 3M maximum before salt can no longer remain dissolved in the solution.

It is to be understood that although specific molar salt solutions were demonstrated that higher or lower concentration of salt could be used to optimize the solution conductivity and cell performance. Though the solutions were demonstrated in rechargeable lithium ion electrochemical cells it is to be understood that the same solutions could be used in other electrochemical cells both as rechargeable and or primary cells containing other electrode chemistries of lithium compounds lithium ion lithium alloys and lithium polymers.

It is to be understood that such other features and modifications to the foregoing detailed description are within the contemplation of the invention which is not limited by this description. As will be further appreciated by those skilled in the art any number of configurations as well any number of combinations of differing materials and dimensions can achieve the results described herein. Accordingly the present invention should not be limited by the foregoing description but only by the appended claims.

