---

title: Centralized management of replacement vehicle labels
abstract: A central labeling data (CLD) management system provides centralized management, assembly, and distribution of labeling data for use in generating replacement labels for damaged vehicles. For example, the CLD management system includes a database that stores label data for a plurality of vehicles produced by a plurality of different manufacturers. The CLD management system presents an interface to receive an electronic communication from a client computing device associated with a repair shop. The electronic communication includes a request for label data associated with an original vehicle label. The CLD management system retrieves the requested label data from the database and communicates the label data to an output device for printing a new vehicle label for use by the repair shop.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07293706&OS=07293706&RS=07293706
owner: 3M Innovative Properties Company
number: 07293706
owner_city: Saint Paul
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050511
---
The invention generally relates to vehicular technologies and more particularly managing labeling and other printed material for vehicle repair.

Each year collision repair centers restore thousands of damaged automobiles and other vehicles. One challenge for a repair center when restoring a vehicle is obtaining appropriate replacement labels for the damaged parts that need to be repaired or replaced. Example replacement labels include emissions labels belt routing labels warning labels information labels and potentially anti theft labels affixed to the damaged parts by the original vehicle manufacturer.

Unfortunately the labels are typically located in areas that are often damaged in an accident. For example when manufactured an automotive vehicle often includes labels at particular locations under the hood on the radiator core supports inside the door and door jamb within the engine compartment inside the fuel filler door inside the trunk area and within the vehicle interior.

One reason the labels are often difficult to obtain is that the labels are often specific to the particular make model and features of the damaged vehicle. Further the labels may include detailed information as the date time and plant where the vehicle was produced particular body colors engine type vehicle identification number VIN and other information. As a result the repair center is typically forced to order the labels directly from the dealerships and parts networks associated with the manufacturer of the particular vehicle being repaired.

Frequently the time required to obtain the labels exceeds the customer s or insurance company s expectations. In many cases the repair center has completed the repair of a vehicle and delivered the vehicle to the customer before the labels arrive from the vehicle manufacturer. As a result the customer is forced to either return with the vehicle or forego the labels altogether. This may give rise to a number of undesirable results such as diminished value of the vehicle safety risks due to the missing labels and inconvenience during maintenance or repair.

In general the invention is directed to techniques for centralized management organization and secure distribution of labeling data for use in generating replacement labels for damaged vehicles. A system is described in which a computer implemented system provides centralized access to labeling data for a plurality of vehicle manufacturers. The system referred to herein as the centralized labeling data CLD management system provides a computing environment with which repair shops and other customers communicate to efficiently obtain replacement labels for vehicles from different manufacturers. The customers or client software at the repair center communicates with the CLD management system to determine the appropriate vehicle specific replacement labels and may download and print the labels as needed. In this manner the system allows the customers to quickly obtain the particular labels needed for the vehicle being repaired.

In one embodiment a method comprises receiving an electronic communication from a client computing device associated with a repair shop wherein the electronic communication includes a request for label data associated with an original vehicle label. The method further comprises retrieving the requested label data from a database that stores label data for a plurality of vehicles produced by different manufacturers and electronically communicating the label data to an output device for printing a new vehicle label for use by the repair shop.

In another embodiment a method comprises receiving an electronic communication from a client computing device associated with a repair shop wherein the electronic communication includes a request for label data associated with an original vehicle label. The method further includes automatically processing the request with a label management system to identify a vehicle manufacturer associated with the original vehicle label wherein the label management system stores information for a plurality of vehicles produced by a plurality of different vehicle manufacturers. In addition the method includes issuing electronic communications from the label management system to a data system associated with the identified vehicle manufacturer to retrieve the label data associated with the original vehicle label and electronically communicating the retrieved label data to an output device for printing a new vehicle label for use by the repair shop.

In another embodiment a system includes a database and a computing system. The database stores label data for a plurality of vehicles produced by a plurality of different manufacturers. The computing system executes software that presents an interface to receive an electronic communication from a client computing device associated with a repair shop wherein the electronic communication includes a request for label data associated with an original vehicle label. Further the computer system executes software that retrieves the requested label data from the database and communicates the label data for printing a new vehicle label on an output device for use by the repair shop.

In another embodiment a system comprises a computer associated with a repair shop. The computer executes software that presents an interface for receiving information specifying a part for use during repair of a vehicle. The software automatically prompts a user to order labels based on the specified parts.

In another embodiment an online label data management system comprises means for centrally storing label data for a plurality of vehicles produced by different manufacturers and means for processing a request for label data associated with an original vehicle label. The system further includes means for electronically communicating the label data for printing a new vehicle label based on the original vehicle label.

In another embodiment the invention is directed to an article i.e. a vehicle label reprinted from label data associated with an original vehicle label. The reprinted vehicle label includes tracking data that includes an identifier of a vehicle repair shop for which the label was reprinted.

The details of one or more embodiments of the invention are set forth in the accompanying drawings and the description below. Other features objects and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the description and drawings and from the claims.

Repair centers may include any organization engaged in the repair or restoration of vehicles such as automotives trains buses planes watercraft snowmobiles jet skis all terrain vehicles motorcycles and other vehicles. Moreover CLD management system may support repair centers of all sizes ranging from sole proprietorships to large national or international franchises. Vehicle manufacturers represent any entity that manufactures vehicles or otherwise maintains specific label information for manufactured vehicles.

Authorized users or automated client software associated with repair centers securely interact with CLD management system to select the appropriate replacement labels. More specifically authorized users associated with repair centers interact with CLD management system via network to view and order the labels or other printed material for application to a repaired vehicle. A user can be any authorized individual such as a service representative technician estimator or repair specialist.

Each user typically interacts with a client computing device suitable for communication with CLD management system via network . For example a user may use a workstation personal computer laptop computer or even a web enabled cell phone or personal digital assistant PDA such as a Palm organizer from Palm Inc. of Santa Clara Calif. or a Windows CE device. The communication device may execute communication software such as a web browser such as Internet Explorer from Microsoft Corporation of Redmond Wash. in order to communicate with CLD management system . Communications between CLD management system and the other devices of computing environment may take the form of encrypted secure communications. For example the communications may be encrypted using the Secure Sockets Layer SSL Secure HTTP S HTTP or IP Security IPSec network protocols.

By communicating with CLD management system repair centers can securely obtain replacement labels without separately interacting each of vehicle manufacturers . In this manner CLD management system may eliminate redundancies and inefficiencies inherent to a decentralized process. This may allow repair centers to better obtain replacement labels in a timely manner. For example CLD management system supports and facilitates on demand print systems by streamlining the delivery of labeling data directly to repair centers and print centers when needed. In other words vehicle specific labeling data can be quickly distributed to print output devices based on the current needs of each repair center thereby allowing the repair centers to accelerate the completion of a repair and the satisfaction of the customer. Although referred to herein generally as vehicle labels the term label includes labels printed on conventional label stock of suitable durability stamped metal plates to be affixed to a vehicle part laser engraved information to be etched on a metal substrate holographic information formed on a substrate or any other form of information conveying medium by the original vehicle manufacturer to be affixed to a vehicle part.

By communicating with CLD management system repair centers and print centers can easily regenerate vehicle labels in conformance with requirements from a variety of diverse entities including vehicle manufacturers and regulatory agencies. In other words CLD management system provides a centralized intelligent system for ensuring that replacement labels used on the repaired vehicles comply with the specific requirements set forth by vehicle manufacturers and regulatory agencies.

CLD management system may also support a variety of features for application of business rules and other constraints to automate the retrieval regeneration and validation of the replacement vehicle labels. A label management rules engine within CLD management system controls the regeneration of the selected labels in view of the rules specified by a service provider of CLD management system and any specific requirements defined by vehicle manufacturers . In this manner CLD management system provides an intelligent warehouse with which repair centers and vehicle manufacturers interact for storage validation and redistribution of labels for use when repairing vehicles.

Repair centers may elect to download and locally print the labels as needed. For example repair centers may include one or more label printers capable of printing high quality labels or general purpose printers such as ink jet and laser printers. This may be advantageous in that repair centers are able to print replacement labels on demand i.e. as needed for the particular vehicles currently being repaired.

Alternatively a repair center or CLD management system may direct the selected replacement labels to one of print centers . Further CLD management system may have on site or remote print capabilities for printing and shipping the replacement labels directly to repair centers . Consequently repair centers need not necessarily have print capabilities on site.

In one embodiment CLD management system includes one or more data servers for hosting the labeling data received from vehicle manufacturers . Examples of such data may include graphic images statements of compliance with regulations translations warnings complete images of the labels thumbnails or other reduced images of the labels or other label data. CLD management system securely organizes the label data to ensure that the label data for a given one of vehicle manufacturers is not accessible by any other vehicle manufacturer.

In another embodiment CLD management system does not host complete label information for vehicle manufacturers . Rather CLD management system stores data that indexes and describes the labels available from vehicle manufacturers . Upon selection of one or more labels by a user CLD management system retrieves the complete label data from the appropriate vehicle manufacturers via network and delivers the label data for printing the actual replacement labels. In this manner vehicle manufacturers maintain and control actual label data in a distributed manner. Nevertheless CLD management system provides a unified interface for seamlessly selecting and obtaining replacement labels from vehicle manufacturers .

The service provider of CLD management system may charge repair centers and or vehicle manufacturers fees for use of the label data management services. The service provider of CLD management system may for example charge vehicle manufacturers data warehouse fees based on the number or volume of stored labeling records graphics or any combination thereof. The service provider of CLD management system may also charge repair centers fees based on the number of accesses by authorized users within the repair centers.

In addition the service provider CLD management system may charge subscription service fees or fees based on the number of labels printed. Alternatively CLD management system may be offered as a value add service provided with other services or labeling materials. For example services provided by CLD management system may be offered to repair centers in conjunction with the sale of labeling material or other material such as automotive tape or adhesive. Further a fee sharing relationship may be utilized between the service provider of CLD management system and vehicle manufacturers in which a portion of fees received from repair centers are shared between the service provider and the vehicle manufacturers.

In some instances CLD management system may replicate and distribute all or selected portions of the aggregated label data. For example CLD management system may distribute the label data to repair centers via a medium such as a CD or DVD or network .

In particular in this example authorized users within repair centers interact with estimating software shop management software part ordering software or other software that executes on client computing devices within the repair centers. One example of estimating software includes On Demand estimating software from the Mitchell Repair Information Division of Mitchell International. Other examples of information providers that provide software and repair information for the automotive industry include CCC Information Services Inc. MOTOR Information Systems Thatcham and Automatic Data Processing ADP Inc.

In this embodiment the client software executing within repair centers includes additional functionality that seamlessly and transparently accesses with CLD management system and or information provider . For example the client software may present a user interface that allows a user to create an estimate or part order for a repair and in particular select the necessary replacement labels from CLD management system . The client software transparently accesses CLD management system directly or indirectly through information provider based on the created estimate or part order. For example the client software may automatically prompt the user to order the necessary replacement labels based on the particular vehicle being repaired and the specific parts identified within the estimate or part order. For example the client software may automatically identify and prompt the user to include labels for the underside of the hood for the specific vehicle under repair when the service representative lists the hood within the current repair estimate or part order. The client software may query CLD management system or information provider to determine which labels are necessary for each damaged part listed by the user and to automatically identify the relevant part numbers for the labels.

In this arrangement a fee sharing relationship may be utilized between the service provider of CLD management system vehicle manufacturers and information provider in which a portion of fees receives from repair centers are shared between the service provider the vehicle manufacturers and the information provider.

In this example web servers provide an interface by which authorized users of repair centers vehicle manufacturers and print centers communicate with CLD management system via network . In one configuration web servers execute web server software such as Internet Information Server from Microsoft Corporation of Redmond Wash. As such web servers provide an environment for interacting with users according to software modules which can include Active Server Pages web pages written in hypertext markup language HTML or dynamic HTML Active X modules Lotus scripts Java scripts Java Applets Distributed Component Object Modules DCOM and the like.

Although illustrated as server side software modules executing within an operating environment provided by web servers software modules could readily be implemented as client side software modules executing on remote client computing devices associated with users . Software modules could be for example implemented as Active X modules executed by web browsers executing on the computing devices. Moreover although illustrated for exemplary purposes as executing on web servers software modules may alternatively execute on one or more application servers within CLD management system . Further software modules may interact with estimating software shop management software part ordering software or other client side software executing within repair centers to seamlessly and transparently provide label data for reprinting vehicle labels.

In this example software modules may include a number of modules including administration Admin module repair center user interface vehicle manufacturer user interface tracking module application programming interface API print control interface rules engine and fee collection module . Software modules are stored on a computer readable medium e.g. memory or a disk .

Software modules interact with one or more database servers to access and maintain data which may include configuration config data A label data B label generation rules C and tracking data D. Data may be stored in a variety of forms including data storage files one or more database management systems DBMS executing on one or more database servers or combinations thereof. The database management systems may be a relational RDBMS hierarchical HDBMS multidimensional MDBMS object oriented ODBMS or OODBMS or object relational ORDBMS database management system. Data could for example be stored within a single relational database such as SQL Server from Microsoft Corporation.

Administration admin module presents an interface by which some users such as system administrators are able to configure CLD management system . A system administrator may for example manage accounts for repair centers vehicle manufacturers and print centers including setting access privileges and defining a number of corporate and user preferences. Examples of corporate preferences include preferred language translations e.g. source and target languages signature lines suggested label stock. Examples of user preferences include authorized printers for each user as well as user access rights. Admin module allows the system administrator to define access rights for individual users to control the access to the appropriate portions of label data B. In this manner individual users cannot access label data associated with vehicle manufacturers for which the particular user or repair center is not authorized.

Admin module stores configuration data A within database servers . Configuration data A represents the configuration data provided by the system administrators including for example account data specifying authorized users associated with repair centers vehicle manufacturers and print centers . In addition configuration data A may include data specifying user and customer preferences preferred output stock substrates for labels types of available printers at repair centers and print centers and other necessary configuration data.

Vehicle manufacturer user interface provides an interface by which vehicle manufacturers remotely manage label data associated with their respective vehicles. For example vehicle manufacturers may interact with vehicle manufacturer user interface to upload label data from one or more databases. In addition vehicle manufacturers may schedule periodic synchronizations to be automatically performed via API . Alternatively vehicle manufacturers may interact with vehicle manufacturer user interface to specify parameters by which CLD management system may dynamically retrieve label data in real time from vehicle manufacturers when requested by repair centers .

Vehicle manufacturer user interface stores the label data B in database servers . Label data B includes text graphics bar codes or other data associated with original vehicle labels as uploaded or otherwise received from vehicle manufacturers . Label data B may include a complete image for each label. Alternatively or in addition label data B may include the constituent elements of a graphic file necessary to regenerate the repair label and each element may comprise textual data or graphical data. Examples of textual elements include vehicle specific manufacturing information warnings vehicle or part specifications and the like or any other text that is typically included on an original vehicle label. Graphical elements may include vehicle specific or manufacturer specific graphics such as instructional graphics trademarks logos and other imagery and may be stored as for example individual image files stored in any of a number of formats including JPEG TIFF GIFF PDF and the like.

Label data B may also include additional information e.g. in the form of metadata that describes each label uploaded by vehicle manufacturers . For example the metadata may describe the composition of each label including the arrangement of the elements that formulate each vehicle label. As a result label data B allows CLD management system to reassemble the textual and graphical elements including retention of the original properties of the elements to produce replacement labels for printing by repair centers or print centers . The stored metadata may conform to a data description language such as the extensible Markup Language XML or the like.

Repair center user interface provides an interface with which authorized users or automated software of repair centers interact to securely obtain replacement vehicle labels. Repair center user interface allows users to search and easily identify labels based on manufacturer make and model of vehicle parts to which the labels are to be affixed date of manufacturer of the vehicle and other relevant search criteria. Further repair center user interface allows users to initiate reprinting of the labels at CLD management system or at printers within repair centers or print centers . Alternatively users may issue electronic communications to submit label requests by way of facsimile telephone using automated menu systems or voice recognition technology or other techniques.

Print control interface controls output of label data for printing. In some embodiments print control interface allows a thumbnail or other reduced image of the requested label to be previewed before print. Once a user or client software has interacted with repair center user interface to select one or more labels print control interface outputs an electronic label record via network for printing at repair centers or print centers . A print server or other computer at repair center or print center may receive the label data and control printing of the label on the output device. Alternatively print control interface may remotely control the output device. The label data may have embedded access rights so that only the authorized repair center or print center that requested the label data is able to print a new vehicle label from the label data. In these embodiments client software executing on a device associated with the requesting repair center processes the label data and enforces the access rights.

In one embodiment print control interface requires an acknowledgement from the requesting repair center or print center that the new vehicle label has been successfully received from CLD management system and printed on an output device. Upon receiving the acknowledgement print control interface marks the original request as complete and prevent additional prints until a new request is received and validated. Further print control interface may output the label data to include expiration data that specifies a date and time period through which the new vehicle label may be printed. The client software executing associated with the requesting repair center processes may allow only a single successful print of the replacement label during the defined time period and may require that any additional prints require additional authorization from CLD management system .

In some cases only labels having an approved status from vehicle manufacturer are available to repair centers . This gives vehicle manufacturers the ability to manage label data B add new labels and update labels within label data B without concern about the possibility that one of repair centers may prematurely use an unapproved label.

Rules engine provides a degree of automated and secure control over the reprinting of original labels by applying label generation rules C which may represent particular constraints specified by a service provider of CLD management system or by vehicle manufacturers . For example vehicle manufacturers may interact with vehicle manufacturer user interface to specify particular rules and other constraints to control the regeneration and printing of labels related to their corresponding vehicles. A host or other service provider associated with CLD management system may also provide a base set of rules. Vehicle manufacturers may interact with vehicle manufacturer user interface to easily augment the rule set provided by the service provider of CLD management system . Rules engine controls the reprinting of the selected vehicle labels in view of the rules specified by the service provider and the specific requirements defined by each of vehicle manufacturers . Label generation rules C may also be used to provide additional security informational in the form of text or a bar code for automatic inclusion within the replacement labels. For example as further described below label generation rules C may be created to require the capture and storage of tracking data D and the inclusion of all or a portion of the tracking data within the reprinted label.

API provides the ability to establish direct connections with external computing devices. API may be used to allow such devices to automatically control CLD management system or for automatically retrieving data from such devices. For example a front end module such as a software module script or command line interface provided by the remote computing device may communicate with API directly e.g. bypassing the interfaces presented by other software modules . In this manner the front end module can automatically interact with CLD management system and thereby access update and retrieve label data B as well as initiate and control print of replacement labels. As a result API can be useful when connecting to internal systems to upload and synchronize for example label data B with labeling information from vehicle manufacturers . In other words API also allows CLD management system to directly access external data sources such as data sources within vehicle manufacturers or vice versa. In addition API may be used at the time labels are requested to interface with estimating part ordering or shop management software executing on client devices and automatically provide label data in near real time in response to automated requests.

Fee collection module handles all aspects of invoice and payment processing including receipt of credit card payments and generation of invoices for payment repair centers print centers and vehicle manufacturers . Fee collection module may communicate electronic invoices to the data system of the payors or may present the electronic invoices via a user interface for approval by authorized users associated with the payors. Upon receiving an approval e.g. via web servers or directly from the data system of the payor fee collection module may initiate electronic fund transfers EFT from a bank account of the payor to a bank account of the payee for payment of the electronic invoices. For example fee collection module may initiate an EFT to transfer funds directly from an account of repair centers to accounts associated with CLD management system or accounts of one or more vehicle manufacturers associated with the labels that were printed.

Tracking module maintains tracking data D to record information for tracking the reprinting of vehicle labels. For example tracking module may require that tracking information be added to the label prior to reprinting the label. Example information includes a barcode or other printed code that includes the vehicle identification number VIN of the vehicle for which the label was printed. In other embodiments radio frequency identification RFID or other technologies are used to program or otherwise include tracking data within the reprinted vehicle label. Print control interface updates tracking data D to record the tracking data e.g. the VIN of the vehicle being repaired date time and location at which the replacement label was printed the requesting repair center and service representative the owner of the vehicle being repaired the corresponding part to which the label is to be affixed or other useful tracking information.

In some embodiment CLD management system may archive label data B and tracking data D to an external data repository for long term storage. Data repository indexes label data and tracking data D and provides an interface by which repair centers vehicle manufacturers and other authorized users such as legal authorities access label data B and tracking data D. For example vehicle manufacturers may utilize data repository for analysis of long term repair recall and warranty claim data.

Based on this data CLD management system automatically access and retrieves label data B from data sources associated with vehicle manufacturers . Alternatively an authorized user may interact with vehicle manufacturer user interface to specify parameters allowing CLD management system to dynamically retrieve the label data in real time from vehicle manufacturers when requested by repair centers .

Next an authorized user of a repair center accesses CLD management system and initiates the reprinting of an original vehicle label . The user may request the printing of one or more labels by directly accessing CLD management system e.g. using a web browser or other software executing on a client computer. Alternatively access to CLD management system may be transparent to the user. For example a plug in or other software module may be incorporated within estimating or part ordering software to automatically access CLD management system directly of via information provider to request label data for replacement labels.

For authentication purposes CLD management system may require the user to provide a user identifier ID and a password or other security information. In addition CLD management system may require information e.g. a VIN identifying the specific vehicle for which the label is being reprinted identification of a part to which the label is to be affixed during the repair a current owner of the vehicle being repaired or other information useful for tracking the reprinted vehicle label.

Upon receiving a label request via repair center user interface print control interface invokes rules engine to validate the security information and ultimately approve the reprinting of the requested labels . If the request cannot be validated as a legitimate request by rules engine print control interface directs repair center user interface to reject the request . For example rules engine may reject requests that indicate a pattern of potentially illegal activity. As one example frequent requests for the same replacement labels designating the same VIN number may result in rejected requests.

If the request is validated by rules engine print control interface communicates electronic label records to the user selected destination for reprinting the original vehicle label . In addition tracking module updates tracking data D to record data provided by the user for purposes of tracking the reprinted vehicle label e.g. the VIN of the vehicle being repaired the part to which the label is to be fixed during the repair and data time and location of the reprint and the requesting user and associated repair center .

Tracking module may require that all or a portion of the tracking data be directly printed on the new label. In this case tracking module directs print control interface to merge tracking data D for the print request with label data B to generate output data for communication to repair centers or print centers when the vehicle label is reprinted.

Finally the designated output device e.g. a printer located at one of repair centers or print centers reprints the vehicle label for application during repair of the vehicle .

In one embodiment the service representative may digitally scan all or a portion of the label to be replaced. Once authorized by CLD management system the service representative may reprint the vehicle label based on the scanned image or have the vehicle label printed at one of print centers . Alternatively CLD management system may use all or a portion of the scanned data e.g. a portion of the scanned image or a bar code to automatically retrieve label data B corresponding to the original vehicle image.

Various implementations and embodiments of the invention have been described. For instance a CLD management system for aggregating and managing label data for manufactured vehicles has been described. The components of the system may be implemented as server side components client side components or a combination thereof.

Moreover although shown as a separate stand alone computing system the functions of CLD management system could be integrated within computing systems provided by information provider or any of vehicle manufacturers .

It is understood that various modifications can be made without departing from the invention. Accordingly these and other embodiments are within the scope of the following claims.

