---

title: Method and system for analyzing inventory purchasing opportunities with respect to inventory health
abstract: A method and system for determining analyzing an inventory purchasing opportunity with respect to inventory health. A method may include receiving an offer to purchase units of an inventory item via a purchasing channel for a purchase price per unit; determining a rate of sales demand of the item; and determining a breakeven holding time of existing units of the item, where a cost of holding a unit until the breakeven holding time equals, within an equality threshold, a difference between a sales channel value and the offer purchase price. The method may additionally include determining a healthy inventory level of the item that exceeds a target inventory level by a function of the sales demand rate and the breakeven holding time, and, if a current inventory level of the item exceeds the healthy level, declining to purchase units of said inventory item for the purchase price.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07607577&OS=07607577&RS=07607577
owner: Amazon Technologies, Inc.
number: 07607577
owner_city: Reno
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051212
---
This application claims benefit of priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 728 207 filed Oct. 19 2005 titled Method and System for Inventory Health which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

This invention relates to inventory management and more particularly to analysis of inventory metrics or measurements of inventory health.

In order to offer customers a variety of items readily available for delivery many merchants whether engaging in electronic or conventional brick and mortar commerce hold various quantities of such items within inventory facilities. Keeping items in inventory may serve to buffer variations in customer demand or a manufacturer or distributor s ability to supply various items. For example different items offered for sale by a merchant may have different manufacturer lead times. Holding quantities of such items as inventory may enable a merchant to offer consistent availability of these items to customers despite the different lead times.

Many merchants employ conventional inventory management schemes that attempt simply to ensure that the inventory on hand is sufficient to cover expected customer order volumes for a particular period of time. That is such conventional inventory management schemes focus on whether there is enough inventory on hand to meet projected demand. However storing inventory is not without cost. For example providing a physical facility in which to store inventory presents recurring infrastructure costs directly attributable to the inventory items stored in the facility. Further while items are in storage awaiting sale debt or capital costs associated with acquiring the items may accumulate. Items being held in inventory may also depreciate become obsolete expire or spoil e.g. in the case of perishable items become damaged or otherwise incur costs attributable to holding. When these various inventory holding costs are considered having too much inventory may also be a concern as accumulating costs may erode inventory value.

However taking holding costs into account when optimizing inventory presents challenges. The price paid to acquire a given amount of inventory typically represents a sunk cost that may not correlate with the current value of that inventory which may obscure actions that may be necessary to maximize the current inventory value. Further the problem of maximizing inventory value is complicated by purchase opportunities that on their surface may appear to be desirable but which may actually have a deleterious effect on overall inventory value.

Various embodiments of a method and system for analyzing an inventory purchasing opportunity with respect to inventory health are disclosed. According to one embodiment a method may include receiving an offer to purchase units of an inventory item via a purchasing channel for a given purchase price per unit and determining a time rate of sales demand of units of the given inventory item per unit of time. The method may also include determining a breakeven holding time of existing units of the inventory item where a cost of holding a given existing unit until the breakeven holding time equals within an equality threshold a difference between a sale value for sale of the given inventory item through a sales channel and the purchase price specified by the offer.

The method may further include determining a healthy inventory level of the inventory item where the healthy inventory level exceeds a target inventory level by a mathematical function of the time rate of sales demand and the breakeven holding time and in response to determining that a current inventory level of the inventory item exceeds the healthy inventory level declining to purchase the units of the inventory item for the given purchase price.

While the invention is susceptible to various modifications and alternative forms specific embodiments thereof are shown by way of example in the drawings and will herein be described in detail. It should be understood however that the drawings and detailed description thereto are not intended to limit the invention to the particular form disclosed but on the contrary the intention is to cover all modifications equivalents and alternatives falling within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

One embodiment of a fulfillment center configured to store inventory items is illustrated in . In the illustrated embodiment fulfillment center includes a receiving area a storage area configured to store an arbitrary number of items and a packing shipping area . The arrangement of the various areas within the illustrated embodiment of fulfillment center is depicted functionally rather than schematically. For example in some embodiments it is noted that multiple different receiving areas storage areas and packing shipping areas may be interspersed rather than segregated. Additionally fulfillment center includes an inventory management system configured to interact with each of receiving area storage area and packing shipping area .

Fulfillment center may be configured to receive different kinds of items from various suppliers and to store them until a customer order specifying particular ones of items is received. The particular items may then be selected from storage and sent to the customer. The general flow of items through fulfillment center is indicated using arrows. Specifically in the illustrated embodiment items may be received from one or more suppliers such as manufacturers distributors wholesalers etc. at receiving area . In various embodiments items may include merchandise commodities perishables or any suitable type of item depending on the nature of the enterprise that operates fulfillment center . Upon being received from a supplier at receiving area items may be prepared for storage. For example in some embodiments items may be unpacked or otherwise rearranged and inventory management system which as described below may include one or more software applications executing on a computer system may be updated to reflect the type quantity condition cost or any other suitable parameters with respect to newly received items . It is noted that items may be stocked managed or dispensed in terms of countable individual units or multiples of units such as packages cartons crates pallets or other suitable aggregations. Alternatively some items such as bulk products commodities etc. may be stored in continuous or arbitrarily divisible amounts that may not be inherently organized into countable units. Such items may be managed in terms of measurable quantities such as units of length area volume weight time duration or other dimensional properties characterized by units of measurement. Generally speaking a quantity of an item may refer to either a countable number of individual or aggregate units of an item or a measurable amount of an item as appropriate.

After arriving through receiving area items may be stored within storage area . In some embodiments like items may be stored together in bins on shelves or via other suitable storage mechanisms such that all items of a given kind are stored in one location. In other embodiments like items may be stored in different locations. For example to optimize retrieval of certain items having high turnover within a large physical facility those items may be stored in several different locations to reduce congestion that might occur at a single point of storage.

When a customer order specifying one or more of items is received the corresponding items may be selected or picked from storage area . In various embodiments item picking may range from minimally automated to completely automated picking. For example in one embodiment fulfillment center employees may pick items using written or electronic pick lists derived from customer orders while in another embodiment conveyor belts and robotics may be used to pick and transfer items . After the items corresponding to a particular order are picked they may be processed at packing shipping area for delivery to the customer. For example items may be packaged for shipment to the customer using a common carrier or simply bagged or otherwise prepared for direct transfer to a customer e.g. at an order pickup counter. In some embodiments further interaction with inventory management system may occur when items are picked from storage area and or processed at packing shipping area for example to update inventory records to reflect the removal of inventory to record revenue for the sale or other transaction e.g. lease rental exchange etc. and so forth.

Management of items stored as inventory within fulfillment center presents complex optimization problems. Generally speaking the level of inventory of a given item may affect the quality of service associated with providing the given item to a customer. Quality of service may encompass factors such as general availability and selection of items timeliness of order completion or any other factors relevant to a customer s perceived experience in conducting business relating to items . As an example of the interaction between inventory levels and quality of service if a particular item ordered by a customer is not in stock within fulfillment center the customer may be forced to wait for delivery until that particular item can be obtained or the customer may cancel the order resulting in a lost sale. Consequently keeping a number of units of items on hand may assist in the timely fulfillment of orders and increase customer satisfaction. A larger inventory for example may more readily accommodate unexpected increases in customer demand.

However various costs are typically associated with holding items in storage for any period of time. In some embodiments holding a unit of an item in storage within storage area may incur incremental storage costs. For example the cost of providing fulfillment center in which items may be stored may include recurring real estate costs e.g. lease costs debt service etc. personnel costs facilities costs e.g. utilities maintenance etc. and any other costs associated with fulfillment center . In one embodiment such costs may be incrementally apportioned to a given unit of an item according to an area or volume of storage space occupied by that unit. For example storage costs may be applied to each unit of each item at a rate of dollars per square cubic foot of item volume per unit of storage time day week month etc. . In other embodiments different cost allocation methods may be employed. For example in one embodiment the costs of providing special storage or handling such as refrigeration controlled atmosphere etc. may exclusively be allocated to those items that require such measures rather than averaging those costs across all items . Similarly in one embodiment storage may include temporary capacity e.g. short term leased space seasonal overflow capacity etc. as well as permanent capacity e.g. owned space year round capacity etc. each of which may have different cost characteristics. Correspondingly in some such embodiments items stored within a particular type of facility may exclusively incur costs of the particular type of facility according to their storage utilization e.g. area volume etc. . Alternatively storage costs may be allocated to items based upon their value or sales volume as opposed to their size. In some embodiments additional costs associated with obtaining a given item such as transportation handling costs charged by a supplier or incurred by eventual shipment to a customer may be included within storage costs for that given item .

In addition to storage costs in some embodiments holding a unit of an item in storage may incur capital or economic costs related to the price paid to obtain the item. That is once working capital or cash flow is committed to a unit of an item e.g. once that unit is paid for that economic value is not available for other purposes the committed value is tied up in the corresponding inventory. Depending on the accounting scheme used to manage the costs of inventory a cost of debt or other time value of money cost also referred to as an economic cost may be associated with the price paid for a given unit of an item . For example in one embodiment an effective annual interest rate of 6 may be applied to the price paid for a unit of inventory and may continue to accrue until that unit is sold or otherwise disposed of. In some embodiments economic costs may be applied to storage costs in addition to the price paid for a unit of inventory. In certain cases negative economic costs may also be associated with units of items . For example a supplier may offer a rebate for an item that effectively reduces its cost.

Other types of costs may also be associated with holding units of items in storage. For example in the ordinary course of operation of fulfillment center items may be subject to loss or damage due to accidents or mishaps. A rate of loss or a corresponding rate of insurance against such loss may be included within an overall cost of holding a unit of an item . Also over time items may depreciate expire spoil or become obsolete which may also be expressed as part of a cost of holding such items .

As noted above holding a larger inventory of an item may better enable an enterprise to absorb fluctuations in demand for that item. However in some circumstances the various elements of holding cost may erode some of the advantages of holding inventory. For example at a given point in time an enterprise may have at least two options with respect to a unit of a particular item as shown in . The enterprise may hold the unit within fulfillment center until it is sold to a customer through a sales channel or may dispose of the unit as soon as possible through a disposition channel . As described in greater detail below while a sales channel may generally yield a higher price for a unit than a disposition channel holding costs that accrue until such a sale occurs may diminish the extra revenue received.

Generally speaking sales channel may encompass any suitable method technique or relationship for conducting a transaction with a typical customer of an enterprise in response to an actual or expected customer order or request. Sales channel may include various features configured to present to customers information about items e.g. availability and pricing information product details images etc. as well as features configured to support the receipt and processing of customer orders or requests. For example a retail enterprise that generally sells merchandise to end consumers e.g. as merchandise not generally intended for resale as new may sell through an online web based channel that may include an online catalog or portal configured to display information about items a web based order entry system such as a virtual shopping cart or other system a status tracking tool through which customers may track the status or progress of orders a search engine or any of a number of other features suitable for promoting the conduction of sales transactions.

An enterprise may also engage in customer transactions using other types of sales channels or multiple such channels. For example sales channel may encompass a catalog channel through which customers may receive information about items via a catalog and provide orders through physical order forms or via telephone or a physical store channel through which customers may receive information about and order or purchase items in person. Manufacturers or distributors may similarly engage in sales of items through sales channels appropriate to their position within the supply chain. It is noted that in some embodiments a unit of an item may be rented leased or licensed to a customer via sales channel under specific terms in exchange for revenue or other economic consideration. The term sale may be used herein to generically describe any suitable transaction involving an item resulting in either direct or indirect e.g. imputed or tangential revenue and is intended to encompass rentals leases subscriptions and other types of revenue models.

By contrast disposition channel may generally encompass any suitable method technique or relationship for disposing of units of an item as an alternative to sale through a sales channel . In various embodiments a disposition channel may include a vendor return channel through which units of an item may be returned to a vendor or supplier for credit a liquidation channel through which units may be liquidated through a third party a salvage channel through which units may be disposed for scrap or salvage value or a donation channel through which units may be donated e.g. to a charitable cause. In other embodiments a disposition channel may include a sales channel that is an alternative to sales channel . For example a disposition channel may include a promotional sales channel through which units of an item are offered at a discount e.g. according to the condition of the units quantity on hand or other relevant factors bundled with units of other items e.g. as part of a buy X get Y free offer offered for sale through an auction or bidding process offered for sale through a promotional or marketing partner affiliated with the enterprise or any other suitable disposition arrangement. It is contemplated that in some embodiments different terms and conditions may apply to a sale of an item that occurs through a disposition channel versus a sale that occurs through a sales channel . For example a customer buying a unit of an item via sales channel may receive certain return exchange warranty or satisfaction privileges or guarantees that may not apply to purchases of that item through a disposition channel .

Generally speaking the value of a unit of a given item may correspond to the economic consideration that may be obtained for it via a specific channel. For example a unit of an item may be sold via sales channel for a particular price which may be indicative of the value of a unit of item with respect to sales channel . By contrast a unit of an item may be disposed of via disposition channel for a different level of economic consideration. For example the unit may be returned to a vendor for a percentage of the original purchase cost of the unit sold to a liquidator or disposed of via any other suitable method such as described above. Economic consideration received in exchange for an item may typically include monetary consideration but may also include other consideration such as credit relating to current or future transactions bartered goods or services or any other form of value agreeable to the parties participating in the exchange.

When considering revenue alone it may often be preferable to sell a given item via sales channel rather than to dispose of given item via a disposition channel . However an enterprise may have little direct control over when a sale event via sales channel may occur whereas an enterprise may have considerably greater control over initiating disposition via a disposition channel . In certain circumstances holding costs that accrue until units of an item are sold via sales channel may reduce or even eliminate the difference between the sale value and the disposition value of the units. Consequently even though greater revenue may be realized by waiting for a sale via sales channel to occur in certain circumstances overall economic value may be preserved or improved by electing to dispose of units of an item via disposition channel .

By examining the value that may be received for a given item via various channels in conjunction with the holding costs associated with given item a breakeven holding time may be determined at which holding costs approximately equal the difference in value between a future sale and a current disposition of given item . The breakeven holding time may then be used to determine an inventory policy that may be used to direct actions to be taken against items such as whether to hold or dispose of items .

At a general level of abstraction the logic behind an inventory policy that takes into account a breakeven holding time may be summarized as follows Suppose an item generally sells through a sales channel for a higher value than is expected to be received by disposing of the item through a disposition channel. Then it may be expected that any given unit of item may be profitably held for sale via the sales channel until the costs of holding the unit approximately equal the difference in value between the sales channel and the disposition channel. After this point referred to as the breakeven holding time accumulated holding costs may exceed the difference in value between the channels. For example a particular item may have a sale value of ten dollars and a disposition value of five dollars and may incur holding costs of one dollar per week. Thus the breakeven holding time for the particular item may be five weeks at which time the accumulated holding costs may be expected to total five dollars equal to the difference between the sale and disposition values.

The breakeven holding time may be used in determining a healthy level of inventory. Generally speaking a healthy level of inventory of an item may correspond to the total expected demand for that item through the breakeven holding time. That is if the breakeven holding time represents the tipping point for an item the point at which holding costs may be expected to exceed the added value of selling the item through a sales channel vs. a disposition channel then the total amount of inventory of the item may be considered healthy e.g. not at risk of incurring excessive holding costs if the inventory would be expected to be sold via a sales channel prior to the breakeven holding time. In other words if the inventory on hand of an item is expected to turn over e.g. be sold and possibly replaced prior to the breakeven holding time the inventory on hand may be considered healthy. Referring to the previous example if the demand or sales rate of particular item is two units per week then given the breakeven holding time of five weeks a healthy inventory level for the particular item may be ten units.

In one embodiment a breakeven holding time and a healthy inventory level for an item may be determined as follows. Let and p respectively represent the disposition value associated with disposing of item via disposition channel net of associated disposition costs and the sale value associated with sale of item via sales channel and let b represent the purchase paid to acquire item . If more than one disposition channel exists the disposition channel with the highest current disposition value may be chosen for the analysis. Let h represent the rate of holding cost accrual for a unit of item per unit of time e.g. dollars per week . The total breakeven holding time Tfor item may then be determined by setting the profit realized from disposition of item equal to the profit realized from holding item until the breakeven holding time and solving for T. That is . 1 This yields

It is noted that in some embodiments the accrued holding cost and the difference between current sale and disposition value may not be exactly equal but rather equal within some equality threshold. That is two values may be considered equal if their difference is less than the equality threshold which may be expressed as an absolute value e.g. a given number of units or a relative value e.g. a percentage . For example units of time or cost may not be arbitrarily divisible. Consequently rounding or truncation of values may occur during evaluation which may lead to inexact computation.

In some embodiments the healthy inventory level H and breakeven time Tmay be determined relative to another inventory policy. For example an enterprise may establish a target inventory level S of a particular item that may be used for planning and managing inventory levels of that item . In some embodiments S may be determined by an optimization process configured to determine an optimal level of inventory given various parameters such as customer demand supplier lead time market dynamics expected profit margins or other factors. In other embodiments S may simply be given as an arbitrary inventory level target. Generally speaking S may be determined in such a way that a desired service level for item will be achieved for at least a period of time T the coverage period with a given degree of certainty. That is S may denote the amount of inventory needed to cover expected demand to the degree required by the desired service level e.g. with a certain level of delay or other service parameters for a period of time T with a certain probability or certainty. For example the supply and demand characteristics of a particular item may be analyzed or modeled to determine that 100 units of that item are necessary to provide two weeks of inventory coverage with a probability of 99 .

In some cases the target inventory level S may not intrinsically take into account inventory health related to holding time as described above. In one embodiment a healthy inventory level may be determined relative to a target inventory level as follows. Let trepresent the incremental breakeven holding time for an item relative to T That is 4 although as noted below in some instances tmay be negative. Substituting equation 4 into equation 1 yields 5 and solving for tyields 6 It is noted that alternative expressions and derivations are possible. In particular it is noted that both equations 2 and 6 the breakeven holding time is entirely independent of the purchase price paid to acquire item b. Thus the expression for breakeven holding time may also be derived by setting the total holding cost accrued until the breakeven holding time equal to the difference between the current sale value and the current disposition value 7 

The relative breakeven holding time tmay be generally illustrative of a point in time beyond T at which accrued holding costs of an item begin to exceed the expected value from holding and eventually selling item through a sales channel. Equations 3 and 4 may be combined to yield an inventory health metric that reflects the disaggregation of total holding time Tinto a coverage period T and a relative breakeven holding time tas follows 

In some instances the demand over the interval from T to T tmay be given by an average value D. In such a case equation 9 may be further simplified to . 10 Generally speaking in these formulations the healthy inventory level H may exceed the target by the number of units expected to be sold according to current demand D over the incremental period of time given by the breakeven holding period t. By substitution of equation 6 the healthy inventory level may be given in terms of sale channel value disposition channel value and holding cost accrual rate as 11 

According to the foregoing a unit of item that sells via sales channel after the breakeven holding time may yield a lower value net of holding costs than if it were disposed of via disposition channel . The number of units that may be expected to sell prior to the breakeven holding time may generally be a function of the demand and is reflected in the healthy inventory level as shown above. It follows that if a current inventory level I of an item exceeds the healthy inventory level H for those units of item in excess of the healthy level greater value may be realized by disposition via disposition channel rather than holding for sale via sales channel . That is those units in excess of H may be considered unhealthy in that their value may be expected to be greater at the current time than at some future time. It is noted that if the breakeven holding period tis a negative value all units in excess of target inventory level S may be considered unhealthy. In this circumstance accrued holding costs through the expected time of sale given as hT already equal or exceed the difference between the sale and disposition values. Thus in this case H S. In some instances it may be possible for expected accrued holding costs for some units of S to equal or exceed the difference between the sale and disposition values and thus be technically unhealthy. However in some embodiments S may be enforced as a minimum required inventory level necessary to ensure a given level of service. Consequently in such embodiments H may be constrained to be greater than or equal to S.

As described above in some embodiments inventory management system may be configured to record and analyze the state of inventory items within fulfillment center . For example inventory management system may be implemented as one or more software processes configured to execute on one or more computer systems to create records of the arrival storage picking sale disposition or other events relating to items with respect to fulfillment center . In one embodiment inventory management system may be configured to analyze the inventory of a particular item determine whether the inventory level is healthy or unhealthy in accordance with the model derived above and initiate or suggest action such as disposition to be taken with respect to any unhealthy inventory.

One embodiment of a method of analyzing inventory health is illustrated in . Referring collectively to operation begins in block where a target inventory level in units of a particular item is specified. As noted above in various embodiments the target level of inventory may be dynamically determined by any suitable algorithm or process or may be statically or manually given. For example inventory management system may be separately configured to determine the target level of inventory may receive the target level from a different system or may include a static record or specification of the target level.

Additionally the time rate of sales demand of units of the particular item is determined block . In one embodiment inventory management system may extrapolate sales demand from historical sales activity of the particular item . Alternatively a more sophisticated model internal or external to inventory management system may be configured to generate a prediction of sales demand according to suitable variables such as seasonality trends planned marketing or promotional activity historical behavior of related items future product plans or any other factor relevant to demand. As noted previously sales channel may generally encompass any suitable model of revenue transaction including rentals leases licensing arrangements etc. Correspondingly the time rate of sales demand may correspond to demand for any relevant type of transaction that may occur via sales channel .

The breakeven holding time of units of particular item in excess of the specified target inventory level is then determined block . Specifically as described above the breakeven holding time may be determined such that the cost of holding a given excess unit until the breakeven time equals within an equality threshold the difference between a current sale value for sale of the item through a sales channel and a current disposition value for disposition of the item through a disposition channel . In one embodiment inventory management system may be configured to determine current sale and disposition value information and holding cost information for item or to obtain such information from another system such as a pricing or finance system.

A healthy inventory level of particular item is then determined where the healthy inventory level exceeds the target inventory level by the product of the time rate of sales demand and the determined breakeven holding time as described above block . The current inventory level of particular item is then compared against the healthy inventory level block . If the current inventory level does not exceed the healthy inventory level the inventory of particular item including inventory in excess of the target inventory level if any may be held for future sale block . If the current inventory level does exceed the healthy level those units of particular item in excess of the healthy level may be disposed of via disposition channel block . In one embodiment inventory management system may be configured to generate a report or indication notifying a user of the system of the healthy or unhealthy status of inventory and advising that a particular action e.g. hold or dispose be taken. That is inventory management system may merely advise or indicate that an action such as disposition should be taken while the actual undertaking of the indicated action is performed at the discretion of another agent or system. In other embodiments inventory management system may be configured to initiate the disposition process if unhealthy inventory exists for example by contacting a vendor to arrange a return directing that unhealthy inventory be picked and packaged for return or other actions suitable to disposition channel .

In some embodiments more than one disposition channel may exist and such channels may be limited in the number of units that can be disposed of. For example a vendor may limit the number of returns it will accept to a given number or dollar value of units per month or other time period. Similarly a liquidator may only accept a certain number of units at a given time. In some such embodiments the method of may be applied to each disposition channel in nonincreasing order of disposition value. That is each subsequent disposition channel to which the method is applied may have a disposition value that is less than or equal to the disposition value of the previous channel. For example the highest value channel may be selected to perform the breakeven holding time analysis. If unhealthy inventory exists with respect to the highest value channel it may be removed from inventory to the extent that the limitations of the channel allow. The next highest value channel may then be selected for a similar analysis and the process may repeat until each disposition channel has been considered.

In the course of performing inventory health analysis inventory management system may be configured to generate and report a number of different inventory metrics that may be indicative of various aspects of inventory decision quality and health status. For example the total overstock amount I S and associated purchase value b I S disposition value I S and or expected sale value p I S may be reported. Similar metrics may be reported with respect to unhealthy inventory I H. Additionally for unhealthy inventory unit value loss speed e.g. given as the holding cost rate h may be reported as an indication of the rate at which value loss increases due to continued holding cost accrual if disposition action is not taken. In some embodiments inventory metrics may be defined for individual items as well as in the aggregate for groups of items such as groupings by product type manufacturer etc. Additionally in enterprises where different items may be associated with different business units or departments for financial or accounting purposes metrics may be grouped and reported according to organizational units. Numerous other types of inventory metrics may also be generated.

As described above in one embodiment inventory management system may be configured to ascertain whether a given level of inventory of an item is healthy or unhealthy and to responsively initiate an appropriate action such as disposition of unhealthy inventory through a disposition channel . Such an analysis may be performed for example to manage an existing quantity of inventory given its holding costs and sales dynamics. However in some situations an enterprise may be required to determine whether a proposed inventory acquisition should be undertaken.

Generally speaking just as units of a given item may be sold or disposed of through sales or disposition channels having associated sales or disposition values units of given item may be acquired through a purchasing channel for a purchase price or value. For example a vendor manufacturer or other supplier of inventory may present an offer to an enterprise via a purchasing channel to purchase a particular number of units of a given item for a particular price. Such an offer may be constrained in numerous ways for example the supplier may require that a minimum quantity be purchased in order to receive a preferred offer price or the supplier may require that the offer be accepted within a specified time period. A supplier may further constrain that units purchased according to the offer may have restrictions on return or disposition options compared to units purchased under different terms. For example units purchased under the terms of the offer may be not be returnable may not be liquidated or resold through certain types of disposition channels or other restrictions may apply. It is noted that as described above with respect to sales of items the term purchase may refer to any suitable type of acquisition transaction including acquisitions of rights or options leases rentals licensing arrangements etc.

Such offers may occasionally or frequently represent favorable deals for an enterprise in terms of the overall price paid for units of an item . However as noted above holding costs of an item may erode the value of item over time including any potential purchase savings associated with purchases under a constrained offer. If such purchases are made without concern for overall inventory health the enterprise s goal of maximizing inventory value may be frustrated. However lengthy analysis of the inventory health implications of an offer may result in a lost opportunity if the offer is not found to be acceptable before it expires.

In the following discussion methods and techniques are described in which the impacts of a particular purchasing opportunity for an item on the inventory health of that item are analyzed. In one embodiment of such a method a purchasing opportunity may be treated as a hypothetical disposition opportunity for the purposes of assessing inventory health implications. As described in detail below if it would be advantageous from an inventory health standpoint to dispose of item via such a hypothetical disposition e.g. if some portion of the inventory of item would be unhealthy with respect to such a hypothetical disposition channel the purchasing opportunity may be ill advised. That is it may be inadvisable to acquire inventory under terms for which one would prefer to dispose of inventory if the opportunity to dispose were available. In other embodiments of the method described below additional factors may be taken into account when evaluating a purchasing opportunity such as determining whether minimum profit margin requirements for the purchased units are expected to be satisfied optimizing the purchase quantity etc.

As described in the previous section a given inventory level of an item may be considered unhealthy if greater value can be expected from disposing of at least some units of that item via a disposition channel instead of waiting for a sale to occur via a sales channel . Generally speaking a given inventory level may be either healthy or unhealthy with respect to any given disposition channel according to the disposition value associated with the channel. That is for any given disposition value the given inventory level may be in excess of the healthy inventory level in which case disposition may be indicated or below the healthy inventory level in which case additional inventory may be accumulated without compromising inventory value. The given inventory level may also be equal to the healthy inventory level in which case no additional inventory accumulation may be advised but inventory need not be disposed. 

For any given purchase offer for an item that is being considered by an enterprise the purchase price associated with the offer may be considered an indication of the value of item . If the current inventory level of item is unhealthy with respect to the purchase price this would indicate that given an opportunity to do so e.g. given the existence of a disposition channel having a disposition value equal to the purchase price of the offer inventory value may be improved by disposition of units of item for the value of the purchase price. However since disposition is the opposite of acquisition an indication that disposition for the value of the purchase price is a preferable option may correspondingly indicate that purchasing for the indicated price is not preferable. In other words given any particular value associated with an item as well as the sales price sales demand and holding cost characteristics described above it would either be preferable to dispose of units of item for the particular value in question or to hold those units for future sale that is current inventory of item is either unhealthy or healthy with respect to the particular value . If it would be preferable to dispose of units of item in exchange for the particular value a net acquisition of units of item for the particular value may represent a questionable opportunity. It is noted that no actual opportunity to perform a disposition for the particular value is necessary to conclude that a purchase would not be preferable. Rather it is the potential impact to inventory health of disposition versus acquisition that may determine a preferable course of action.

Correspondingly in one embodiment inventory management system may be configured to analyze an offer to purchase units of an item from a supplier as though the offer were actually an opportunity to dispose of existing inventory of item for a disposition value equal to the purchase offer price. That is for the purposes of such an analysis inventory management system may be configured to treat a purchasing channel as a disposition channel. If inventory management system determines that disposition would be indicated given the current inventory state the purchase offer may be declined.

One embodiment of a method of analyzing a purchasing opportunity with respect to inventory health is illustrated in . Referring collectively to operation begins in block where an offer to purchase units of a particular item via a purchasing channel for a given purchase price per unit is received. Receiving a suitable indication specifying the details of the offer such as a message may constitute receiving the offer. The offer may or may not specify a minimum or maximum number of units eligible to be purchased. For example inventory management system may receive such an offer electronically from a supplier. Alternatively the offer may be electronically received from or manually entered by a buyer for an enterprise who receives the offer from a supplier via another means.

Additionally the time rate of sales demand of units of the particular item is determined block . In various embodiments sales demand may be determined through appropriate extrapolation or modeling similar to that described above with respect to block of .

The breakeven holding time of existing units of particular item e.g. units of item already held in inventory beyond an expected time of sale of the existing units is then determined with respect to the purchasing channel block . The breakeven holding time determination may be similar to that described above with respect to block of with the exception that the purchase price specified in the received offer may be used as the disposition value. That is the purchasing channel corresponding to the received offer may be treated as a disposition channel for the purposes of analyzing the offer. Specifically as described above the breakeven holding time may be determined such that the cost of holding a given excess unit until the breakeven time equals within an equality threshold the difference between a current sale value for sale of the item through a sales channel and the given purchase price specified in the received offer. In one embodiment inventory management system may be configured to determine current sale value information and holding cost information for item or to obtain such information from another system such as a pricing or finance system.

A healthy inventory level of particular item with respect to the purchasing channel is then determined where the healthy inventory level exceeds a target inventory level by the product of the time rate of sales demand and the determined breakeven holding time as described above block . In some embodiments the target inventory level may be separately determined and treated as an input to the purchasing opportunity analysis.

The current inventory level of particular item is then compared against the healthy inventory level block . If the current inventory level exceeds the healthy inventory level as determined with respect to the purchase price the offer to purchase units of the particular item for the given purchase price may be declined block . In some embodiments as described in greater detail below a counteroffer may be made with respect to purchase price or quantity. If the current inventory level does not exceed the healthy inventory level the purchase price may be deemed acceptable block . The offer may subsequently be accepted or evaluated with respect to purchase quantity as described below. Further evaluation may result in the offer being accepted or declined or a counteroffer being made. For example if a given offer that specifies a minimum purchase quantity is deemed unacceptable in some embodiments the method of may iterate over possible purchase quantities to determine a purchase quantity that would be acceptable at the offer price. Alternatively the method of may iterate over possible offer prices to determine an offer price that would be acceptable at the minimum purchase quantity or may iterate over both variables concurrently. It is noted that such iterations may take into account any particular price or quantity increments that may be implemented by a particular vendor. For example a vendor may require that items be ordered in certain multiples of units e.g. crates pallets etc. rather than individual units. Correspondingly iteration over purchase quantities may reflect such multiples.

Once it has been determined that a purchase price associated with an offer is acceptable with respect to the breakeven holding time analysis described above if no minimum purchase quantity is specified in the offer the number of units of item to be purchased under the offer may be analyzed. According to the above analysis if the purchase price is deemed acceptable the healthy inventory level H with respect to the purchase price exceeds the current inventory level I. Thus in one embodiment the quantity to be purchased under the offer may be any quantity less than or equal to the difference H I.

However more sophisticated optimizations of purchase quantity relative to the offer terms may be performed. In one embodiment a minimum profit margin M in units of economic value e.g. dollars may be specified for units of an item . For example an enterprise may specify that a unit of item should not be acquired or held unless there is a reasonable expectation e.g. justified by sales dynamics of item that the unit will yield a profit margin of at least M. In various embodiments profit margin may take into account different factors and be expressed or determined in different ways. For example a minimum margin M may represent the difference between a sales price of a unit of item and all aggregate costs associated with acquiring and holding that unit e.g. its purchase price holding costs and or other associated costs . In other approaches some costs may be excluded from a margin determination depending on accounting practices. While M may be expressed in absolute terms it may also be expressed as a relative percentage m of another value such as a purchase price paid or sales price received for a unit of item indicated respectively as b and p in the above analysis . For example in various embodiments M mb or M mp. Other suitable definitions or derivations of profit margin may also be employed. It is noted that in some situations it may be permissible for profit margin to be negative indicating a loss with respect to an item . For example an item may be treated as a loss leader intended to catalyze other more profitable sales.

In one embodiment the purchase quantity corresponding to a particular offer denoted Q may be optimized given the constraint that the purchased units should produce a minimum profit margin M relative to a total available profit margin. Profit margin may typically be determined according to a margin price basis such as a purchase price paid sales price received or a function of these or other prices. As described above the costs of holding purchased units of an item until sale through sales channel may erode the benefits of a higher sale value versus a current disposition value. Such costs of holding may also erode the realized profit margin for those units. Similar to the holding breakeven time described above a profit margin breakeven time may be derived for item where the cost of holding a given unit of item until the profit margin breakeven time equals all total available profit margin except the minimum profit margin within an equality threshold as previously discussed. That is the cost of holding a unit is equal to the total available margin less the minimum profit margin. For sake of analysis suppose the total available margin is the expected sale price p less the price corresponding to a particular purchasing opportunity or offer b although it is noted that the basis of the total available margin calculation may be a function of either of these prices taken alone or a more complex measure . According to one embodiment the minimum profit margin according to a minimum margin rate m may be given as . 12 Then to determine the profit margin breakeven time let 1 13 where h denotes holding costs per unit of time for a unit of item . Since accumulated holding costs should leave at least m percent of the margin basis holding costs should not exceed 1 m percent of the margin basis. The profit margin breakeven time t is then given as

As before the average time rate of sales demand of units of item may be given as D. For simplicity of exposition the simple average of demand is used for the following derivations. However it is noted that alternate expressions using integral or summation techniques similar to those employed in previous derivations may be developed that make use of a continuous or discrete functional expression of demand D t . Such general expressions are contemplated as within the scope of the following discussion. The optimal quantity of units to be purchased under the terms of the offer being considered may be given as Q . If the last unit purchased is expected to yield the minimum profit margin then the total number of units in inventory following a purchase should not exceed the number expected to be sold before the profit margin breakeven time. Thus . 15 Solving for Q and substituting for tyields

Generally speaking a purchase should not result in inventory of an item exceeding healthy inventory level H for that item. This constraint can be made explicit in the calculation of Q 

Once the purchase quantity has been optimized with respect to a desired minimum profit margin it is possible to determine the net contribution to overall profit that may be expected from executing the purchase. From the above analysis the last unit of the purchase quantity when sold has a net profit contribution of m p b and is sold after Q D time elapses incurring hQ D in holding costs. Correspondingly the first unit of the purchase quantity if sold before any substantial holding costs accrue should contribute hQ D m p b to the net profit. In embodiments where sales demand is linear over time the total net profit contribution V of the units purchased under the terms of the purchase offer may be computed as the average of the contributions of the first and last units sold multiplied by the number of units purchased 

It may be the case in some circumstances that a supplier may make purchase price b contingent upon an enterprise purchasing a minimum quantity Q of units of an item . If after optimizing for a particular minimum profit margin the optimized purchase quantity Q is greater than or equal to the minimum required quantity Q quantity Q may be purchased without further consideration. However if Q 

As described above with respect to inventory management system may be configured to analyze an offer to purchase units of an item from a supplier as to the inventory health implications of such a purchase. Similarly in one embodiment inventory management system may be configured to optimize the quantity of units to be purchased under the terms of a given purchase offer with respect to a minimum profit margin requirement. In one such embodiment inventory management system may also be configured to determine a net profit contribution associated with the optimized purchase quantity of units as well as a net profit contribution associated with a minimum required purchase quantity if any. In some embodiments inventory management system may also be configured to recommend counteroffer strategies if a purchase offer is found unacceptable such as by recommending alternative purchase prices or quantities.

One embodiment of a method of analyzing a purchasing opportunity with respect to purchase quantity and price is illustrated in . Referring collectively to operation begins in block where a minimum profit margin associated with a particular item is specified. For example an enterprise may impose a uniform requirement or expectation that all items yield a profit margin of some amount or percentage. Alternatively different profit margin expectations may be imposed for different types of items such as product classes e.g. books music electronics appliances etc. brands specific product lines or individual items . It is noted that as mentioned above profit margin may be determined in any suitable consistent fashion for example as an absolute dollar amount as a percentage of a purchase price or sale price as a percentage of gross profit e.g. a difference between a sale price and a purchase price etc.

Additionally the time rate of sales demand of units of the particular item is determined block . In various embodiments sales demand may be determined through appropriate extrapolation or modeling similar to that described above with respect to block of .

An offer to purchase units of a particular item via a purchasing channel for a given purchase price per unit is received block . As in block of the offer or a suitable indication of the offer e.g. a message including the offer details may be received by inventory management system electronically or by other means and may or may not specify a minimum purchase quantity. It is noted that in some embodiments the method of may be performed after the offer has been analyzed with respect to inventory health as described above with respect to . In some such embodiments analysis of the offer according to may be performed contingent upon whether purchase of any quantity of item would render inventory unhealthy with respect to the purchasing channel as described with respect to .

The profit margin breakeven time of particular item is then determined with respect to the offer block . In one embodiment as described above inventory management system may be configured to determine the profit margin breakeven time such that the accrued cost of holding a unit of particular item purchased under the offer until the profit margin breakeven time equals within an equality threshold as previously described the difference between the total available profit margin for particular item e.g. according to the basis on which margin is computed less the minimum profit margin associated with particular item . For example the total available margin may be given as the difference between a sales price and the purchase offer price p b and the minimum profit margin may be given as m p b . The difference between these as described above may be given as 1 m p b .

The purchase quantity of units of particular item may then be optimized with respect to the profit margin breakeven time block . In one embodiment inventory management system may be configured to determine an optimized purchase quantity Q of particular item according to the previously determined profit margin breakeven time and the time rate of sales demand of particular item as described in detail above. In some embodiments if the optimized purchase quantity as determined on this basis is greater than the difference between the current inventory level I of particular item and a healthy inventory level H as determined with respect to the purchase channel e.g. according to the method of the difference H I may be selected as the optimized purchase quantity of particular item as described above.

The total expected contribution to net profit of the optimized number of units subject to purchase under the terms of the offer may then be computed block . For example inventory management system may be configured to compute the net profit V as the average of the profit contributions of the first and last units sold times the number of units purchased where the last unit sold has an expected profit contribution of the minimum profit margin and the first unit sold has an expected profit contribution of the minimum profit margin plus the accrued holding cost until the profit margin breakeven time of the last unit sold as described above. In other embodiments other types of summation or integration techniques may be used to compute the expected net profit of units of particular item purchased under the terms of the offer.

If a minimum purchase quantity Q is specified by the terms of the purchase offer and the minimum quantity is less than or equal to the previously determined optimized purchase quantity Q applying an appropriate equality threshold if necessary or if no minimum purchase quantity is specified the optimized purchase quantity may be purchased blocks . If the minimum purchase quantity is greater than Q the total contribution to net profit of the minimum purchase quantity of units Q may be computed blocks . For example inventory management system may be configured to compute the net profit of the minimum quantity of units V by averaging the profit contributions of the first and last units sold in a manner similar to that described above for block with the exception that the profit contribution of the last unit sold may be reduced by its holding costs for holding time in excess of the profit margin breakeven time as described previously. This step is not necessarily contingent upon a comparison of the minimum purchase quantity with the optimized purchase quantity. For example determination of the net expected profit of the minimum purchase quantity of units V may be performed concurrently with the computation of V in block in some embodiments.

If the net expected profit associated with the minimum purchase quantity Q is acceptable relative to the net expected profit associated with the optimized purchase quantity Q the minimum required quantity of units may be purchased blocks . For example if the difference V V is less than some absolute or relative threshold quantity e.g. as a percentage of V the offer may be deemed acceptable. In this case inventory management system may be configured to autonomously initiate or complete the purchasing process or to advise another entity e.g. an employee or other agent that the offer is acceptable and should be pursued.

If the net expected profit associated with the minimum purchase quantity Q is not acceptable the offer may be declined or in some embodiments a counteroffer may be made blocks . For example in some embodiments inventory management system may be configured to determine a counteroffer purchase price that would render the net expected profit acceptable with respect to the minimum purchase quantity or conversely to determine a counteroffer purchase quantity that would render the net expected profit acceptable with respect to the purchase offer price. In some embodiments inventory management system may be configured to autonomously reject an offer or negotiate a counteroffer with a supplier or to advise another software or human agent of the strategy that should be employed. Also in some embodiments a purchase offer may still be accepted even though the net expected profit associated with the minimum purchase quantity Q is not acceptable and no counteroffer is agreed to. For example such a purchase offer may be deliberately accepted for exceptional reasons that go beyond the analysis factors and logic programmed into inventory management system . Such exceptional reasons may include for example competitive strategy e.g. to prevent a competitor from acquiring resources vendor goodwill public relations charitable activity or any other factors not captured by the inventory management model.

It is noted that in some embodiments not all steps of the method shown in may occur. For example if no minimum purchase quantity is specified for a purchase offer blocks through may be omitted. Also counteroffer logic may be omitted from inventory management system such that purchase offers are simply rejected if a minimum purchase quantity exceeds the optimized purchase quantity Q at block .

It is contemplated that in some embodiments any of the methods or techniques described above may be implemented as program instructions and data capable of being stored or conveyed via a computer accessible medium. Such methods or techniques may include for example and without limitation the functions of inventory management system as well as the methods illustrated in and and any suitable variations thereof. Such program instructions may be executed to perform a particular computational function such as inventory health metric generation and analysis purchase offer analysis purchase and or sales management operating system functionality applications and or any other suitable functions.

One exemplary embodiment of a computer system including computer accessible media is illustrated in . In the illustrated embodiment computer system includes one or more processors coupled to a system memory via an input output I O interface . Computer system further includes a network interface coupled to I O interface . In some embodiments it is contemplated that inventory management system may be implemented using a single instance of computer system while in other embodiments multiple such systems may be configured to host different portions or instances of inventory management system . For example in one embodiment some data sources or services e.g. purchasing management services may be implemented via instances of computer system that are distinct from those instances implementing other data sources or services e.g. order entry fulfillment services .

In various embodiments computer system may be a uniprocessor system including one processor or a multiprocessor system including several processors e.g. two four eight or another suitable number . Processors may be any suitable processor capable of executing instructions. For example in various embodiments processors may be a general purpose or embedded processor implementing any of a variety of instruction set architectures ISAs such as the x86 PowerPC SPARC or MIPS ISAs or any other suitable ISA. In multiprocessor systems each of processors may commonly but not necessarily implement the same ISA.

System memory may be configured to store instructions and data accessible by process . In various embodiments system memory may be implemented using any suitable memory technology such as static random access memory SRAM synchronous dynamic RAM SDRAM nonvolatile Flash type memory or any other type of memory. In the illustrated embodiment program instructions and data implementing desired functions such as those described above are shown stored within system memory as code .

In one embodiment I O interface may be configured to coordinate I O traffic between processor system memory and any peripheral devices in the device including network interface or other peripheral interfaces. In some embodiments I O interface may perform any necessary protocol timing or other data transformations to convert data signals from one component e.g. system memory into a format suitable for use by another component e.g. processor . In some embodiments I O interface may include support for devices attached through various types of peripheral buses such as a variant of the Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus standard or the Universal Serial Bus USB standard for example. In some embodiments the function of I O interface may be split into two or more separate components such as a north bridge and a south bridge for example. Also in some embodiments some or all of the functionality of I O interface such as an interface to system memory may be incorporated directly into processor .

Network interface may be configured to allow data to be exchanged between computer system and other devices attached to a network such as other computer systems for example. In various embodiments network interface may support communication via wired or wireless general data networks such as any suitable type of Ethernet network for example via telecommunications telephony networks such as analog voice networks or digital fiber communications networks via storage area networks such as Fibre Channel SANs or via any other suitable type of network and or protocol.

In some embodiments system memory may be one embodiment of a computer accessible medium configured to store program instructions and data as described above. However in other embodiments program instructions and or data may be received sent or stored upon different types of computer accessible media. Generally speaking a computer accessible medium may include storage media or memory media such as magnetic or optical media e.g. disk or CD DVD ROM coupled to computer system via I O interface . A computer accessible medium may also include any volatile or non volatile media such as RAM e.g. SDRAM DDR SDRAM RDRAM SRAM etc. ROM etc that may be included in some embodiments of computer system as system memory or another type of memory. Program instructions and data stored via a computer accessible medium may be transmitted by transmission media or signals such as electrical electromagnetic or digital signals which may be conveyed via a communication medium such as a network and or a wireless link such as may be implemented via network interface .

Additionally it is contemplated that any of the methods or techniques described above and illustrated for example in may be implemented as a web service that may be performed on behalf of clients requesting such a service. Generally speaking providing a function or service as a web service may encompass providing any of a variety of standardized APIs configured to allow different software programs to communicate e.g. to request services and respond to such requests in an autonomous web based and typically platform independent manner. For example an enterprise may choose to expose certain enterprise data e.g. catalog data inventory data customer data or other types of data and or certain enterprise functions e.g. query functions electronic commerce functions generic data storage or computational functions etc. to external customers or in some embodiments internal clients via a web services interface. Applications could then access the exposed data and or functions via the web services interface even though the accessing application may be configured to execute on an entirely different platform e.g. a different operating system or system architecture than the platform hosting the exposed data or functions. Similarly an enterprise may elect to provide clients with access to inventory management analysis services such as inventory health determination purchase offer analysis counteroffer analysis or other such services. For example clients may provide inventory details via a web services interface and request various kinds of analysis through that interface. Alternatively an enterprise may elect to provide physical management of inventory on behalf of clients and may analyze client owned inventory in a manner similar to enterprise owned inventory exposing the results of such analysis to clients as a web service.

In some embodiments provisioning a web service may encompass the use of particular protocols which may be executable e.g. as part of code to publish available web services to potential users to describe the interfaces of web services sufficiently to allow users to invoke web services properly to allow users to select and differentiate among web services for a particular transaction and to provide a format for exchanging web services data in a flexible and platform independent manner. Specifically in one embodiment a provider of a web service may register the service using a version of the Universal Discovery Description and Integration UDDI protocol which may function as a general directory through which potential resource users may locate web services of interest. The web service provider may also publish specific details regarding how a well formed web services request from a user should be formatted e.g. what specific parameters are required or allowed the data type or format to be used for a given parameter etc. . For example such interface details may be published e.g. within a UDDI directory entry using a version of the Web Services Description Language WSDL .

In many embodiments web services request and response data is exchanged between a client and the service provider through the use of messages or documents formatted as platform independent structured data such as a document formatted in compliance with a version of eXtensible Markup Language XML . For example in one embodiment a web services request to provide inventory health information for a given inventory item may be embodied in an XML document including fields identifying the item of interest the type of data requested e.g. inventory health data and possibly other fields in which each field is delimited by an XML tag describing the type of data the field represents. The response to such a request from the web service provider may include an XML document containing the requested data. In some embodiments web services related documents may be transmitted between applications making requests and targeted web services using a web based data transfer protocol such as a version of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP for example.

Different types of web services requests and responses may yield XML documents that bear little content in common which may complicate the handling and interpretation of such documents. For example in different versions of a free form XML document specifying a web services request the actual web service that is requested may appear at different places within different document versions which may require a recipient of the document to buffer or parse a good deal of document data before understanding what the document is for. Consequently in some embodiments the XML documents containing web services request response data may encapsulated within additional XML data used to define a messaging framework e.g. a generic format for exchanging documents or messages having arbitrary content. For example in one embodiment web services requests or responses may be XML documents formatted according to a version of the Simple Object Access Protocol SOAP which in various versions may define distinct document sections such as an envelope e.g. which may include a specification of the document type the intended recipient web service etc. as well as a message body that may include arbitrary XML message data e.g. the particular details of the web services request . However in some embodiments web services may be implemented using different protocols and standards for publishing services and formatting and exchanging messages.

Additionally in some embodiments a web services system may be implemented without using document based techniques such as SOAP type protocols. For example as an alternative to a document based approach a web service may be implemented using a Representational State Transfer REST type architecture. Generally speaking in REST type architectures web services requests may be formed as commands conveyed via a transport protocol such as PUT or GET commands conveyed via a version of the HTTP protocol. Those parameters of the request that might be embedded within a document in a document based web services architecture may instead be included as command parameters in a REST type architecture. Other suitable configurations of web services architectures are possible and contemplated.

Although the embodiments above have been described in considerable detail numerous variations and modifications will become apparent to those skilled in the art once the above disclosure is fully appreciated. It is intended that the following claims be interpreted to embrace all such variations and modifications.

