---

title: Voltage-gated, pH-sensitive anion channel and its novel splice variant involved in taste sensation
abstract: The invention provides a novel splice-variant of the ClC-4 protein, termed ClC-4A. ClC-4A is expressed in taste bud cells and is involved in sour taste perception. The invention provides ClC-4A polynucleotides and ClC-4A polypeptides, vectors, host cells and ClC-4A specific antibodies as well as designing high potency taste stimuli, determining taste preferences in animals, developing breed-specific foods, and modifying the taste of foods and medications.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07785807&OS=07785807&RS=07785807
owner: Monell Chemical Senses Center
number: 07785807
owner_city: Philadelphia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051213
---
This application is the National Stage of International Application No. PCT US2005 045542 filed Dec. 13 2005 which claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 635 675 filed Dec. 13 2004 the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

This invention was made with government support under Grant No. DC005154 awarded by the National Institutes of Health. The government has certain rights in the invention.

The invention relates to a voltage gated pH sensitive anion channel polynucleotides encoding the channel polypeptides antibodies against the channel transgenic animals and methods of using the same. More specifically the invention relates to the anion channel ClC 4 and a novel splice variant of ClC 4 expressed in taste bud cells.

The sense of taste plays an important role in the life of humans and animals. Mammals are generally thought to distinguish five primary taste qualities sour salty bitter sweet and umami the taste of monosodium glutamate aspartate and some ribonucleotides . These five modalities reflect the organism s internal physiological needs. For example salty sweet and umami tastes enable humans and animals to seek out necessary minerals energy or nutrient rich food while sour and bitter perceptions are crucial for the avoidance of putrefied foods unripe fruits potentially harmful plant alkaloids and other toxins. Taste stimuli can also evoke positive hedonic responses and via the cephalic phase initiate secretory and metabolic changes in the gut prior to food entering the stomach.

Taste sensations are mediated by specialized epithelial cells referred to as taste receptor cells. About 50 150 taste receptor cells and supporting cells form a single taste bud. These are embedded within the epithelium of the tongue in morphologically distinct papillae or regions. Taste receptor cells utilize different receptors and signaling pathways to convey the tastes of different modalities. For example salt taste is apparently mediated by sodium channels while sour taste may be transduced by one of several putative channels including acid sensing ion channels hyperpolarization and cyclic nucleotide gated cation channels. In addition electrophysiological studies suggest that chloride channels are also involved in sour taste transduction. Bitter sweet and umami tastes are transduced by seven transmembrane receptors coupled with heterotrimeric G proteins. In addition bitter compounds may permeate taste receptor cells and directly interact with G proteins and ion channels. Activation of receptors and ion channels by taste stimuli leads to taste cell depolarization alteration of membrane potentials generation of action potentials and the triggering of neurotransmitter release onto afferent gustatory nerves transmitting the gustatory signals to the brain.

The molecular mechanisms underlying taste transduction especially the peripheral signal coding in the taste buds are not well understood. Molecular and genetic data indicated that subsets of taste receptor cells are responsible for bitter sweet and umami tastes respectively. Physiological studies showed that most taste receptor cells can be excited by stimuli representative of two or more different taste modalities. Furthermore the molecules that are involved in generation of action potentials in taste receptor cells and in transmission of gustatory signals from taste receptor cells to afferent axons remain unknown.

Identification of proteins that respond to changes in taste cell membrane potential will allow novel insights into taste peripheral coding. The activity of some of these potential sensitive proteins may also be pH sensitive. If so they could represent an additional transduction process in sour taste. Possessing a more complete understanding of the activity of channel proteins will provide new targets for evaluating taste stimuli and modifiers and developing new flavors.

Currently the molecular mechanisms underlying the transduction steps in taste and in sour taste sensation in particular are not fully understood. Therefore strategies that seek to discover substances to modify tastes and to develop new flavors is based on incomplete knowledge. As a result many potentially taste active compounds need to be taken through exhaustive and difficult animal feeding studies or expensive human psychophysical tests. At present the incomplete knowledge of sour taste and its interaction with other taste modalities makes rational computational design approaches difficult.

The overall objective of this invention was to discover identify and characterize a membrane potential voltage dependent pH sourness sensitive chloride channel ClC 4 and any novel isoforms that may be selective to the taste cell. Using a PCR based strategy two isoforms of ClC 4 have been cloned and characterized. One of the two isoforms ClC 4A appears to be taste cell type specific. The invention further provides a means to screen compounds that can be used to modify taste and develop new flavors. In one embodiment the channels are expressed in a heterologous cell line expression system. In another embodiment a more stable and durable device can incorporate one or both of these channels into an active artificial support matrix. Changes in pH or membrane potential can open or close these two channels thus regulating the flux of chloride and other anions. This movement of anions can be monitored electronically or optically for example.

The invention provides isolated polynucleotides of comprising a splice variant of ClC 4 termed ClC 4A comprising a sequence of SEQ ID NO 6 or SEQ ID NO 11 or a sequence encoding a polypeptide having the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 8. The polynucleotides may include expression vectors comprising the polynucleotide encoding ClC 4A and the invention further provides host cells such as mammalian cells e.g. from humans mice rats dogs cows pigs cats oxen buffalo llamas sheep horses goats and non human primates containing such expression vectors. Host cells may also be derived from non mammals such as for example frogs birds bacteria yeast insects and nematodes. The invention also provides transgenic animals expressing the ClC 4A channel.

The invention also provides transgenic non human animals such as mice rats dogs cows pigs cats oxen buffalo llamas sheep horses goats and non human primates that comprise a heterologous ClC 4A polynucleotide operably linked to expression control sequences and methods of making the same.

The invention also provides isolated ClC 4A polypeptide. In some embodiments the ClC 4A polypeptide has the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 8. In some embodiments the ClC 4A polypeptide is a fusion protein.

The invention provides methods for identifying taste modifiers comprising contacting a ClC 4A polypeptide with a potential taste modifier and measuring the binding of the potential taste modifier to the ClC 4A polypeptide with respect to the binding of a natural ligand to ClC4 A. In some embodiments the ClC4 A polypeptide is expressed on the surface of a host cell e.g. oocytes human embryonic kidney cells Chinese hamster ovary cells HeLa cells baby hamster kidney cells monkey kidney cells N1E 115 cells and PC 12 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells and is encoded by a nucleic acid sequence that specifically hybridizes under stringent conditions to a polynucleotide sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NO 1 SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 3 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 SEQ ID NO 6 SEQ ID NO 10 and SEQ ID NO 11 and the polypeptide comprises as its first three amino acids the sequence Met Leu Leu. In some embodiments the potential taste modifier modulates intracellular chloride concentration. In some embodiments the ClC 4A polypeptides are immobilized on a solid substrate.

The invention also provides a method for diagnosing a ClC 4A related disease i.e. excess production or insufficient production of ClC 4A in taste cells comprising contacting a test biological sample with a polynucleotide that specifically hybridizes to a nucleic acid encoding a ClC 4A polypeptide and determining the expression level of the nucleic acid wherein a variation from expression of the nucleic acid from a known normal biological sample indicates a ClC 4A disease state. The genetic analysis may be by any means known in the art including but not limited to reverse transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction rtPCR and northern hybridization.

The invention also provides a method for treating a ClC 4 A deficiency related disease i.e. insufficient production of ClC 4A in taste cells comprising administering to a subject in need of such treatment a polynucleotide encoding a ClC 4 A polypeptide operably linked to expression control sequences. In some embodiments the polynucleotide specifically hybridizes under stringent conditions to a polynucleotide sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NO 1 SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 3 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 SEQ ID NO 6 SEQ ID NO 10 and SEQ ID NO 11 and wherein said polynucleotide encodes a polypeptide comprising as its first three amino acids the sequence Met Leu Leu. In some embodiments the polynucleotide comprises a sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NO 6 and SEQ ID NO 11. In some embodiments the polynucleotide encodes a polypeptide with the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 8.

The invention further provides a method for developing a food specific for a breed of animal. In some embodiments the method comprises admixing a compound that specifically binds to a ClC 4A of the animal with a dietary preparation wherein the compound modulates the taste of the dietary preparation such that it is perceived as palatable by the breed of animal. In some embodiments the compound blocks sour taste perception in said animal. In some embodiments the compound binds to said ClC4 A with higher affinity than a natural ligand of ClC4 A. In some embodiments the compound competes with a natural ligand for binding to ClC4 A. Thus the invention also provides dietary preparations comprising a taste modifying amount of a compound that specifically binds to a ClC4 A protein.

The invention also provides a method for modulating the taste of other orally ingested preparations such as medicines. In some embodiments the method for modulating the taste of a medication comprises adding a taste modifying amount of a compound to the medication wherein said compound specifically binds to a ClC 4 A polypeptide and is perceived as palatable by a patient to which the medicine is administered. In some embodiments the compound blocks sour taste perception in said animal. In some embodiments the compound binds to said ClC 4 A with higher affinity than a natural ligand of ClC 4 A. In some embodiments the compound competes with a natural ligand for binding to ClC 4 A.

The invention further provides methods for determining taste preferences in an animal by determining the relative expression of ClC 4A in the animal as compared with the expression of ClC 4 wherein higher expression of ClC 4A in the animal correlates to an increased sensitivity to sour taste and a propensity to preferring foods with high potency sweeteners.

The invention further provides a method for designing a high potency taste stimulus by determining that a test compound has high affinity for a ClC 4A polypeptide and modeling compound analogues based on the test compound. In some embodiments the secondary compounds are screened for affinity to ClC 4A polypeptides wherein higher affinity for ClC 4A correlates to the relative potency of the secondary compound as a taste stimulus.

The reference works patents patent applications and scientific literature including accession numbers to GenBank database sequences that are referred to herein establish the knowledge of those with skill in the art and are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety to the same extent as if each was specifically and individually indicated to be incorporated by reference. Any conflict between any reference cited herein and the specific teachings of this specification shall be resolved in favor of the latter.

Various definitions are made throughout this document. Most words have the meaning that would be attributed to those words by one skilled in the art. Words specifically defined either below or elsewhere in this document have the meaning provided in the context of the present invention as a whole and as are typically understood by those skilled in the art. Any conflict between an art understood definition of a word or phrase and a definition of the word or phrase as specifically taught in this specification shall be resolved in favor of the latter. Headings used herein are for convenience and are not to be construed as limiting.

Standard reference works setting forth the general principles of recombinant DNA technology known to those of skill in the art include Ausubel et al. CPIMB John Wiley Sons New York 1998 Sambrook et al. MC A LM2E. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Plainview N.Y. 1989 Kaufman et al. Eds. HOMACMIBAM CRC Press Boca Raton 1995 McPherson Ed. DM A PA IRL Press Oxford 1991.

As used herein taste perception refers to a response e.g. biochemical behavioral or sensitivity of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A of the invention to a taste stimulus. Taste stimulus as used herein refers to any compound that elicits for example at the biochemical level e.g. activation or inhibition of a taste receptor or behavioral level e.g. preference indifference or distaste a taste response which would be perceived by a mammal as at least one of the five taste elements including sweet salty sour bitter and umami. Taste perception or taste stimulus or variants thereof does not require though it does include transmission of a neural signal resulting in in vivo sensation of taste by a mammal. Modification of taste perception includes an alteration of enhancement of reduction to or change to a biochemical response an ingestive response a taste preference or general behavior of a mammal in response to a compound.

As used herein polynucleotide refers to a nucleic acid molecule and includes genomic DNA cDNA RNA mRNA mixed polymers recombinant nucleic acids fragments and variants thereof and the like. Polynucleotide fragments of the invention comprise at least 10 and preferably at least 12 14 16 18 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 75 or 100 consecutive nucleotides of a reference polynucleotide. The polynucleotides of the invention include sense and antisense strands. The polynucleotides of the invention may be naturally occurring or non naturally occurring polynucleotides. A synthesized polynucleotide as used herein refers to polynucleotides produced by purely chemical as opposed to enzymatic methods. Wholly synthesized DNA sequences are therefore produced entirely by chemical means and partially synthesized DNAs embrace those wherein only portions of the resulting DNA were produced by chemical means. The polynucleotides of the invention may be single or double stranded. The polynucleotides of the invention may be chemically modified and may contain non natural or derivatized nucleotide bases as will be readily appreciated by those skilled in the art. Such modifications include for example labels methylation substitution of one or more nucleotides with an analog internucleotide modifications such as uncharged linkages e.g. methyl phosphonates phosphotriesters phosphoramidates carbamates etc. charged linkages e.g. phosphorothioates phosphorodithioates etc. pendent moieties e.g. polypeptides etc. intercalators e.g. acridine psoralen etc. chelators alkylators and modified linkages e.g. alpha anomeric nucleic acids etc. . Also included are synthetic molecules that mimic polynucleotides in their ability to bind to a designated sequence via hydrogen bonding and other chemical interactions. Such molecules are known in the art and include for example those in which peptide linkages substitute for phosphate linkages in the backbone of the molecule.

 Recombinant nucleic acid is a nucleic acid generated by combination of two segments of nucleotide sequence. The combination may be for example by chemical means or by genetic engineering.

As used herein polynucleotide amplification refers to a broad range of techniques for increasing the number of copies of specific polynucleotide sequences. Typically amplification of either or both strand s of the target nucleic acid comprises the use of one or more nucleic acid modifying enzymes such as a DNA polymerase ligase RNA polymerase or RNA dependent reverse transcriptase. Examples of polynucleotide amplification include but are not limited to polymerase chain reaction PCR nucleic acid sequence based amplification NASB self sustained sequence replication 3SR strand displacement activation SDA ligase chain reaction Q replicase system and the like. A wide variety of alternative cloning and in vitro amplification methodologies are well known to those skilled in the art. Examples of these techniques are found in for example Berger et al. Guide to Molecular Cloning Techniques MIE152 Academic Press Inc. San Diego Calif. Berger which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

As used herein the term oligonucleotide or primer refers to a series of linked nucleotide residues which has a sufficient number of bases to be used in a polymerase chain reaction PCR . This short sequence is based on or designed from a genomic or cDNA sequence and is used to amplify confirm or reveal the presence of an identical similar or complementary DNA or RNA in a particular cell or tissue. Oligonucleotides comprise portions of a nucleic acid sequence having at least about 10 nucleotides and as many as about 50 nucleotides often about 12 or 15 to about 30 nucleotides. They are chemically synthesized and may be used as probes. Primer pair refers to a set of primers including a 5 upstream primer that hybridizes with the 5 end of a target sequence to be amplified and a 3 downstream primer that hybridizes with the complement of the 3 end of the target sequence to be amplified.

As used herein the term probe refers to nucleic acid sequences of variable length for example between at least about 10 and as many as about 8 500 nucleotides depending on use. Probes are used in the detection of identical similar or complementary target nucleic acid sequences which target sequences may be single or double stranded. Longer probes are usually obtained from a natural or recombinant source are highly specific and are much slower to hybridize than oligomers or shorter probes. They may be single or double stranded and are carefully designed to have specificity in PCR hybridization membrane based or ELISA like technologies.

As used herein the phrase stringent hybridization conditions or stringent conditions refers to conditions under which a probe primer or oligonucleotide will hybridize to its target sequence but to a minimal number of or no other sequences. Stringent conditions are sequence dependent and will be different in different circumstances. Longer sequences will hybridize with specificity to their proper complements at higher temperatures. Generally stringent conditions are selected to be about 5 C. lower than the thermal melting point Tm for the specific sequence at a defined ionic strength and pH. The Tm is the temperature under defined ionic strength pH and nucleic acid concentration at which 50 of the probes complementary to the target sequence hybridize to the target sequence at equilibrium. Since the target sequences are generally present in excess at Tm 50 of the probes are hybridized to their complements at equilibrium. Stringent temperature conditions will generally include temperatures in excess of 30 C. typically in excess of 37 C. and may be in excess of 45 C. Stringent salt conditions will ordinarily be less than 1.0 M typically less than 0.5 M and may be less than 0.2 M. Typically stringent conditions will be those in which the salt concentration is less than about 1.0 M sodium ion typically about 0.01 to 1.0 M sodium ion or other salts at pH 7.0 to 8.3 and the temperature is at least about 30 C. for short probes primers or oligonucleotides e.g. 10 to 50 nucleotides and at least about 60 C. for longer probes primers or oligonucleotides. Stringent conditions may also be achieved with the addition of destabilizing agents such as formamide.

As used herein antisense oligonucleotide refers to a nucleic acid molecule that is complementary to at least a portion of a target nucleotide sequence of interest and specifically hybridizes to the target nucleotide sequence under physiological conditions. The term double stranded RNA or dsRNA as used herein refers to a double stranded RNA molecule capable of RNA interference including small interfering RNA siRNA see for example Bass Nature 411 428 429 2001 Elbashir et al. Nature 411 494 498 2001 .

As used herein the term complementary refers to Watson Crick base pairing between nucleotide units of a nucleic acid molecule.

The term marker gene or reporter gene refers to a gene encoding a product that when expressed confers a phenotype at the physical morphologic or biochemical level on a transformed cell that is easily identifiable either directly or indirectly by standard techniques and includes but is not limited to genes encoding proteins that confer resistance to toxins or antibiotics such as ampicillin neomycin and methotrexate genes encoding proteins that complement auxotrophic deficiencies and genes encoding proteins that supply critical components not available from complex media. Examples of marker genes include green fluorescent protein GFP red fluorescent protein DsRed alkaline phosphatase AP lactamase chloramphenicol acetyltransferase CAT adenosine deaminase ADA aminoglycoside phosphotransferase NEOr G418r dihydrofolate reductase DHFR hygromycin B phosphotransferase HPH thymidine kinase TK lacZ encoding galactosidase lactamase luciferase luc and xanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase XGPRT . As with many of the standard procedures associated with the practice of the invention skilled artisans will be aware of additional sequences that can serve the function of a marker or reporter. Thus this list is merely meant to show examples of what can be used and is not meant to limit the invention.

As used herein the term promoter refers to a regulatory element that regulates controls or drives expression of a nucleic acid molecule of interest and can be derived from sources such as from adenovirus SV40 parvoviruses vaccinia virus cytomegalovirus or mammalian genomic DNA. Examples of suitable promoters include but are not limited to CMV MSH2 trp lac phage and TRNA promoters. Suitable promoters that can be used in yeast include but are not limited to such constitutive promoters as 3 phosphoglycerate kinase and various other glycolytic enzyme gene promoters such as enolase or glyceraldehydes 3 phosphate dehydrogenase or such inducible promoters as the alcohol dehydrogenase 2 promoter or metallothionine promoter. Again as with many of the standard procedures associated with the practice of the invention skilled artisans will be aware of additional promoters that can serve the function of directing the expression of a marker or reporter. Thus the list is merely meant to show examples of what can be used and is not meant to limit the invention.

 Operably linked refers to juxtaposition wherein the components are in a functional relationship. For example a promoter is operably linked or connected to a coding sequence if it controls the transcription or expression of the sequence.

The terms polypeptide peptide and protein are used interchangeably herein. Polypeptide refers to a polymer of amino acids without referring to a specific length. Polypeptides of the invention include peptide fragments derivatives and fusion proteins. Peptide fragments preferably have at least about 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 60 70 80 90 or 100 amino acids. Some peptide fragments of the invention are biologically active. Biological activities include immunogenicity ligand binding and activity associated with the reference peptide. Immunogenic peptides and fragments of the invention generate an epitope specific immune response wherein epitope refers to an immunogenic determinant of a peptide and preferably contains at least three five eight nine ten fifteen twenty thirty forty forty five or fifty amino acids. Some immunogenic peptides of the invention generate an immune response specific to that peptide. Polypeptides of the invention include naturally occurring and non naturally occurring peptides. The term includes modified polypeptides wherein examples of such modifications include glycosylation acetylation phosphorylation carboxylation ubiquitination labeling etc. analogs such as non naturally occurring amino acids substituted linkages etc. and functional mimetics. A variety of methods for labeling polypeptides are well known in the art and include radioactive isotopes such as P or S ligands that bind to labeled antiligands e.g. antibodies fluorophores chemiluminescent agents enzymes and antiligands.

As used herein the term amino acid denotes a molecule containing both an amino group and a carboxyl group. In some embodiments the amino acids are or amino acids including their stereoisomers and racemates. As used herein the term L amino acid denotes an amino acid having the L configuration around the carbon that is a carboxylic acid of general formula CH COOH NH side chain having the L configuration. The term D amino acid similarly denotes a carboxylic acid of general formula CH COOH NH side chain having the D configuration around the carbon. Side chains of L amino acids include naturally occurring and non naturally occurring moieties. Non naturally occurring i.e. unnatural amino acid side chains are moieties that are used in place of naturally occurring amino acid side chains in for example amino acid analogs. Amino acid substituents may be attached for example through their carbonyl groups through the oxygen or carbonyl carbon thereof or through their amino groups or through functionalities residing on their side chain portions.

The amino acid sequences are presented in the amino N to carboxy C direction from left to right. The N terminal amino group and the C terminal carboxy groups are not depicted in the sequence. The nucleotide sequences are presented by single strands only in the 5 to 3 direction from left to right. Nucleotides and amino acids are represented in the manner recommended by the IUPAC IUB Biochemical Nomenclature Commission or amino acids are represented by their three letters code designations.

As used herein the term antibody is meant to refer to complete intact antibodies and Fab Fab F ab Fv and other fragments thereof. Complete intact antibodies include antibodies such as polyclonal antibodies monoclonal antibodies chimeric antibodies and humanized antibodies felinized antibodies and immunologic binding equivalents thereof. The antibodies of the invention may be labeled or unlabeled. Examples of labels of antibodies include but are not limited to radionuclides enzymes substrates cofactors inhibitors fluorescent agents chemiluminescent agents magnetic particles and the like. Recombinant immunoglobulins are included in the invention.

As used herein the term binding means the physical or chemical interaction between two proteins or compounds or associated proteins or compounds or combinations thereof. Binding includes ionic non ionic Hydrogen bonds Van der Waals hydrophobic interactions etc. The physical interaction the binding can be either direct or indirect indirect being through or due to the effects of another protein or compound. Direct binding refers to interactions that do not take place through or due to the effect of another protein or compound but instead are without other substantial chemical intermediates. Binding may be detected in many different manners. As a non limiting example the physical binding interaction between two molecules can be detected using a labeled compound. Other methods of detecting binding are well known to those of skill in the art.

As used herein the term contacting means bringing together either directly or indirectly a compound into physical proximity to a molecule of interest. Contacting may occur for example in any number of buffers salts solutions or in a cell or cell extract.

As used herein the terms modulates or modifies means an increase or decrease in the amount quality or effect of a particular activity or protein. Modulators refer to any inhibitory or activating molecules identified using in vitro and in vivo assays for e.g. agonists antagonists and their homologues including fragments variants and mimetics as defined herein that exert substantially the same biological activity as the molecule. Inhibitors or antagonists are modulating compounds that reduce decrease block prevent delay activation inactivate desensitize or downregulate the biological activity or expression of a molecule or pathway of interest. Inducers activators or agonists are modulating compounds that increase induce stimulate open activate facilitate enhance activation sensitize or upregulate a molecule or pathway of interest. In some preferred embodiments of the invention the level of inhibition or upregulation of the expression or biological activity of a molecule or pathway of interest refers to a decrease inhibition or downregulation or increase upregulation of greater than about 50 60 70 75 80 85 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 or 99 . The inhibition or upregulation may be direct i.e. operate on the molecule or pathway of interest itself or indirect i.e. operate on a molecule or pathway that affects the molecule or pathway of interest.

A purified or substantially purified polynucleotide or polypeptide is substantially separated from other cellular components that naturally accompany a native or wild type nucleic acid or polypeptide and or from other impurities e.g. agarose gel . A purified polypeptide or protein will comprise about 60 to more than 99 w w of a sample and may be about 90 about 95 or about 98 pure. As used herein the term isolated refers to a molecule that has been removed from its native environment. Examples of isolated nucleic acid molecules include but are not limited to recombinant DNA molecules contained in a vector recombinant DNA molecules maintained in a heterologous host cell partially or substantially purified nucleic acid molecules and synthetic DNA or RNA molecules.

 About as used herein refers to 10 of the reference value. As used herein variant nucleotide or amino acid sequences refer to homologues including for example isoforms species variants allelic variants and fragments of the sequence of interest. Homologous nucleotide sequence or homologous amino acid sequence or variations thereof refers to sequences characterized by a relative identity at the nucleotide level with respect to a reference sequence or homology at the amino acid level of at least about 60 at least about 70 at least about 75 at least about 80 at least about 81 at least about 82 at least about 83 at least about 84 at least about 85 preferably at least about 90 at least about 95 at least about 98 or at least about 99 and more preferably 100 to a reference sequence or portion or fragment thereof encoding or having a functional domain. The reference sequence may include for example but is not limited to the nucleic acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 1 SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 3 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 SEQ ID NO 6 SEQ ID NO 10 SEQ ID NO 11 SEQ ID NO 12 SEQ ID NO 25 SEQ ID NO 26 SEQ ID NO 27 SEQ ID NO 28 SEQ ID NO 29 SEQ ID NO 30 SEQ ID NO 31 SEQ ID NO 32 SEQ ID NO 33 SEQ ID NO 34 SEQ ID NO 35 and SEQ ID NO 36 or portions thereof which encode a functional domain of the encoded polypeptide SEQ ID NO 9 SEQ ID NO 13 SEQ ID NO 14 SEQ ID NO 15 SEQ ID NO 16 SEQ ID NO 17 SEQ ID NO 18 SEQ ID NO 19 SEQ ID NO 20 SEQ ID NO 21 SEQ ID NO 22 SEQ ID NO 23 or SEQ ID NO 24 or the polypeptide having amino acid sequence SEQ ID NO 7 or SEQ ID NO 8. Functional domains of the ClC4 or ClC 4A of the invention include extracellular domains transmembrane domains and intracellular domains. Isoforms can be expressed in different tissues of the same organism as a result of for example alternative splicing of RNA. Alternatively isoforms can be encoded by different genes. Homologous nucleotide sequences include nucleotide sequences encoding for a species variant of a protein. Homologous nucleotide sequences also include but are not limited to naturally occurring allelic variations and mutations of the nucleotide sequences set forth herein. Study of mutations and polymorphisms of the ClC 4 and ClC 4A receptor polynucleotide sequences may explain breed specific and or individual taste preferences of a mammal. The contribution of ClC 4A in taste perception may be in its interaction with other taste perceiving molecules. It is known for example that acid increases sweet taste perception and decreases salt and bitter taste perception Sakurai N F. Kanemura K. Watanabe Y. Shimizu and K. Tonosaki 2000 Effects of acids on neural activity elicited by other taste stimuli in the rat Chorda tympani 859 2 369 372 and therefore the perception of taste from mixed taste signal input may be a central event. The contribution of ClC 4A stimulators and antagonists may play an important role in central taste perception and is an important parameter to consider in the design and development of breed specific foods and high potency taste modifiers. Homologous amino acid sequences include those amino acid sequences which encode conservative amino acid substitutions in polypeptides having an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 7 SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 9 SEQ ID NO 13 SEQ ID NO 14 SEQ ID NO 15 SEQ ID NO 16 SEQ ID NO 17 SEQ ID NO 18 SEQ ID NO 19 SEQ ID NO 20 SEQ ID NO 21 SEQ ID NO 22 SEQ ID NO 23 or SEQ ID NO 24 as well as in polypeptides identified according to the methods of the invention. Percent homology may be determined by for example the Gap program Wisconsin Sequence Analysis Package Version 8 for Unix Genetics Computer Group University Research Park Madison Wis. using the default settings which uses the algorithm of Smith and Waterman Smith and Waterman 1981 2 482 489 . Nucleic acid fragments of the invention preferably have at least about 5 at least about 10 at least about 15 at least about 20 at least about 25 at least about 50 or at least about 100 nucleotides of the reference nucleotide sequence. The nucleic acid fragments of the invention may encode a polypeptide having at least one biological property or function that is substantially similar to a biological property of the polypeptide encoded by the full length nucleic acid sequence.

As is well known in the art because of the degeneracy of the genetic code there are numerous DNA and RNA molecules that can code for the same polypeptide as that encoded by a nucleotide sequence of interest. The present invention therefore contemplates those other DNA and RNA molecules which on expression encode a polypeptide encoded by the nucleic acid molecule of interest. DNA and RNA molecules other than those specifically disclosed herein characterized simply by a change in a codon for a particular amino acid are within the scope of this invention.

Amino acid insertions substitutions or deletions are changes to or within an amino acid sequence. The variation allowed in a particular amino acid sequence may be experimentally determined by producing the peptide synthetically or by systematically making insertions deletions or substitutions of nucleotides in the nucleic acid sequence using recombinant DNA techniques. Alterations of the naturally occurring amino acid sequence can be accomplished by any of a number of known techniques. For example mutations can be introduced into the polynucleotide encoding a polypeptide at particular locations by procedures well known to the skilled artisan such as oligonucleotide directed mutagenesis.

A polypeptide variant of the present invention may exhibit substantially the biological activity of a naturally occurring reference polypeptide. Biological activity as used herein refers to the level of a particular function for example ion conductance ion selectivity binding of agonist or antagonist change in membrane potential in response to alteration of pH inhibition by known antagonists e.g. niflumic acid NFA or 5 nitro 2 3 phenylpropylamino benzoic acid NPPB of a molecule or pathway of interest in a biological system. Biological activity of ClC 4 and ClC 4A may be distinguished for example by selectivity of ions. ClC4 has an ion selectivity characterized by NO Br Cl while ClC 4A has an ion selectivity of I Br Cl NO. Wild type biological activity refers to the normal level of function of a molecule or pathway of interest. Reduced biological activity refers to a decreased level of function of a molecule or pathway of interest relative to a reference level of biological activity of that molecule or pathway. For example reduced biological activity may refer to a decreased level of biological activity relative to the wild type biological activity of a molecule or pathway of interest. Increased biological activity refers to an increased level of function of a molecule or pathway of interest relative to a reference level of biological activity of that molecule or pathway. For example increased biological activity may refer to an increased level of biological activity relative to the wild type biological activity of a molecule or pathway of interest. Reference to exhibiting substantially the biological activity of a naturally occurring polypeptide indicates that variants within the scope of the invention can comprise conservatively substituted sequences meaning that one or more amino acid residues of a polypeptide are replaced by different residues that do not alter the secondary and or tertiary structure of the polypeptide. Such substitutions may include the replacement of an amino acid by a residue having similar physicochemical properties such as substituting one aliphatic residue Ile Val Leu or Ala for another or substitution between basic residues Lys and Arg acidic residues Glu and Asp amide residues Gln and Asn hydroxyl residues Ser and Tyr or aromatic residues Phe and Tyr. Further information regarding making phenotypically silent amino acid exchanges are known in the art Bowie et al. 1990 247 1306 1310 . Other polypeptide homologues which might retain substantially the biological activities of the reference polypeptide are those where amino acid substitutions have been made in areas outside functional regions of the protein. For a discussion of protein structure and correlation of structure and function of ClC 4 and ClC 4A see sections below under Polypeptides and Mimetics . The biological activity may be assessed by for example measuring inhibition of conductance of ClC 4A with niflumic acid NFA or 5 nitro 2 3 phenylpropylamino benzoic acid NPPB . Biological activity of the polypeptides of the invention also may be determined by measuring ion conductance ion flow calcium imaging including with fura 2 green dextran activity or aquorin activity voltage measurement and or voltage imaging with dyes or reporter genes such as luciferase alkaline phosphatase galactosidase or lactamase second messenger measurement for example IP3 cAMP G protein activation based assays or receptor phosphorylation.

A nucleotide and or amino acid sequence of a nucleic acid molecule or polypeptide employed in the invention or of a compound identified by the screening method of the invention may be used to search a nucleotide and amino acid sequence databank for regions of similarity using Gapped BLAST Altschul et al. 1997 25 3389 . Briefly the BLAST algorithm which stands for Basic Local Alignment Search Tool is suitable for determining sequence similarity Altschul et al. 1990 215 403 410 . Software or performing BLAST analyses is publicly available through the National Center for Biotechnology Information. This algorithm involves first identifying high scoring sequence pair HSPs by identifying short words of length W in the query sequence that either match or satisfy some positive valued threshold score T when aligned with a word of the same length in a database sequence. T is referred to as the neighborhood word score threshold Altschul et al. 1990 215 403 410 . These initial neighborhood word hits act as seeds for initiating searches to find HSPs containing them. The word hits are extended in both directions along each sequence for as far as the cumulative alignment score can be increased. Extension for the word hits in each direction are halted when 1 the cumulative alignment score falls off by the quantity X from its maximum achieved value 2 the cumulative score goes to zero or below due to the accumulation of one or more negative scoring residue alignments or 3 the end of either sequence is reached. The BLAST algorithm parameters W T and X determine the sensitivity and speed of the alignment. The BLAST program uses as defaults a word length W of 11 the BLOSUM62 scoring matrix Henikoff et al. 1992 89 10915 10919 alignments B of 50 expectation E of 10 M 5 N 4 and a comparison of both strands. The BLAST algorithm Karlin et al. 1993 90 5873 5877 and Gapped BLAST perform a statistical analysis of the similarity between two sequences. One measure of similarity provided by the BLAST algorithm is the smallest sum probability P N which provides an indication of the probability by which a match between two nucleotide or amino acid sequences would occur by chance. For example a nucleic acid is considered similar to a gene or cDNA if the smallest sum probability in comparison of the test nucleic acid to the reference nucleic acid is less than about 1 preferably less than about 0.1 more preferably less than about 0.01 and most preferably less than about 0.001.

The term mimetic as used herein refers to a compound that is sterically similar to a reference compound. Mimetics are structural and functional equivalents to the reference compounds.

The terms patient and subject are used interchangeably herein and include but are not limited to amphibians birds dogs cats cattle horses buffalo llama sheep goats pigs rodents monkeys apes and humans. Host cell includes for example prokaryotic cells such as bacterial cells eukaryotic cells such as yeast cells and animal cells including but not limited to invertebrate cells e.g. insect cells and nematode cells amphibian cells e.g. frog cells particularly mammalian cells e.g. human rodent canine feline caprine ovine bovine equine porcine simian or plant cells. Rodents include for example rats and mice. Mammalian cell lines available as hosts for expression are known in the art and include many immortalized cell lines available from the American Type Culture Collection ATCC including but not limited to Chinese hamster ovary CHO cells HeLa cells baby hamster kidney BHK cells monkey kidney cells COS N1E 115 Liles et al. 1986 261 5307 5313 PC 12 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells e.g. Hep G2 .

The term treatment as used herein refers to any indicia of success of prevention treatment or amelioration of a disease or condition. Treatment includes any objective or subjective parameter such as but not limited to abatement remission normalization of receptor activity reduction in the number or severity of symptoms or side effects or slowing of the rate of degeneration or decline of the patient. Treatment also includes a prevention of the onset of symptoms in a patient that may be at increased risk for or is suspected of having a disease or condition but does not yet experience or exhibit symptoms thereof.

As used herein the term compound means any identifiable chemical or molecule including but not limited to a small molecule peptide protein sugar nucleotide or nucleic acid. Such compound can be natural or synthetic.

Topologically sensory GPCRs have an N terminal domain extracellular domains a transmembrane domain comprising seven transmembrane regions cytoplasmic and extracellular loops cytoplasmic domains and a C terminal domain see e.g. Hoon et al. Cell 96 541 551 1999 Buck Axel Cell 65 175 187 1991 . These domains can be structurally identified using methods known to those of skill in the art such as sequence analysis programs that identify hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains see e.g. Stryer Biochemistry 3ed. 1988 see also any of a number of Internet based sequence analysis programs . Such domains are useful for making chimeric proteins and for in vitro assays of the invention e.g. ligand binding assays. In the polypeptides of the invention the N terminal domain is believed to be extracellular while the C terminal domain is believed to be cytoplasmic or intracellular.

As used herein bitter refers to a basic taste characterized by solutions of such compounds as quinine caffeine and certain other alkaloids that are sensed in humans primarily by taste buds at the back of the tongue which are perceived as acrid sharp pungent or harsh.

As used herein sweet refers to a basic taste characterized by solutions of sugars e.g. sucrose and glucose alcohols glycols some small molecules and some amino acids that are sensed in humans primarily by taste buds on the tip of the tongue which are perceived as agreeable or pleasing.

As used herein sour refers to a basic taste characterized by solutions of vinegar and the juices of most unripe fruits and having a acid or sharp tart or biting taste.

As used herein ClC 4 and ClC 4A in general refers to all variants of each of these splice variants respectively.

The invention provides purified and isolated polynucleotides e.g. cDNA genomic DNA synthetic DNA RNA or combinations thereof whether single or double stranded that comprise a nucleotide sequence encoding the amino acid sequence of the polypeptides of the invention. Such polynucleotides are useful for recombinantly expressing the receptor and also for detecting expression of the receptor in cells e.g. using Northern hybridization and in situ hybridization assays . Such polynucleotides also are useful in the design of antisense and other molecules for the suppression of the expression of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel in a cultured cell a tissue or an animal for therapeutic purposes. Specifically excluded from the definition of polynucleotides of the invention are entire isolated non recombinant native chromosomes of host cells. Polynucleotides of the invention include the nucleotide sequences of SEQ ID NO 1 SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 3 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 SEQ ID NO 6 SEQ ID NO 10 SEQ ID NO 11 SEQ ID NO 12 SEQ ID NO 25 SEQ ID NO 26 SEQ ID NO 27 SEQ ID NO 28 SEQ ID NO 29 SEQ ID NO 30 SEQ ID NO 31 SEQ ID NO 32 SEQ ID NO 33 SEQ ID NO 34 and SEQ ID NO 35. It will be appreciated that numerous other polynucleotide sequences exist that also encode the ClC 4 and ClC 4A receptors of the invention due to the well known degeneracy of the universal genetic code. The polynucleotides of the invention include polynucleotides encoding and of the polypeptides of the invention.

The invention also provides a purified and isolated polynucleotide comprising a nucleotide sequence that encodes a polypeptide wherein the polynucleotide hybridizes to a polynucleotide having a sequence of SEQ ID NO SEQ ID NO 1 SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 3 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 SEQ ID NO 6 SEQ ID NO 10 SEQ ID NO 11 SEQ ID NO 12 SEQ ID NO 25 SEQ ID NO 26 SEQ ID NO 27 SEQ ID NO 28 SEQ ID NO 29 SEQ ID NO 30 SEQ ID NO 31 SEQ ID NO 32 SEQ ID NO 33 SEQ ID NO 34 and SEQ ID NO 35 or the non coding strand complementary thereto under stringent hybridization conditions.

Genomic DNA of the invention comprises the protein coding region for a polypeptide of the invention and is also intended to include allelic variants thereof. It is widely understood that for many genes genomic DNA is transcribed into RNA transcripts that undergo one or more splicing events wherein intron i.e. non coding regions of the transcripts are removed or spliced out. RNA transcripts that can be spliced by alternative mechanisms and therefore be subject to removal of different RNA sequences but still encode a ClC 4 polypeptide are referred to in the art as splice variants which are embraced by the invention. Splice variants comprehended by the invention therefore are encoded by the same original genomic DNA sequences but arise from distinct mRNA transcripts. A specific splice variant of the invention is ClC 4A which is encoded by the cDNA of SEQ ID NO 11 and which has an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 8. Allelic variants are modified forms of a wild type gene sequence the modification resulting from recombination during chromosomal segregation or exposure to conditions which give rise to genetic mutation. Allelic variants like wild type genes are naturally occurring sequences as opposed to non naturally occurring variants that arise from in vitro manipulation .

The invention also comprehends cDNA that is obtained through reverse transcription of an RNA polynucleotide encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel conventionally followed by second strand synthesis of a complementary strand to provide a double stranded DNA .

One embodiment of the DNA of the invention comprises a double stranded molecule along with the complementary molecule the non coding strand or complement having a sequence unambiguously deducible from the coding strand according to Watson Crick base pairing rules for DNA.

The present invention includes fragments of nucleotide sequences encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel comprising at least 10 and preferably at least 12 14 16 18 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 75 or 100 consecutive nucleotides of a polynucleotide encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Fragment polynucleotides of the invention may comprise sequences unique to the ClC 4 or ClC 4A encoding polynucleotide sequence and therefore hybridize under highly stringent or moderately stringent conditions only i.e. specifically to polynucleotides encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or fragments thereof . Polynucleotide fragments of genomic sequences of the invention comprise not only sequences unique to the coding region but also include fragments of the full length sequence derived from introns regulatory regions and or other non translated sequences. Sequences unique to polynucleotides of the invention are recognizable through sequence comparison to other known polynucleotides and can be identified through use of alignment programs routinely utilized in the art e.g. those made available in public sequence databases. Such sequences also are recognizable from Southern hybridization analyses to determine the number of fragments of genomic DNA to which a polynucleotide will hybridize. Polynucleotides of the invention can be labeled in a manner that permits their detection including radioactive fluorescent and enzymatic labeling.

Fragment polynucleotides are particularly useful as probes for detection of full length or fragments of ClC 4 or ClC 4A polynucleotides. One or more polynucleotides can be included in kits that are used to detect the presence of a polynucleotide encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or used to detect variations in a polynucleotide sequence encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel.

The invention also embraces DNAs encoding ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides that hybridize under high stringency conditions to the non coding strand or complement of the polynucleotides.

Exemplary highly stringent hybridization conditions are as follows hybridization at 42 C. in a hybridization solution comprising 50 formamide 1 SDS 1 M NaCl 10 Dextran sulfate and washing twice for 30 minutes at 60 C. in a wash solution comprising 0.1 SSC and 1 SDS. It is understood in the art that conditions of equivalent stringency can be achieved through variation of temperature and buffer or salt concentration as described for example in Ausubel et al. Eds. PMB John Wiley Sons 1994 pp. 6.0.3 to 6.4.10. Modifications in hybridization conditions can be empirically determined or precisely calculated based on the length and the percentage of guanosine cytosine GC base pairing of the probe. The hybridization conditions can be calculated as described for example in Sambrook et al. Eds. MC A LM Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 1989 pp. 9.47 to 9.51.

With the knowledge of the nucleotide sequence information disclosed in the present invention one skilled in the art can identify and obtain nucleotide sequences which encode ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels from different sources i.e. different tissues or different organisms through a variety of means well known to the skilled artisan and as disclosed by for example Sambrook et al. M Second Edition Cold Spring Harbor Press Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 1989 .

For example DNA that encodes a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel may be obtained by screening mRNA cDNA or genomic DNA with oligonucleotide probes generated from the ClC 4 or ClC 4A gene sequence information provided herein. Probes may be labeled with a detectable group such as a fluorescent group a radioactive atom or a chemiluminescent group in accordance with procedures known to the skilled artisan and used in conventional hybridization assays as described by for example Sambrook et al.

A nucleic acid molecule comprising a ClC 4 or ClC 4A nucleotide sequence can alternatively be synthesized by use of the polymerase chain reaction PCR procedure with the PCR oligonucleotide primers produced from the nucleotide sequences provided herein. The PCR reaction provides a method for selectively increasing the concentration of a particular nucleic acid sequence even when that sequence has not been previously purified and is present only in a single copy in a particular sample. The method can be used to amplify either single or double stranded DNA. The essence of the method involves the use of two oligonucleotide probes to serve as primers for the template dependent polymerase mediated replication of a desired nucleic acid molecule.

A wide variety of alternative cloning and in vitro amplification methodologies are well known to those skilled in the art. Examples of these techniques are found in for example Berger et al. Guide to Molecular Cloning Techniques ME152 Academic Press Inc. San Diego Calif. Berger which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The polynucleotides of the invention may be used in hybridization techniques known to those skilled in the art including but not limited to Northern and Southern blotting and overgo hybridization. For example polynucleotide probes of the invention may be used in tissue distribution studies and diagnostic assays.

Automated sequencing methods can be used to obtain or verify the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel encoding nucleotide sequence. The nucleotide sequences of the present invention are believed to be accurate. However as is known in the art nucleotide sequences obtained by automated methods may contain some errors. Nucleotide sequences determined by automation are typically at least about 90 more typically at least about 95 to at least about 99.9 identical to the actual nucleotide sequence of a given nucleic acid molecule. The actual sequence may be more precisely determined using manual sequencing methods which are well known in the art. An error in a sequence which results in an insertion or deletion of one or more nucleotides may result in a frame shift in translation such that the predicted amino acid sequence will differ from that which would be predicted from the actual nucleotide sequence of the nucleic acid molecule starting at the point of the mutation.

The nucleic acid molecules of the present invention and fragments derived therefrom are useful for screening for restriction fragment length polymorphism RFLP associated with certain disorders for genetic mapping and for methods for predicting the taste perception of an organism such as a mammal involving detection of a nucleotide sequence of the invention in a biological sample of the organism. For example an organism in which a nucleotide sequence of the invention has been identified may perceive sour compounds through the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel.

The polynucleotide sequence information provided by the invention makes possible large scale expression of the encoded polypeptide by techniques well known and routinely practiced in the art.

Another aspect of the present invention is directed to vectors or recombinant expression vectors comprising any of the nucleic acid molecules described above. Vectors are used herein either to amplify DNA or RNA encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and or to express DNA which encodes a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Examples of vectors include but are not limited to plasmids phages cosmids episomes viral particles or viruses and integratable DNA fragments i.e. fragments integratable into the host genome by homologous recombination . Examples of viral particles include but are not limited to adenoviruses baculoviruses parvoviruses herpesviruses poxviruses adeno associated viruses Semliki Forest viruses vaccinia viruses and retroviruses. Examples of expression vectors include but are not limited to pcDNA3 Invitrogen and pSVL Pharmacia Biotech . Other expression vectors include but are not limited to pSPORT vectors pGEM vectors Promega pPROEXvectors LTI Bethesda Md. Bluescript vectors Stratagene pQE vectors Qiagen pSE420 Invitrogen and pYES2 Invitrogen .

Expression constructs may comprise ClC 4 or ClC 4A encoding polynucleotides operably linked to an endogenous or exogenous expression control DNA sequence and a transcription terminator. Expression control DNA sequences include promoters enhancers operators and regulatory element binding sites generally and are typically selected based on the expression systems in which the expression construct is to be utilized. Promoter and enhancer sequences are generally selected for the ability to increase gene expression while operator sequences are generally selected for the ability to regulate gene expression. Expression constructs of the invention may also include sequences encoding one or more selectable markers that permit identification of host cells bearing the construct. Expression constructs may also include sequences that facilitate or promote homologous recombination in a host cell. Constructs of the invention also may include sequences necessary for replication in a host cell.

Expression constructs may be utilized for production of an encoded protein but may also be utilized simply to amplify a ClC 4 or ClC 4A encoding polynucleotide sequence. In some embodiments the vector is an expression vector wherein a polynucleotide of the invention is operably linked to a polynucleotide comprising an expression control sequence. Autonomously replicating recombinant expression constructs such as plasmid and viral DNA vectors incorporating polynucleotides of the invention are also provided. Some expression vectors are replicable DNA constructs in which a DNA sequence encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel is operably linked or connected to suitable control sequence s capable of effecting the expression of the receptor in a suitable host. Amplification vectors do not require expression control domains but rather need only the ability to replicate in a host such as conferred by an origin of replication and a selection gene to facilitate recognition of transformants. The need for control sequences in the expression vector will vary depending upon the host selected and the transformation method chosen. Control sequences include a transcriptional promoter an optional operator sequence to control transcription a sequence encoding suitable mRNA ribosomal binding and sequences which control the termination of transcription and translation.

Vectors of the invention may contain a promoter that is recognized by the host organism. The promoter sequences of the present invention may be prokaryotic eukaryotic or viral. Examples of suitable prokaryotic sequences include the Pand Ppromoters of bacteriophage lambda TBL Hershey A. D. Ed. Cold Spring Harbor Press Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 1973 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety LII Hendrix R. W. Ed. Cold Spring Harbor Press Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 1980 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety the trp recA heat shock and lacZ promoters of and the SV40 early promoter Benoist et al. 1981 290 304 310 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. Additional promoters include but are not limited to mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat of human immunodeficiency virus maloney virus cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter Epstein Barr virus Rous sarcoma virus human actin human myosin human hemoglobin human muscle creatine and human metallothionein.

Additional regulatory sequences can also be included in vectors of the invention. Examples of suitable regulatory sequences are represented by the Shine Dalgarno of the replicase gene of the phage MS 2 and of the gene cII of bacteriophage lambda. The Shine Dalgarno sequence may be directly followed by DNA encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel resulting in the expression of the mature protein.

Moreover suitable expression vectors can include an appropriate marker that allows the screening of transformed host cells. The transformation of the selected host is carried out using any one of the various techniques well known to the expert in the art and described in Sambrook et al. supra.

An origin of replication or autonomously replicating sequence ARS can also be provided either by construction of the vector to include an exogenous origin or may be provided by the host cell chromosomal replication mechanism. If the vector is integrated into the host cell chromosome the latter may be sufficient. Alternatively rather than using vectors which contain viral origins of replication one skilled in the art can transform mammalian cells by the method of co transformation with a selectable marker and ClC 4 or ClC 4A DNA. An example of a suitable marker is dihydrofolate reductase DHFR or thymidine kinase TK see U.S. Pat. No. 4 399 216 .

Additional regulatory sequences that may be included in the polynucleotides of the invention include secretion signals which allow the encoded polypeptide to cross and or lodge in cell membranes or be secreted from the cell. All regulatory sequences referred to herein that contribute to gene expression may be collectively referred to herein as expression control sequences. 

Nucleotide sequences encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel may be recombined with vector DNA in accordance with conventional techniques including blunt ended or staggered ended termini for ligation restriction enzyme digestion to provide appropriate termini filling in of cohesive ends as appropriate alkaline phosphatase treatment to avoid undesirable joining and ligation with appropriate ligases. Techniques for such manipulation are disclosed by Sambrook et al. supra and are well known in the art. Methods for construction of mammalian expression vectors are disclosed in for example Okayama et al. 1983 3 280 Cosman et al. 1986 23 935 Cosman et al. 1984 312 768 EP A 0367566 and WO 91 18982 each of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Vector of the invention are useful for expressing ClC 4 or ClC 4A in various cell systems. Overexpression of ClC 4 or ClC 4A may for example be useful in screening for antagonists of ClC 4 or ClC 4A as described herein. Stimulation of transcription of ClC 4 or ClC 4A polynucleotides may be used to analyze the effect of ClC 4 or ClC 4A expression on the expression of other taste receptors. Vectors may also be used to produce antisense polynucleotides that inhibit endogenous ClC 4 or ClC 4A expression to analyze the effect of a loss of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A gene.

According to another aspect of the invention host cells are provided including prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells comprising a polynucleotide of the invention or vector of the invention in a manner that permits expression of the encoded ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide. Polynucleotides of the invention may be introduced into the host cell as part of a circular plasmid or as linear DNA comprising an isolated protein coding region or a viral vector. Methods for introducing DNA into the host cell that are well known and routinely practiced in the art include transformation transfection electroporation nuclear injection or fusion with carriers such as liposomes micelles ghost cells and protoplasts. Expression systems of the invention include bacterial yeast fungal plant insect invertebrate vertebrate and mammalian cell systems.

The invention provides host cells that are transformed or transfected stably or transiently with polynucleotides of the invention or vectors of the invention. As stated above such host cells are useful for amplifying the polynucleotides and also for expressing a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or fragment thereof encoded by the polynucleotide.

In still another related embodiment the invention provides a method for producing a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or fragment thereof comprising the steps of growing a host cell of the invention in a nutrient medium and isolating the polypeptide or variant thereof from the cell or the medium. Because the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel is a membrane spanning polypeptide it will be appreciated that for some applications such as certain activity assays the preferable isolation may involve isolation of cell membranes containing the polypeptide embedded therein whereas for other applications a more complete isolation may be preferable.

According to some aspects of the present invention transformed host cells having an expression vector comprising any of the nucleic acid molecules described above are provided. Expression of the nucleotide sequence occurs when the expression vector is introduced into an appropriate host cell. Suitable host cells for expression of the polypeptides of the invention include but are not limited to prokaryotes yeast and eukaryotes. If a prokaryotic expression vector is employed then the appropriate host cell would be any prokaryotic cell capable of expressing the cloned sequences. Suitable prokaryotic cells include but are not limited to bacteria of the genera and

If a eukaryotic expression vector is employed then the appropriate host cell would be any eukaryotic cell capable of expressing the cloned sequence. Eukaryotic cells may be cells of higher eukaryotes. Suitable eukaryotic cells include but are not limited to non human mammalian tissue culture cells and human tissue culture cells. Host cells include but are not limited to insect cells HeLa cells Chinese hamster ovary cells CHO cells baby hamster kidney cells normal dog kidney cell lines normal cat kidney cell lines African green monkey kidney cells COS cells human HEK 293 cells and murine 3T3 fibroblasts. Propagation of such cells in cell culture has become a routine procedure see TC Academic Press Kruse and Patterson eds. 1973 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety .

In addition a yeast host may be employed as a host cell. Yeast cells include but are not limited to the genera and . Yeast hosts may be and . Yeast vectors may contain an origin of replication sequence from a 2T yeast plasmid an autonomously replication sequence ARS a promoter region sequences for polyadenylation sequences for transcription termination and a selectable marker gene. Shuttle vectors for replication hi both yeast and are also included herein.

Alternatively insect cells may be used as host cells. In some embodiments the polypeptides of the invention are expressed using a baculovirus expression system see Luckow et al. 1988 6 47 BEV A LM O Reilly et al Eds. W.H. Freeman and Company New York 1992 and U.S. Pat. No. 4 879 236 each of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety . In addition the MAXBAC complete baculovirus expression system Invitrogen can for example be used for production in insect cells.

Host cells of the invention are a valuable source of immunogen for development of antibodies specifically immunoreactive with the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Host cells of the invention also are useful in methods for the large scale production of ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides wherein the cells are grown in a suitable culture medium and the desired polypeptide products are isolated from the cells or from the medium in which the cells are grown by purification methods known in the art e.g. conventional chromatographic methods including immunoaffinity chromatography receptor affinity chromatography hydrophobic interaction chromatography lectin affinity chromatography size exclusion filtration cation or anion exchange chromatography high pressure liquid chromatography HPLC reverse phase HPLC and the like. Still other methods of purification include those methods wherein the desired protein is expressed and purified as a fusion protein having a specific tag label or chelating moiety that is recognized by a specific binding partner or agent. The purified protein can be cleaved to yield the desired protein or can be left as an intact fusion protein. Cleavage of the fusion component may produce a form of the desired protein having additional amino acid residues as a result of the cleavage process.

Knowledge of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel encoding nucleotide sequence allows for modification of cells to permit or increase expression of endogenous channel. Cells can be modified e.g. by homologous recombination to provide increased expression by replacing in whole or in part the naturally occurring ClC 4 or ClC 4A promoter with all or part of a heterologous promoter so that the cells express the channel at higher or lower levels. The heterologous promoter is inserted in such a manner that it is operably linked to endogenous ClC 4 or ClC 4A coding sequence. See for example PCT International Publication No. WO 94 12650 PCT International Publication No. WO 92 20808 and PCT International Publication No. WO 91 09955 . It is also contemplated that in addition to heterologous promoter DNA amplifiable marker DNA e.g. ada dhfr and the multifunctional CAD gene which encodes carbamoyl phosphate synthase aspartate transcarbamylase and dihydroorotase and or intron DNA may be inserted along with the heterologous promoter DNA. If linked to the ClC 4 or ClC 4A coding sequence amplification of the marker DNA by standard selection methods results in co amplification of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A coding sequences in the cells.

The DNA sequence information provided by the present invention also makes possible the development e.g. by homologous recombination strategies see Capecchi 244 1288 1292 1989 which is incorporated herein by reference of transgenic or gene targeted animals including for example animals that fail to express functional ClC 4 or ClC 4A knock out or that express a variant thereof transplacement . Such animals especially small laboratory animals such as rats rabbits mice and cats are useful as models for studying the in vivo activities of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels and modulators of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels. ClC 4 ClC 4A knockout mice have been generated. The mutation was not lethal and the animals appear to be normal at the gross level. ClC 4 in some mouse strains is carried on the X chromosome while in other mouse strains it is carried on an autosome. This was believed to be the first gene found to violate Ohno s law of genetics Pahner S. J. Perry and A. Ashworth 1995 A contravention of Ohno s law in mice Nat. Genet. 10 4 472 476 . Hybrid sterility in the two mouse strains is believed to be the result of abnormal pairing of sex chromosomes during male meiosis Rugarli E. I. et al. 1995 Different chromosomal localization of the Clcn4 gene in and C57BL 6J mice . 4 466 71 .

Transgenic may be produced to express any ClC 4 or ClC 4A including those of human by any means known in the art for example using the methods described in Fujioka M. et al. 2000 Production of Transgenic 2000 136 353 363.

Transgenic expressing ClC 4 or ClC 4A may be used in behavioral studies to determine the activity of ClC 4 or ClC 4A alleles variants and mutants. In some embodiments transgenic flies may be studied for food selection based on compound selection. In other embodiments transgenic flies may be studied for compound avoidance.

Transgenic nematodes such as expressing various alleles mutants and portions of ClC 4 or ClC 4A may be made using techniques known in the art. For example but not by way of limitation transgenic may be made using protocols described in Broverman S. M. and T. Blumenthal 1993 90 4359 4363 Fire A. 1986 5 2673 2680 and Jackstadt P. et al. 1999 103 261 266.

Also encompassed by the invention are antisense and small interfering polynucleotides that recognize and hybridize to polynucleotides encoding ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels. Full length and fragment antisense polynucleotides are provided. Fragment antisense molecules of the invention include i those that specifically recognize and hybridize to ClC 4 or ClC 4A RNA as determined by sequence comparison of DNA encoding ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel to DNA encoding other known molecules . Identification of sequences unique to ClC 4 or ClC 4A encoding polynucleotides can be deduced through use of any publicly available sequence database and or through use of commercially available sequence comparison programs. After identification of the desired sequences isolation through restriction digestion or amplification using any of the various polymerase chain reaction techniques well known in the art can be performed. Antisense polynucleotides are particularly relevant to regulation of expression of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel by those cells expressing ClC 4 or ClC 4A mRNA.

Antisense nucleic acids preferably 10 to 30 base pair oligonucleotides capable of specifically binding to ClC 4 or ClC 4A expression control sequences or ClC 4 or ClC 4A RNA are introduced into cells e.g. by a viral vector or colloidal dispersion system such as a liposome . The antisense nucleic acid binds to the target nucleotide sequence in the cell and prevents transcription and or translation of the target sequence. Phosphorothioate and methylphosphonate antisense oligonucleotides are specifically contemplated for therapeutic use by the invention. Locked nucleic acids are also specifically contemplated for therapeutic use by the present invention. See for example Wahlestedt et al. 2000 97 10 5633 5638. The antisense oligonucleotides may be further modified by adding poly L lysine transferrin polylysine or cholesterol moieties at their 5 end.

Antisense oligonucleotides or fragments of nucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO 1 SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 3 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 SEQ ID NO 6 SEQ ID NO 10 SEQ ID NO 11 SEQ ID NO 12 SEQ ID NO 25 SEQ ID NO 26 SEQ ID NO 27 SEQ ID NO 28 SEQ ID NO 29 SEQ ID NO 30 SEQ ID NO 31 SEQ ID NO 32 SEQ ID NO 33 SEQ ID NO 34 SEQ ID NO 35 and SEQ ID NO 36 or sequences complementary or homologous thereto derived from the nucleotide sequences of the present invention encoding ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels are useful as diagnostic tools for probing gene expression in various tissues. For example tissue can be probed in situ with oligonucleotide probes carrying detectable groups by conventional autoradiography techniques to investigate native expression of this enzyme or pathological conditions relating thereto. Antisense oligonucleotides may be directed to regulatory regions of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A nucleotide sequence or mRNA corresponding thereto including but not limited to the initiation codon TATA box enhancer sequences and the like.

Those of skill in the art recognize that the antisense oligonucleotides that inhibit the expression and or biological activity of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel may be predicted using any gene encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Specifically antisense nucleic acid molecules comprise a sequence preferably complementary to at least about 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 100 250 or 500 nucleotides or an entire ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel gene sequence. The antisense oligonucleotides may comprise a sequence complementary to about 15 consecutive nucleotides of the coding strand of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel encoding sequence.

In one embodiment an antisense nucleic acid molecule is antisense to a coding region of the coding strand of a nucleotide sequence encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A protein. The coding strand may also include regulatory regions of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A sequence. The term coding region refers to the region of the nucleotide sequence comprising codons which are translated into amino acid residues. In another embodiment the antisense nucleic acid molecule is antisense to a noncoding region of the coding strand of a nucleotide sequence encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A protein. The term noncoding region refers to 5 and 3 sequences which flank the coding region that are not translated into amino acids i.e. also referred to as 5 and 3 untranslated regions UTR .

Antisense oligonucleotides may be directed to regulatory regions of a nucleotide sequence encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A protein or mRNA corresponding thereto including but not limited to the initiation codon TATA box enhancer sequences and the like. Given the coding strand sequences provided herein antisense nucleic acids of the invention can be designed according to the rules of Watson and Crick or Hoogsteen base pairing. The antisense nucleic acid molecule can be complementary to the entire coding region of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A mRNA but also may be an oligonucleotide that is antisense to only a portion of the coding or noncoding region of the mRNA. For example the antisense oligonucleotide can be complementary to the region surrounding the translation start site of an mRNA. An antisense oligonucleotide can be for example about 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 or 50 nucleotides in length.

Another means to inhibit the activity of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel according to the invention is via RNA interference RNAi see e.g. Elbashir et al. 411 494 498 2001 Elbashir et al. 15 188 200 2001 . RNAi is the process of sequence specific post transcriptional gene silencing initiated by double stranded RNA dsRNA that is homologous in sequence to the silenced gene e.g. is homologous in sequence to the sequence encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel for example but not limited to the sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 1 SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 3 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 SEQ ID NO 6 SEQ ID NO 10 SEQ ID NO 11 SEQ ID NO 12 SEQ ID NO 25 SEQ ID NO 26 SEQ ID NO 27 SEQ ID NO 28 SEQ ID NO 29 SEQ ID NO 30 SEQ ID NO 31 SEQ ID NO 32 SEQ ID NO 33 SEQ ID NO 34 SEQ ID NO 35 or SEQ ID NO 36 . siRNA mediated silencing is thought to occur post transcriptionally and or transcriptionally. For example siRNA duplexes may mediate post transcriptional gene silencing by reconstitution of siRNA protein complexes siRNPs which guide mRNA recognition and targeted cleavage.

Accordingly another form of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A inhibitory compound of the invention is a small interfering RNA siRNA directed against a ClC 4 or ClC 4A encoding sequence. Exemplary siRNAs are siRNA duplexes for example 10 25 preferably 20 21 22 23 24 or 25 residues in length having a sequence homologous or identical to a fragment of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A sequence set forth as SEQ ID NO 1 SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 3 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 SEQ ID NO 6 SEQ ID NO 10 SEQ ID NO 11 SEQ ID NO 12 SEQ ID NO 25 SEQ ID NO 26 SEQ ID NO 27 SEQ ID NO 28 SEQ ID NO 29 SEQ ID NO 30 SEQ ID NO 31 SEQ ID NO 32 SEQ ID NO 33 SEQ ID NO 34 SEQ ID NO 35 or SEQ ID NO 36 and having a symmetric 2 nucleotide 3 overhang. The 2 nucleotide 3 overhang may be composed of 2 deoxy thymidine because it reduces costs of RNA synthesis and may enhance nuclease resistance of siRNAs in the cell culture medium and within transfected cells. Substitution of uridine by thymidine in the 3 overhang is also well tolerated in mammalian cells and the sequence of the overhang appears not to contribute to target recognition.

The invention also provides purified and isolated mammalian ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel polypeptides encoded by a polynucleotide of the invention. Some embodiments include a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide comprising the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 7 SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 9 SEQ ID NO 13 SEQ ID NO 14 SEQ ID NO 15 SEQ ID NO 16 SEQ ID NO 17 SEQ ID NO 18 SEQ ID NO 19 SEQ ID NO 20 SEQ ID NO 21 SEQ ID NO 22 SEQ ID NO 23 or SEQ ID NO 24 or fragments thereof comprising an epitope specific to the polypeptide. A reference to epitope specific to or polypeptide specific epitope or variations thereof indicates that a portion of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or amino acid sequence is recognizable by an antibody that is specific for the ClC 4 or ClC 4A or amino acid sequence.

Included within the scope of the invention are polypeptides encoded by allelic variants of ClC 4 or ClC 4A. The allelic variants of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel of the invention may modify the taste perception of a mammal to a taste stimulus. Preferably the variants have a limited number of amino acid changes. In some embodiments there is a single amino acid change. In other embodiments 2 5 amino acids have substitutions. In other embodiments there are up to 10 amino acid changes. In other embodiments there are up to 15 amino acid changes. In other embodiments there are up to 20 amino acid changes. In still other embodiments there are up to 25 amino acid changes. In other embodiments there are up to 30 amino acid changes or more. In some embodiments the amino acid changes are conservative such that the function of the protein is a functional chloride channel. In other embodiments the variant is modified such that function is lost.

The amino acid sequences of several CLC chloride channels are known and they are highly conserved. X ray crystal structure has been determined for the CLC chloride channel of and Dutzler et al. 2002 415 287 294 . The chloride channels share 18 alpha helical structures labeled A R but these structures do not necessarily span the membrane Est vez and Jentsch 2002 12 531 539 . The alpha helical portions of ClC 4A SEQ ID NO 8 are defined by residues as follows B 1 33 SEQ ID NO 36 C 78 100 SEQ ID NO 37 D 108 116 SEQ ID NO 38 E 125 144 SEQ ID NO 39 F 150 169 SEQ ID NO 40 G 176 193 SEQ ID NO 41 H 198 207 SEQ ID NO 42 I 217 236 SEQ ID NO 43 J 259 289 SEQ ID NO 44 K 292 311 SEQ ID NO 45 L 325 328 SEQ ID NO 46 M 378 389 SEQ ID NO 47 N 395 416 SEQ ID NO 48 0 440 456 SEQ ID NO 49 P 458 470 SEQ ID NO 50 Q 476 493 SEQ ID NO 51 R 497 513 SEQ ID NO 52 . The ClC 4A protein also has two cystathionine beta synthase CBS domains at residues 526 586 and 624 674 of SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 53 and SEQ ID NO 54 respectively . ClC 4A additionally contains a conserved Asn residue at 348 which is believed to be a consensus site for glycosylation. It is conserved between human ClC 5 and mouse ClC 4A as shown in .

Some polymorphisms of ClC 4 and ClC 4A have been found including a variant in which Glnis replaced by a His.

Extracellular epitopes are useful for generating and screening for antibodies and other binding compounds that bind to a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Thus in another embodiment the invention provides a purified and isolated polypeptide comprising at least one extracellular domain of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Examples of extracellular domains of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides of the invention include residues 34 77 of ClC 4A of SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 55 237 258 of SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 56 329 378 of SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 57 and 417 439 of SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 58 . Corresponding residues may be found for ClC 4. Intracellular portions of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides may be important in the intracellular signaling involved in taste perception and as such another embodiment of the invention provides a purified and isolated polypeptide comprising at least one intracellular domain of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Examples of intracellular domains of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides of the invention include residues 170 175 of SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 59 208 216 of SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 60 494 687 of SEQ ID NO 8 SEQ ID NO 61 . Corresponding residues may be found for ClC 4. Polypeptide fragments of the invention may be continuous portions of the native receptor. However it will also be appreciated that knowledge of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A genes and protein sequences as provided herein permits recombination of various domains that are not contiguous in the native protein.

The invention embraces polypeptides that preferably have at least about 99 at least about 95 at least about 90 at least about 85 at least about 80 at least about 75 at least about 74 at least about 73 at least about 72 at least about 71 at least about 70 at least about 65 at least about 60 at least about 55 or at least about 50 identity and or homology to the polypeptides of the invention and particularly those that have substantially the same biological activity of SEQ ID NO 7 or 8.

Polypeptides of the invention may be isolated from natural cell sources or may be chemically synthesized but are preferably produced by recombinant procedures involving host cells of the invention. Use of mammalian host cells is expected to provide for such post translational modifications e.g. glycosylation truncation lipidation and phosphorylation as may be needed to confer optimal biological activity on recombinant expression products of the invention.

The invention also embraces variant ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides. Insertions may be located at either or both termini of the protein or may be positioned within internal regions of the amino acid sequence. Insertional variants with additional residues at either or both termini can include for example fusion proteins and proteins including amino acid tags or labels. As there is an established structural functional relationship of the chloride channels and a highly conserved amino acid sequence among family members one can predict alterations of amino acids of the protein and the effect on the three dimensional structure and possible functional alterations. Thus one may make alterations of the primary amino acid sequence using conservative substitutions to generate new protein homologues of ClC 4 and ClC 4A. Alternatively one may introduce non conservative amino acid changes to disrupt functionality of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A proteins in a targeted manner. Such mutations may be introduced to alter critical residues such as those believed to be involved in Cl selectivity are shown in bold in .

Insertion variants include ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides wherein one or more amino acid residues are added to a biologically active fragment thereof. For example the insertion variants of the invention include chimeric ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels wherein at least one functional domain of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel of the invention is present.

The invention also embraces ClC 4 or ClC 4A variants having additional amino acid residues that result from use of specific expression systems. For example use of commercially available vectors that express a desired polypeptide as part of a glutathione S transferase GST fusion product provides the desired polypeptide having an additional glycine residue at position 1 after cleavage of the GST component from the desired polypeptide. Variants that result from expression in other vector systems are also contemplated.

In another aspect the invention provides deletion variants wherein one or more amino acid residues in a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide are removed. Deletions can be effected at one or both termini of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or with removal of one or more non terminal amino acid residues of ClC 4 or ClC 4A. Deletion variants therefore include all fragments of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide.

The invention also embraces polypeptide fragments that maintain biological e.g. ligand binding heterodimerization receptor activity and or immunological properties of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide.

As used in the present invention polypeptide fragments preferably comprise at least 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 or 50 consecutive amino acids of SEQ ID NO 18 SEQ ID NO 19 SEQ ID NO 20 SEQ ID NO 21 SEQ ID NO 22 SEQ ID NO 23 SEQ ID NO 24 SEQ ID NO 25 SEQ ID NO 26 SEQ ID NO 27 or SEQ ID NO 28. Some polypeptide fragments display antigenic properties unique to or specific for a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel of a given species. Fragments of the invention having the desired biological and immunological properties can be prepared by any of the methods well known and routinely practiced in the art.

In still another aspect the invention provides substitution variants of ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides. Substitution variants include those polypeptides wherein one or more amino acid residues of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide are removed and replaced with alternative residues. In one aspect the substitutions are conservative in nature however the invention embraces substitutions that are also non conservative. Conservative substitutions for this purpose may be defined as set out in Tables 1 2 or 3 below.

Variant polypeptides include those wherein conservative substitutions have been introduced by modification of polynucleotides encoding polypeptides of the invention. Amino acids can be classified according to physical properties and contribution to secondary and tertiary protein structure. A conservative substitution is recognized in the art as a substitution of one amino acid for another amino acid that has similar properties. Exemplary conservative substitutions are set out in Table 1 from WO 97 09433 page 10 published Mar. 13 1997 PCT GB96 02197 filed Sep. 6 1996 immediately below.

Alternatively conservative amino acids can be grouped as described in Lehninger B Second Edition Worth Publishers Inc. NY N.Y. 1975 pp. 71 77 as set out in Table 2 below.

It should be understood that the definition of polypeptides of the invention is intended to include polypeptides bearing modifications other than insertion deletion or substitution of amino acid residues. By way of example the modifications may be covalent in nature and include for example chemical bonding with polymers lipids other organic and inorganic moieties. Such derivatives may be prepared to increase circulating half life of a polypeptide or may be designed to improve the targeting capacity of the polypeptide for desired cells tissues or organs. Similarly the invention further embraces ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides that have been covalently modified to include one or more water soluble polymer attachments such as polyethylene glycol polyoxyethylene glycol or polypropylene glycol. Variants that display ligand binding properties of native ClC 4 or ClC 4A and are expressed at higher levels as well as variants that provide for constitutively active receptors are particularly useful in assays of the invention.

In a related embodiment the present invention provides compositions comprising purified polypeptides of the invention. Some compositions comprise in addition to the polypeptide of the invention a pharmaceutically acceptable i.e. sterile and non toxic liquid semisolid or solid diluent that serves as a pharmaceutical vehicle excipient or medium. Any diluent known in the art may be used. Exemplary diluents include but are not limited to water saline solutions polyoxyethylene sorbitan monolaurate magnesium stearate methyl and propylhydroxybenzoate talc alginates starches lactose sucrose dextrose sorbitol mannitol glycerol calcium phosphate mineral oil and cocoa butter.

Variants that display ligand binding properties of native ClC 4 or ClC 4A and are expressed at higher levels as well as variants that provide for constitutively active receptors are particularly useful in assays of the invention the variants are also useful in assays of the invention and in providing cellular tissue and animal models with aberrant ClC 4 or ClC 4A activity.

Also included in the present invention are antibodies e.g. monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies single chain antibodies chimeric antibodies bifunctional bispecific antibodies humanized antibodies human antibodies simian antibodies antibodies of various species including but not limited to dog cat goat rabbit horse buffalo llama guinea pig donkey sheet pig mouse and rat and complementary determining region CDR grafted antibodies including compounds which include CDR sequences which specifically recognize a polypeptide of the invention specific for a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel of the invention or fragments thereof. Antibody fragments including Fab Fab F ab and F are also provided by the invention. The term specific for when used to describe antibodies of the invention indicates that the variable regions of the antibodies of the invention recognize and bind ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides preferably exclusively i.e. are able to distinguish ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides of the invention from other known polypeptides by virtue of measurable differences in binding affinity despite the possible existence of localized sequence identity homology or similarity between ClC 4 or ClC 4A and such polypeptides . It will be understood that specific antibodies may also interact with other proteins for example protein A or other antibodies in ELISA techniques through interactions with sequences outside the variable region of the antibodies and in particular in the constant region of the molecule. Screening assays to determine binding specificity of an antibody of the invention are well known and routinely practiced in the art. For a comprehensive discussion of such assays see Harlow et al. Eds. AA LM Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 1988 Chapter 6. Antibodies that recognize and bind fragments of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides of the invention are also contemplated provided that the antibodies are specific for ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides. Antibodies of the invention can be produced using any method well known and routinely practiced in the art.

The invention provides an antibody that is specific for the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels of the invention. Antibodies that can be generated from polypeptides that have previously been described in the literature and that are capable of fortuitously cross reacting with ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel e.g. due to the fortuitous existence of a similar epitope in both polypeptides are considered cross reactive antibodies. Such cross reactive antibodies are not antibodies that are specific for a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. The determination of whether an antibody is specific for a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or is cross reactive with another known receptor is made using any of several assays such as Western blotting assays that are well known in the art. For identifying cells that express a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and also for modulating ClC 4 or ClC 4A ligand binding activity antibodies that specifically bind to an extracellular epitope of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel may be used.

In some embodiments of the invention the antibodies specifically bind ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides that bind sour molecules or block sour molecules from binding to the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides. These antibodies may also block the biological activity of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides. In other embodiments the antibodies preferentially bind ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides of a certain species or family of ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides.

In some variations the invention provides monoclonal antibodies. Hybridomas that produce such antibodies also are intended as aspects of the invention.

In another variation the invention provides a cell free composition comprising polyclonal antibodies wherein at least one of the antibodies is an antibody of the invention specific for ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Antiserum isolated from an animal is an exemplary composition as is a composition comprising an antibody fraction of an antisera that has been resuspended in water or in another diluent excipient or carrier.

In still another related embodiment the invention provides an anti idiotypic antibody specific for an antibody that is specific for ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel of the invention.

It is well known that antibodies contain relatively small antigen binding domains that can be isolated chemically or by recombinant techniques. Such domains are useful ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel binding molecules themselves and also may be reintroduced into other antibodies or fused to toxins or other polypeptides. Thus in still another embodiment the invention provides a polypeptide comprising a fragment of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A specific antibody wherein the fragment and the polypeptide bind to the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. By way of non limiting example the invention provides polypeptides that are single chain antibodies and CDR grafted antibodies.

Antibodies of the invention are useful for e.g. therapeutic purposes such as by modulating activity of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel diagnostic purposes such as detecting or quantitating ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel activity for identification of compounds that may compete with the antibodies for binding to ClC 4 or ClC 4A and also for purification of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Kits comprising an antibody of the invention for any of the purposes described herein are also included within the scope of the invention. In general a kit of the invention preferably includes a control antigen for which the antibody is immunospecific.

The invention also provides assays to identify compounds that bind and or modulate ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. A ClC 4 or ClC 4A binding partner is a compound that directly or indirectly binds a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide of the invention. One assay of the invention comprises the steps of a contacting ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel with a compound suspected of binding ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel the test compound and b measuring binding between the compound and the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. In one variation the composition comprises a cell expressing ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel on its surface. In another variation isolated ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or cell membranes comprising ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel are employed. The binding may be measured directly e.g. by using a labeled compound or may be measured indirectly. Compounds identified as binding ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel may be further tested in other assays including but not limited to ClC 4 or ClC 4A activity assays and or in vivo models in order to confirm or quantitate their activity.

Specific binding molecules including natural ligands and synthetic compounds can be identified or developed using isolated or recombinant ClC 4 or ClC 4A products ClC 4 or ClC 4A variants or preferably cells expressing such products. Binding partners are useful for purifying ClC 4 or ClC 4A products and detection or quantification of ClC 4 or ClC 4A products in fluid and tissue samples using known immunological procedures. Binding molecules are also manifestly useful in modulating i.e. blocking inhibiting or stimulating biological activities of ClC 4 or ClC 4A especially those activities involved in signal transduction. Binding molecules also are useful in methods for predicting the taste perception of an organism such as a mammal by detecting a polypeptide of the invention in a biological sample of the organism.

The DNA and amino acid sequence information provided by the present invention also makes possible identification of binding partner compounds with which a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or polynucleotide will interact. Methods to identify binding partner compounds include solution assays in vitro assays wherein ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides are immobilized and cell based assays. Identification of binding partner compounds of ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides provides candidates for compounds that will be perceived as sour by the organism.

The invention includes several assay systems for identifying ClC 4 or ClC 4A binding partners. In solution assays methods of the invention comprise the steps of a contacting a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide with one or more candidate binding partner compounds and b identifying the compounds that bind to the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide. Identification of the compounds that bind the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide can be achieved by isolating the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide binding partner complex and separating the binding partner compound from the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide. An additional step of characterizing the physical biological and or biochemical properties of the binding partner compound are also comprehended in another embodiment of the invention. In one aspect the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide binding partner complex is isolated using an antibody immunospecific for either the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or the candidate binding partner compound.

In still other embodiments either the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or the candidate binding partner compound comprises a label or tag that facilitates its isolation and methods of the invention to identify binding partner compounds include a step of isolating the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide binding partner complex through interaction with the label or tag. An exemplary tag of this type is a poly histidine sequence generally around six histidine residues that permits isolation of a compound so labeled using nickel chelation. Other labels and tags such as the FLAG tag Eastman Kodak Rochester N.Y. well known and routinely used in the art are embraced by the invention.

In one variation of an in vitro assay the invention provides a method comprising the steps of a contacting an immobilized ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide with a candidate binding partner compound and b detecting binding of the candidate compound to the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide. In an alternative embodiment the candidate binding partner compound is immobilized and binding of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel is detected. Immobilization is accomplished using any of the methods well known in the art including covalent bonding to a support a bead or a chromatographic resin as well as non covalent high affinity interactions such as antibody binding or use of streptavidin biotin binding wherein the immobilized compound includes a biotin moiety. The support may for example be formulated into an electronic tongue or biosensor. Detection of binding can be accomplished i using a radioactive label on the compound that is not immobilized ii using a fluorescent label on the non immobilized compound iii using an antibody immunospecific for the non immobilized compound iv using a label on the non immobilized compound that excites a fluorescent support to which the immobilized compound is attached as well as other techniques well known and routinely practiced in the art.

The invention also provides cell based assays to identify binding partner compounds of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide. In one embodiment the invention provides a method comprising the steps of contacting a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide expressed on the surface of a cell with a candidate binding partner compound and detecting binding of the candidate binding partner compound to the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide. In some embodiments the detection comprises detecting physiological event in the cell caused by the binding of the molecule.

Another aspect of the present invention is directed to methods of identifying compounds that bind to either ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or nucleic acid molecules encoding ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel comprising contacting ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or a nucleic acid molecule encoding the same with a compound and determining whether the compound binds ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or a nucleic acid molecule encoding the same. Binding can be determined by binding assays which are well known to the skilled artisan including but not limited to gel shift assays Western blots radiolabeled competition assay phage based expression cloning co fractionation by chromatography co precipitation cross linking interaction trap two hybrid analysis southwestern analysis ELISA and the like which are described in for example CPMB1999 John Wiley Sons NY which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. The compounds to be screened include which may include compounds which are suspected to bind ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or a nucleic acid molecule encoding the same but are not limited to extracellular intracellular biological or chemical origin. The methods of the invention also embrace ligands especially neuropeptides that are attached to a label such as a radiolabel e.g. I S P P H a fluorescence label a chemiluminescent label an enzymatic label and an immunogenic label. Modulators falling within the scope of the invention include but are not limited to non peptide molecules such as non peptide mimetics non peptide allosteric effectors and peptides. The ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or polynucleotide employed in such a test may either be free in solution attached to a solid support borne on a cell surface or located intracellularly or associated with a portion of a cell. One skilled in the art can for example measure the formation of complexes between ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and the compound being tested. Alternatively one skilled in the art can examine the diminution in complex formation between ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and its substrate caused by the compound being tested. In some embodiments of the invention the recognition sites of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel are coupled with a monitoring system either electrical or optical. An appropriate chemical stimulus can bind to the receptor s ligand binding domain changing the receptor conformation to a degree that the coupled electronics or optical changes can be observed on a read out.

In another embodiment of the invention high throughput screening for compounds having suitable binding affinity to ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel is employed. Briefly large numbers of different small peptide test compounds are synthesized on a solid substrate. The peptide test compounds are contacted with ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and washed. Bound ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel is then detected by methods well known in the art. Purified polypeptides of the invention can also be coated directly onto plates for use in the aforementioned drug screening techniques. In addition non neutralizing antibodies can be used to capture the protein and immobilize it on the solid support.

Generally an expressed ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel can be used for HTS binding assays in conjunction with a ligand such as an amino acid or carbohydrate. The identified peptide is labeled with a suitable radioisotope including but not limited to I H S or P by methods that are well known to those skilled in the art. Alternatively the peptides may be labeled by well known methods with a suitable fluorescent derivative Baindur et al. 1994 33 373 398 Rogers 1997 2 156 160 . Radioactive ligand specifically bound to the receptor in membrane preparations made from the cell line expressing the recombinant protein can be detected in HTS assays in one of several standard ways including filtration of the receptor ligand complex to separate bound ligand from unbound ligand Williams 1991 11 147 184 Sweetnam et al. 1993 56 441 455 . Alternative methods include a scintillation proximity assay SPA or a FlashPlate format in which such separation is unnecessary Nakayama 1998 1 85 91 Boss et al 1998 3 285 292 . Binding of fluorescent ligands can be detected in various ways including fluorescence energy transfer FRET direct spectrophotofluorometric analysis of bound ligand or fluorescence polarization Rogers 1997 2 156 160 Hill 1998 1 92 97 .

Other assays may be used to identify specific ligands of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel including assays that identify ligands of the target protein through measuring direct binding of test ligands to the target protein as well as assays that identify ligands of target proteins through affinity ultrafiltration with ion spray mass spectroscopy HPLC methods or other physical and analytical methods. Alternatively such binding interactions are evaluated indirectly using the yeast two hybrid system described in Fields et al. 1989 340 245 246 and Fields et al. 1994 10 286 292 both of which are incorporated herein by reference. The two hybrid system is a genetic assay for detecting interactions between two proteins or polypeptides. It can be used to identify proteins that bind to a known protein of interest or to delineate domains or residues critical for an interaction. Variations on this methodology have been developed to clone genes that encode DNA binding proteins to identify peptides that bind to a protein and to screen for drugs. The two hybrid system exploits the ability of a pair of interacting proteins to bring a transcription activation domain into close proximity with a DNA binding domain that binds to an upstream activation sequence UAS of a reporter gene and is generally performed in yeast. The assay requires the construction of two hybrid genes encoding 1 a DNA binding domain that is fused to a first protein and 2 an activation domain fused to a second protein. The DNA binding domain targets the first hybrid protein to the UAS of the reporter gene however because most proteins lack an activation domain this DNA binding hybrid protein does not activate transcription of the reporter gene. The second hybrid protein which contains the activation domain cannot by itself activate expression of the reporter gene because it does not bind the UAS. However when both hybrid proteins are present the noncovalent interaction of the first and second proteins tethers the activation domain to the UAS activating transcription of the reporter gene. For example when the first protein is a receptor or fragment thereof that is known to interact with another protein or nucleic acid this assay can be used to detect agents that interfere with the binding interaction. Expression of the reporter gene is monitored as different test agents are added to the system. The presence of an inhibitory agent results in lack of a reporter signal.

The yeast two hybrid assay can also be used to identify proteins that bind to the gene product. In an assay to identify proteins that bind to a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or fragment thereof a fusion polynucleotide encoding both a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel or fragment and a UAS binding domain i.e. a first protein may be used. In addition a large number of hybrid genes each encoding a different second protein fused to an activation domain are produced and screened in the assay. Typically the second protein is encoded by one or more members of a total cDNA or genomic DNA fusion library with each second protein coding region being fused to the activation domain. This system is applicable to a wide variety of proteins and it is not necessary to know the identity or function of the second binding protein. The system is highly sensitive and can detect interactions not revealed by other methods even transient interactions may trigger transcription to produce a stable mRNA that can be repeatedly translated to yield the reporter protein.

Other assays may be used to search for agents that bind to the target protein. One such screening method to identify direct binding of test ligands to a target protein is described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 585 277 incorporated herein by reference. This method relies on the principle that proteins generally exist as a mixture of folded and unfolded states and continually alternate between the two states. When a test ligand binds to the folded form of a target protein i.e. when the test ligand is a ligand of the target protein the target protein molecule bound by the ligand remains in its folded state. Thus the folded target protein is present to a greater extent in the presence of a test ligand which binds the target protein than in the absence of a ligand. Binding of the ligand to the target protein can be determined by any method that distinguishes between the folded and unfolded states of the target protein. The function of the target protein need not be known in order for this assay to be performed. Virtually any agent can be assessed by this method as a test ligand including but not limited to metals polypeptides proteins lipids polysaccharides polynucleotides and small organic molecules.

Another method for identifying ligands of a target protein is described in Wieboldt et al. 91997 69 1683 1691 incorporated herein by reference. This technique screens combinatorial libraries of 20 30 agents at a time in solution phase for binding to the target protein. Agents that bind to the target protein are separated from other library components by simple membrane washing. The specifically selected molecules that are retained on the filter are subsequently liberated from the target protein and analyzed by HPLC and pneumatically assisted electrospray ion spray ionization mass spectroscopy. This procedure selects library components with the greatest affinity for the target protein and is particularly useful for small molecule libraries.

Other embodiments of the invention comprise using competitive screening assays in which neutralizing antibodies capable of binding a polypeptide of the invention specifically compete with a test compound for binding to the polypeptide. In this manner the antibodies can be used to detect the presence of any peptide that shares one or more antigenic determinants with ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Radiolabeled competitive binding studies are described in A. H. Lin et al. 1997 41 10 2127 2131 the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Another aspect of the present invention is directed to methods of identifying compounds that modulate i.e. increase or decrease activity of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel comprising contacting ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel with a compound and determining whether the compound modifies activity of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. The activity in the presence of the test compound is compared to the activity in the absence of the test compound. Where the activity of the sample containing the test compound is higher than the activity in the sample lacking the test compound the compound is an agonist. Similarly where the activity of the sample containing the test compound is lower than the activity in the sample lacking the test compound the compound is an antagonist. In certain embodiments of the invention the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel has the biological activity of SEQ ID NO 16. That is the ClC 4 or ClC 4A can sense sour compounds. Thus agonists of such ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptides will perceive the agonists as sour.

Agents that modulate i.e. increase decrease or block ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel activity or expression also may be identified for example by incubating a putative modulator with a cell containing a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or polynucleotide and determining the effect of the putative modulator on ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel activity or expression. The selectivity of a compound that modulates the activity of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel can be evaluated by comparing its effects on ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel to its effect on other taste receptors. Selective modulators may include for example antibodies and other proteins peptides or organic molecules that specifically bind to a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide or a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel encoding nucleic acid. Compounds identified as modulating ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel activity may be further tested in other assays including but not limited to in vivo models in order to confirm or quantitate their activity.

The invention also provides methods for identifying a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel modulator by a contacting a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel binding partner and a composition comprising a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel in the presence and in the absence of a putative modulator compound b detecting binding between the binding partner and the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and c identifying a putative modulator compound or a modulator compound in view of decreased or increased binding between the binding partner and the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel in the presence of the putative modulator as compared to binding in the absence of the putative modulator. Compounds identified as modulators of binding between ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and a ClC 4 or ClC 4A binding partner may be further tested in other assays including but not limited to in vivo models in order to confirm or quantitate their activity.

The invention also includes within its scope high throughput screening HTS assays to identify compounds that interact with enhance or inhibit biological activity i.e. affect enzymatic activity binding activity signal transduction etc. of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide. HTS assays permit screening of large numbers of compounds in an efficient manner. Cell based HTS systems are contemplated to investigate ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel ligand interaction. HTS assays are designed to identify hits or lead compounds having the desired property from which modifications can be designed to improve the desired property. Chemical modification of the hit or lead compound is often based on an identifiable structure activity relationship between the hit and the ClC 4 or ClC 4A polypeptide.

For example modulators of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel activity may be identified by expressing the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel in a heterologous cultured mammalian cell line such as HEK cells and detecting receptor activity in the presence and absence of a test compound by monitoring changes in intracellular calcium using a calcium specific intracellular dye. In another embodiment this process may be automated using a high throughput screening device. In some embodiments analysis of stimulation of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels and receptor heterodimers may be performed using the FLIPR assay as described by the manufacturer Molecular Devices Corp. .

Candidate modulators contemplated by the invention include compounds selected from libraries of either potential activators or potential inhibitors. There are a number of different libraries used for the identification of small molecule modulators including 1 chemical libraries 2 natural product libraries and 3 combinatorial libraries comprised of random peptides oligonucleotides or organic molecules. Chemical libraries consist of random chemical structures some of which are analogs of known compounds or analogs of compounds that have been identified as hits or leads in other drug discovery screens some of which are derived from natural products and some of which arise from non directed synthetic organic chemistry. Natural product libraries are collections of microorganisms animals plants or marine organisms that are used to create mixtures for screening by 1 fermentation and extraction of broths from soil plant or marine microorganisms or 2 extraction of plants or marine organisms. Natural product libraries include polyketides non ribosomal peptides and variants non naturally occurring thereof. For a review see 282 63 68 1998 . Combinatorial libraries are composed of large numbers of peptides oligonucleotides or organic compounds as a mixture. These libraries are relatively easy to prepare by traditional automated synthesis methods PCR cloning or proprietary synthetic methods. Of particular interest are non peptide combinatorial libraries. Still other libraries of interest include peptide protein peptidomimetic multiparallel synthetic collection recombinatorial and polypeptide libraries. For a review of combinatorial chemistry and libraries created therefrom see Myers 8 701 707 1997 . Identification of modulators through use of the various libraries described herein permits modification of the candidate hit or lead to optimize the capacity of the hit to modulate activity.

ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel binding partners that stimulate ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel activity are useful as agonists for conditions characterized by insufficient ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel signaling e.g. as a result of insufficient activity of a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel ligand . ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel binding partners that block ligand mediated ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel signaling are useful as ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel antagonists to modify excessive ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel signaling. In addition ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel modulators in general as well as ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel encoding polynucleotides and polypeptides are useful in diagnostic.

Mimetics or mimics of compounds identified herein sterically similar compounds formulated to mimic the key portions of the structure may be designed for pharmaceutical use. Mimetics may be used in the same manner as the compounds identified by the present invention that modulate the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and hence are also functional equivalents. The generation of a structural functional equivalent may be achieved by the techniques of modeling and chemical design known to those of skill in the art. It will be understood that all such sterically similar constructs fall within the scope of the present invention.

The design of mimetics to a known pharmaceutically active compound is a known approach to the development of pharmaceuticals based on a lead compound. This is desirable where for example the active compound is difficult or expensive to synthesize or where it is unsuitable for a particular method of administration e.g. some peptides may be unsuitable active agents for oral compositions as they tend to be quickly degraded by proteases in the alimentary canal.

There are several steps commonly taken in the design of a mimetic. First the particular parts of the compound that are critical and or important in determining its ClC 4 or ClC 4A modulating properties are determined. In the case of a polypeptide this can be done by systematically varying the amino acid residues in the peptide e.g. by substituting each residue in turn. Alanine scans of peptides are commonly used to refine such peptide motifs.

Once the active region of the compound has been identified its structure is modeled according to its physical properties e.g. stereochemistry bonding size and or charge using data from a range of sources such as but not limited to spectroscopic techniques X ray diffraction data and NMR. Computational analysis similarity mapping which models the charge and or volume of the active region rather than the bonding between atoms and other techniques known to those of skill in the art can be used in this modeling process.

In a variant of this approach the three dimensional structure of the compound that modulates a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel and the active region of the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel are modeled. This can be especially useful where either or both of these compounds change conformation upon binding. Knowledge of the structure of the ligand binding domain the receptor also allows the design of high potency ligands and or modulators.

A template molecule is then selected onto which chemical groups that mimic the ClC 4 or ClC 4A modulator can be grafted. The template molecule and the chemical groups grafted onto it can conveniently be selected so that the mimetic is easy to synthesize is pharmacologically acceptable and does not degrade in vivo while retaining the biological activity of the lead compound. Alternatively where the mimetic is peptide based further stability can be achieved by cyclizing the peptide thereby increasing its rigidity. The mimetic or mimetics found by this approach can then be screened by the methods of the present invention to see whether they have the ability to modulate the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel. Further optimization or modification can then be performed to arrive at one or more final mimetics for in vivo or clinical testing.

Molecular modeling for ClC 4A may be accomplished by aligning the ClC 4A sequence with other known members of the ClC chloride channel family such as those provided in Dutzler et al. 2002 415 287 294. In that study Dutzler describes the x ray structure of the ClC chloride channel and correlates the structure with the function of the protein by establishing a physical and chemical basis of the anion selectivity of the protein. Dutzler noted that all ClC chloride channels exhibit sequence conservation throughout indicating conservation of their three dimensional structure Dutzler at page 289 . Dutzler further states that given the sequence conservation together with what is known about ion selectivity in a ClC chloride channel from one can be certain that a common set of ion selectivity principles applies to the entire family Dutzler a 389 . Thus molecular modeling for agonists and antagonists of ClC 4A is possible as the sequence of the protein is well conserved and is correlated with a particular known structure and function. Conservative substitutions and non conservative substitutions may be made in the protein an modeled for observation of any change in structure. This approach is also useful for making mutations of ClC 4A to develop new proteins that may have different abilities to sense molecules either enhanced or diminished for example .

In Est vez R. and T. J. Jentsch 2002 CLC chloride channels correlating structure with function 12 531 539 the authors review the advances in bacterial chloride channel crystallization of Dutzler et al. and discuss the structures of chloride channels in higher organisms. From this information the structure of ClC 4 and ClC 4A may be accurately predicted. With the predicted structure of ClC 4 and ClC 4A it is possible to design a library of compounds with structures that would more likely interact with these channels proposed antagonists and agonists which act as inhibitors enhancers for the channels . Such a library of compounds may be screened for interaction with ClC 4 and or ClC 4A. Molecules that are proposed agonists may be designed to fit into the binding pocket of the natural ligands for ClC 4A. Thus new molecules that are detected as sour may be developed as high intensity taste stimulators. Conversely antagonists may be modeled to bind to ClC 4A to inhibit the binding of natural ligands to ClC 4A. These antagonists may mask sour taste perception in an animal and may be useful for example as taste masking agents for foods and medicine.

For alignment of protein sequences for the molecular modeling any sequence analysis software known in the art may be used. For example the proteins described by Dutzler et al. 2002 415 287 294 may be aligned with ClC 4A using the Clustal W Program Thompson J. D. D. G. Higgins and T. J. Gibson 1994 Clustal W improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting position specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice 22 4670 4680 . Atomic coordinates of the bacterial channel crystal structures are obtained from the protein database and used along with the alignments as the sources of spatial restraints for modeling. The structural models of ClC 4 and ClC 4A may be generated using any modeling program know in the art such as for example the program MODELLER Sali A. and T. L. Blundell 1993 Comparative protein modeling by satisfaction of spatial restraints 234 779 815 . The original images may be created using any programs known in the art such as for example the programs Insight II and Weblab Viewer Molecular Simulations and may be further enhanced with a photographic enhancement program such as Adobe Photoshop.

Following identification of a compound that binds and or or modulates a ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel the compound may be manufactured and or used in preparation of compositions including but not limited to foods drinks and pharmaceutical compositions. The compositions are provided or administered to patients including but not limited to birds cats dogs pigs sheep goats cattle horses rodents monkeys apes and humans.

Thus the present invention extends in various aspects not only to compounds identified in accordance with the methods disclosed herein but also foods drinks pharmaceutical compositions drugs or other compositions comprising such a compound uses of such a compound in the manufacture of a composition for administration to a patient and methods of making a composition comprising admixing such a compound with a pharmaceutically acceptable excipient vehicle or carrier and optionally other ingredients.

Some compositions of the invention comprise a taste modifying amount of at least one or more binding or modulating compounds. A taste modifying amount is a quantity sufficient to increase or decrease the perception of a taste stimulus by a given mammal. The food and drink compositions of the invention are formulated by the addition of a binding or modulating compound to a food or drink of the mammal.

The pharmaceutical compositions of the invention comprise a therapeutically effective amount of a compound identified according to the methods disclosed herein or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt thereof and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier or excipient.

The compounds of the invention can be formulated as neutral or salt forms. Pharmaceutically acceptable salts include those formed with free amino groups such as those derived from hydrochloric phosphoric acetic oxalic tartaric acids etc. and those formed with free carboxyl groups such as those derived from sodium potassium ammonium calcium ferric hydroxides isopropylamine triethylamine 2 ethylamino ethanol histidine procaine etc.

Pharmaceutically acceptable carriers include but are not limited to saline buffered saline dextrose water glycerol ethanol and combinations thereof. The carrier and composition can be sterile. The formulation should suit the mode of administration.

The composition if desired can also contain minor amounts of wetting or emulsifying agents or pH buffering agents. The composition can be a liquid solution suspension emulsion tablet pill capsule sustained release formulation or powder. Oral formulations can include standard carriers such as pharmaceutical grades of mannitol lactose starch magnesium stearate sodium saccharine cellulose magnesium carbonate etc.

The pharmaceutical compositions of the invention may further comprise a secondary compound for the treatment of a disorder unrelated to the ClC 4 or ClC 4A channel such as an antibiotic or other therapeutic agent to improve the palatability of the pharmaceutical composition thereby improving the ease of administration.

In one embodiment the composition is formulated in accordance with routine procedures as a pharmaceutical composition adapted for oral e.g. tablets granules syrups administration to the subject.

ClC 4 or ClC 4A of the invention may also be used to identify compounds that will be perceived as sour using cell signaling assays known in the art. In such assays polynucleotides encoding a ClC 4 or ClC 4A are incorporated into an expression vector and transfected into a host cell. The expression of ClC 4 or ClC 4A may be inducible or constitutive. The host cells expressing ClC 4 or ClC 4A are contacted with candidate sour compounds and the effect of each compound on the cells is assayed. Stimulation of a response is indicative of reactivity to the test compound and correlates with compounds that are perceived as sour. The assays that can be used to assess stimulation of ClC 4 or ClC 4A include but are not limited to assays measuring ion conductance ion flow calcium imaging e.g. using fura 2 green dextran activity or aquorin activity voltage measurement and or voltage imaging with dyes expression of reporter genes e.g. luciferase alkaline phosphatase beta galactosidase beta lactamase fluorescent binding protein receptor binding assays second messenger assays e.g. IP3 cAMP G protein activation based assays e.g. modulation of GTP gamma S binding receptor phosphorylation measures and the like. Four fluorescent indicators for chloride are commercially available from Molecular Probes including 6 methoxy N ethylquinolinium iodide MEQ 6 methoxy N 3 sulfopropyl quinolinium inner salt SPQ N ethoxycarbonylmethyl 6 methoxyquinolinium bromide MQAE See Sun X. C. and J. A. Bonanno 2002 Expression localization and functional evaluation of CFTR in bovine corneal endothelial cells 282 4 C673 683 Geddes C. D. K. Apperson J. Karolin and D. J. Birch 2001 Chloride sensitive fluorescent indicators 293 60 66. In some embodiments analysis of stimulation of ClC 4 or ClC 4A channels and receptor heterodimers may be determined using a FLIPR assay as described by the manufacturer Molecular Devices Corp. .

Screening of cells treated with dyes and fluorescent reagents is well known in the art. Genetic engineering of cells to produce fluorescent proteins such as modified green fluorescent protein GFP as a reporter molecule is also well known in the art U.S. Pat. No. 5 491 084 . Similarly WO 96 23898 relates to methods of detecting biologically active substances affecting intracellular processes by utilizing a GFP construct having a protein kinase activation site. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 401 629 and 5 436 128 describe assays and compositions for detecting and evaluating the intracellular transduction of an extracellular signal using recombinant cells that express cell surface receptors and contain reporter gene constructs that include transcriptional regulatory elements that are responsive to the activity of cell surface receptors. Fluorescence based reagents are useful for the assay of may cell functions including ion concentrations membrane potential specific translocations enzyme activities gene expression as well as the presence amounts and patterns of metabolites proteins lipids carbohydrates and nucleic acid sequences DeBiasio et al. 1996 7 1259 Giuliano et al. 1995 24 405 Heim and Tsien 1996 6 178 .

Cell signaling assays known in the art may also be used to identify CC 4 or ClC 4A antagonists. Expression of G protein coupled receptors at very high concentration in a heterologous system has been shown to result in constitutive cell signaling. For example but not by way of limitation ClC 4 or ClC 4A may be overexpressed in ClC 4 or ClC 4A baculovirus infected Sf9 cells. Alternatively for example ClC 4 or ClC 4A may be operably linked to a CMV promoter and expressed in COS or HEK293 cells. In the activated constitutive state test compounds may be assayed for their ability to inhibit constitutive cell signaling activity. Suitable assays include but are not limited to assays measuring ion conductance ion flow calcium imaging e.g. using fura 2 green dextran activity or aquorin activity voltage measurement and or voltage imaging with dyes expression of reporter genes e.g. luciferase alkaline phosphatase galactosidase lactamase fluorescent binding protein receptor binding assays second messenger assays e.g. IP3 cAMP G protein activation based assays e.g. modulation of GTP gamma S binding receptor phosphorylation measures and the like.

The screening assays of the invention may be used to identify stimuli of ClC 4A. Compounds that specifically bind to ClC 4A may be classified as agonists or antagonists in secondary screening assays in which compounds are tested for the ability to stimulate ion conductance in ClC 4A expressing cells or which block activity of ClC 4A in competition assays with known agonists of ClC 4A. Agonists of ClC 4A may be used as new sour compounds for taste modifiers and taste aversion. Antagonists of ClC 4A may be used as taste modifiers that block sour taste perception.

In some embodiments the ClC 4A and or ClC 4 molecules are immobilized on a solid support. Immobilization is accomplished using any of the methods well known in the art including covalent bonding to a support a bead or a chromatographic resin as well as non covalent high affinity interactions such as antibody binding or use of streptavidin biotin binding wherein the immobilized compound includes a biotin moiety. The support may for example be formulated into an electronic tongue or biosensor.

ClC 4 and ClC 4A present in other parts of the body other than the tongue may be exploited for other effects. For example modulation of expression or function of these receptors may be used to exert an effect on digestion metabolism or recognition and may be used to stimulate more efficient use of nutrients. Accordingly the invention also comprises methods of enhancing digestion metabolism or recognition by modulating the biological activity of ClC 4 and or ClC 4A in an animal by administering to the animal a compound that modulates expression or function of ClC 4 and or ClC 4A.

In some embodiments of the invention the compounds that modulate ClC 4 and or ClC 4A in locations other than taste buds are antagonists. In other embodiments the compounds are agonists. In some embodiments of the invention a method is provided for enhancing an animals efficient use of nutrients comprising administering to the animal an agonist or antagonist of ClC 4 and or ClC 4A. In some embodiments modulation of the relative biological activity of ClC 4 to ClC 4A is accomplished by selectively stimulating either ClC 4 or ClC 4A or by selectively antagonizing either ClC 4 or ClC 4A. In some embodiments both ClC 4 and ClC 4A are stimulated. In other embodiments both ClC 4 and ClC 4A are inhibited. In still other embodiments modulation of the relative biological activity of ClC 4 to ClC 4A is accomplished by selectively stimulating ClC 4 or ClC 4A and simultaneously antagonizing either ClC 4A or ClC 4 respectively.

Further aspects of the invention are exemplified below however the examples are merely illustrative of the invention and the scope of the invention is not to be limited thereto or thereby.

The discovery of these two voltage gated pH sensitive ion channels ClC 4 and ClC 4A was accomplished in two steps 1 isolating the 3 end cDNA fragment from a single taste cell cDNA library by differential screening of the library against non taste cDNAs 2 PCR amplification of ClC 4 and ClC 4A cDNAs from a mouse taste tissue cDNA library with PCR primers encompassing the entire coding regions and PCR screening of a human fungiform taste cDNA library. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry have localized their transcripts and proteins to taste receptor cells. Electrophysiological recordings have characterized their anion selectivity and conductance in response to changes in voltage and pH.

Circumvallate foliate and fungiform papillae epithelium were isolated from young adult mice by enzymatic digestion Ruiz C. M. McPheeters and S. C. Kinnamon Tissue culture of rat taste buds in ECBTO CTP eds. Spielman A. I. and Brand J. G. 79 84 CRC Press Boca Raton Fla. 1995 . Individual taste cells were dissociated from taste papillae and identified by their unique bipolar shape and transferred individually to Eppendorf tubes. First strand cDNAs were synthesized from single cells with oligo dT primers and tailed with dATP and terminal transferase and amplified by polymerase chain reaction Brady G. and M. N. Iscove 1993 Construction of cDNA libraries from single cells 225 611 623 Dulac C. and R. A. Axel 1995 A novel family of genes encoding putative pheromone receptors in mammals 83 195 206 Huang L. et al. 1999 G 13 colocalizes with gustducin in taste receptor cells and mediates IP3 responses to bitter denatonium 2 1055 1062 Perez C. A. et al. 2002 A transient receptor potential channel expressed in taste receptor cells 5 1169 1176 . The PCR products were digested with restriction enzyme EcoR I and ligated into the ZapII vector. Individual phage plaques were picked and their inserts were amplified with vector specific primers size fractionated by electrophoresis and transferred onto a nylon membrane which was hybridized with P labeled cDNAs prepared from non gustatory lingual epithelium. Inserts of the clones that were not hybridized with the probe were presumed to be expressed selectively in taste cells. These were sequenced and searched against genome and EST expressed sequence tag databases.

Blast search of insert cDNA sequences of one of the clones that was selectively expressed in taste epithelium was 83 identical to human chloride channel 4. PCR amplification was performed with mouse taste tissue cDNAs with primers that were designed to encompass the entire mouse ClC 4. Two fragments were obtained and subcloned into pCR Blunt II TOPO vector. DNA sequencing analysis and sequence alignment showed that the long fragment was the same as the mouse ClC 4 while the short fragment was a splicing isoform of ClC 4 which we designated ClC 4A.

To determine whether these two isoforms are expressed in all three types of lingual taste papillae a new set of PCR primers were designed and synthesized to encompass the variable region and PCR reactions were performed with first strand cDNAs from circumvallate foliate fungiform and non gustatory lingual epithelium.

A human fungiform cDNA library was also screened by PCR amplification with human ClC 4 gene specific primers. By dividing PCR screening positive fractions of the library DNA into subpools one clone was isolated which contained the entire coding region.

Digoxigenin labeled RNA probes ClC 4 2.2 kb were used for in situ hybridization on frozen sections 8 m as described Schaeren Wiemers N. and A. Gerfin Moser 1993 A single protocol to detect transcripts of various types and expression levels in neural tissue and cultured cells in situ hybridization using digoxigenin labeled cRNA probes. Histochemistry 100 431 440 . Detection was with an alkaline phosphatase conjugated anti DIG antibody in the presence of nitroblue tetrazolium NBT and 5 bromo 4 chloro 3 indolyl phosphate BCIP .

Polyclonal antiserum against a KLH conjugated 13 amino acid peptide near the C terminus of mouse rat and human ClC 4 ClC 4A was raised in rabbit Alpha Diagnostic International . Frozen sections 10 m of murine lingual tissue previously fixed in 4 paraformaldehyde and cryoprotected in 20 sucrose were blocked in 3 BSA 0.3 Triton X 100 2 goat serum and 0.1 sodium azide in PBS for 1 hour at room temperature and then incubated overnight at 4 C. with the polyclonal antiserum 1 1 000 . The secondary antibody was Cy3 conjugated goat anti rabbit Ig.

To determine the type of cells expressing ClC 4 ClC 4A double immunostaining was carried out on taste sections with the rabbit polyclonal antibody against ClC 4 ClC 4A and the mouse monoclonal antibody against IP3R3 BD Bioscience 1 50 dilution . Secondary antibodies were FITC conjugated and Cy3 conjugated anti mouse and anti rabbit antibodies respectively.

ClC 4 and ClC 4A cDNAs were subcloned into the expression vector pCR Blunt II TOPO. Capped sense cRNA was synthesized from the linearized expression constructs by T7 RNA polymerase with nMessage mMachine in vitro transcription kit and tailed with polyA tailing kit Ambion . The synthesized cRNA products were phenol extracted ethyl alcohol precipitated and then dissolved in nuclease free water at about 0.5 ng nl for injection. Dumont stage V or VI oocytes were obtained from adult female laboratory bred and their follicles were removed by collagenase digestion. Oocytes were injected with 50 nl of 0.5 ng nl cRNA and maintained at 18 C. for 4 6 days in modified Barth s solution supplemented with 5 mM sodium pyruvate Goldin A. L. 1992 Maintenance of and oocyte injection 207 266 279 . Membrane currents were recorded using the two electrode voltage clamp technique in ND96 solution 96 mM NaCl 2 mM KCl 1.8 mM CaCl 1 mM MgCl 5 mM Na HEPES pH 7.4 . For anion replacement 80 mM Cl was substituted by equivalent amounts of Br I NO. When using different pH values 5 mM HEPES for pH 7.4 was replaced with 5 mM MES for pH

We isolated circumvallate foliate and fungiform papillae epithelium from young adult mice and dissociate them into single cells by enzymatic digestion. Individual taste cells were identified by their unique bipolar shape and transferred to Eppendorf tubes where poly A RNAs in each cell were reverse transcribed into first strand cDNAs with oligo dT primers. The first strand cDNAs were then tailed with dATP and amplified by polymerase chain reaction PCR with restriction enzyme site attached oligo dT primers. The amplified products were digested with EcoRI and ligated into the ZapII vector to construct single taste cell cDNA libraries. Individual phage plaques from one of the libraries were picked and their inserts were amplified by PCR with vector specific primers sized fractionated by electrophoresis and transferred onto a nylon membrane. Hybridization of the nylon membranes with radiolabeled cDNAs prepared from non gustatory lingual epithelium showed that many inserts from the single cell cDNA libraries could hybridize with the non gustatory lingual epithelium cDNA generating strong signal after exposed to X ray film while other insert DNAs did not hybridize to the probe and produce background level signal . Insert DNAs that did not hybridize to the probe were believed to be the genes that were selectively expressed in gustatory tissue only and their DNAs were isolated sequenced and blast searched against genome and EST databases. Blast search results showed that one of the clones with a 906 bp insert was 83 identical to a voltage gated pH sensitive human chloride channel 4 ClC 4 .

To isolate the full length ClC 4 cDNA expressed in gustatory tissue a pair of PCR primers was designed to encompass the entire coding region. PCR amplification with taste tissue cDNA yielded two fragments of 2.4 kb and 2.23 kb. DNA sequencing analysis showed that the 2.4 kb fragment is the same as the previously known mouse chloride channel ClC 4. However the 2.23 kb fragment is a novel splicing variant lacking 155 bases near the 5 end of the ClC 4 including the presumed start codon ATG . We designated the shorter splicing variant ClC 4A and its amino acid sequence was deduced from the next in frame starting codon .

To determine whether these two isoforms are expressed in all three types of lingual taste papillae a new set of PCR primers were designed and synthesized to make the amplification of the variable region of the cDNAs more efficient. PCR amplification with the first strand cDNAs from circumvallate foliate fungiform and non gustatory lingual epithelium showed that both forms of cDNA are present in all three types of papillae but absent in the non gustatory lingual epithelium .

To isolate human ClC 4 cDNA a human fungiform cDNA library was screened by PCR amplification of pools of the library DNA and dividing the positive pools into subpools. One clone was isolated and sequencing analysis showed that it was a human ClC 4 cDNA. Isolation of human ClC 4A is in process with a new human taste tissue cDNA library.

To localize the RNA transcripts to taste bud cells in situ hybridization was carried out with a 2.2 kb probe which is common in both ClC 4 and ClC 4A. Results demonstrated that ClC 4 ClC 4A were expressed in many taste bud cells but absent from the surrounding non gustatory lingual epithelium . Sense probe controls showed no non specific hybridization to lingual tissue.

To determine if the ClC 4 ClC 4A proteins localized to taste receptor cells we used immunohistochemistry with antiserum to a peptide near C termini of ClC 4 ClC 4A proteins on sections of murine lingual tissue. This antibody was able to recognize both ClC 4 and ClC 4A. Immunostaining results indicated that the ClC 4 ClC 4A proteins are present on plasma membrane. Some spotty staining seen in cells within the body of the bud suggested that the proteins could also be present in the vesicles such as endosomes and synaptic vesicles .

To determine the type of cells expressing ClC 4 ClC 4A double immunostaining was carried out on taste sections with the ClC 4 ClC 4A antibody produced from rabbit and the IP3R3 monoclonal antibody generated by a mouse cell line. Confocal laser scanning microscopy images showed that ClC 4 ClC 4A proteins are nearly overlapping with IP3R3. Since IP3 has been implicated in bitter sweet and umami sensation co expression of ClC 4 ClC 4A with IP3R3 suggests that these chloride channels may play an important role in bitter sweet and umami taste signal transduction and transmission in taste bud cells.

To characterize the function of ClC 4 and ClC 4A we subcloned their cDNAs into the expression vector pCR Blunt II TOPO and synthesized the capped sense cRNA with in vitro transcription and tailed the cRNA with poly A which was then purified and injected into oocytes. Membrane currents were recorded using the two electrode voltage clamp technique 4 6 days after injection. Strong outward currents were recorded in ClC 4 cRNA injected oocytes which were absent in the control oocytes. ClC 4 mediated currents were markedly reduced by extracellular acidification left panel indicating that ClC 4 channels were open in pH 7.5 6.5 and began to close from pH 6.5. By contrast currents in ClC 4A injected oocytes at pH 7.5 and 6.5 were close to the basal level as recorded from the control oocytes and strong outward currents were recorded at pH 6.5 6.0 and 5.5 indicating that ClC 4A was closed at pH 7.5 and 6.5 but open at the lower pH middle panel . We also tested the sensitivity of human ClC 4 activity to external pH right panel and found that like mouse ClC 4 human counterpart was closed at acidic pH which is consistent with previous studies.

When chloride was replaced with other anions results showed the different ion selectivity for ClC 4 and ClC 4A . The conductance sequence of ClC 4 is I NO Br Cl while the sequence of ClC 4A is I Br Cl NO . These ion selectivities were quite different from those reported for the human ClC 4. To confirm our results we expressed and recorded from human ClC 4 and the conductance sequence is nearly identical to the reported data NO Cl Br I indicating that the 2 difference in amino acid sequence between human and mouse ClC 4 confers anion selectivity.

To pharmacologically characterize these ion channels we tested the effect of chloride channel inhibitors on these channels at their optimal pH NFA niflumic acid and NPPB 5 nitro 2 3 phenylpropylamino benzoic acid . Results indicated that NFA had only a slight inhibitory effect on human and mouse ClC 4 left and middle panels at pH 7.4 but significantly inhibited the conductance of ClC 4A at pH 5.5 right panels . NPPB had no apparent effect on the conductance of human and mouse ClC 4 channels but did slightly inhibit ClC 4A .

