---

title: Low contaminant formic acid fuel for direct liquid fuel cell
abstract: A low contaminant formic acid fuel is especially suited toward use in a direct organic liquid fuel cell. A fuel of the invention provides high power output that is maintained for a substantial time and the fuel is substantially non-flammable. Specific contaminants and contaminant levels have been identified as being deleterious to the performance of a formic acid fuel in a fuel cell, and embodiments of the invention provide low contaminant fuels that have improved performance compared to known commercial bulk grade and commercial purified grade formic acid fuels. Preferred embodiment fuels (and fuel cells containing such fuels) including low levels of a combination of key contaminants, including acetic acid, methyl formate, and methanol.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07618725&OS=07618725&RS=07618725
owner: The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
number: 07618725
owner_city: Urbana
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050314
---
This application claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 of application Ser. No. 60 611 906 filed Sep. 21 2004.

This invention was made with Government assistance under Department of Energy Grant No. DEGF 02 99ER14993. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

The field of the invention is liquid organic fuels. A fuel of the invention is applicable for example to direct liquid feed electrochemical fuel cells.

Fuel cells are electrochemical cells in which a free energy change resulting from a fuel oxidation reaction is converted into electrical energy. End uses for fuel cells include battery replacement mini and microelectronics automotive engines and other transportation power generators power plants and many others. One advantage of fuel cells is that they are substantially pollution free.

In hydrogen oxygen fuel cells hydrogen gas is oxidized to form water with a useful electrical current produced as a byproduct of the oxidation reaction. A solid polymer membrane electrolyte layer can be employed to separate the hydrogen fuel from the oxygen. The anode and cathode are arranged on opposite faces of the membrane. Electron flow along the electrical connection between the anode and the cathode provides electrical power to load s interposed in circuit with the electrical connection between the anode and the cathode. Hydrogen fuel cells are impractical for many applications however because of difficulties related to storing and handling hydrogen gas.

Organic fuel cells may prove useful in many applications as an alternative to hydrogen fuel cells. In an organic fuel cell an organic fuel such as methanol is oxidized to carbon dioxide at an anode while air or oxygen is simultaneously reduced to water at a cathode. One advantage over hydrogen fuel cells is that organic air fuel cells can be operated with a liquid organic fuel. This diminishes or eliminates problems associated with hydrogen gas handling and storage. Some organic fuel cells require initial conversion of the organic fuel to hydrogen gas by a reformer. These are referred to as indirect fuel cells.

The presence of a reformer increases cell size cost complexity and start up time. Other types of organic fuel cells called direct fuel cells avoid these disadvantages by directly oxidizing the organic fuel without conversion to hydrogen gas. Until recently methanol and other alcohols were the fuel of choice in the development of direct fuel cells and most research focused on the use of these fuels.

An advance in the art is presented in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 2003 0198852 the 852 publication and 2004 0115518 the 518 publication . Embodiments described in these applications disclose formic acid fuel cells with high power densities and current output. Exemplary power densities of 15 mW cmand much higher were achieved at low operating temperatures. Additionally embodiments described in those applications provided for compact fuel cells.

While fuel cells will have different configurations for different applications the compact fuel cells will be suitable for replacement in small portable electronics e.g. cellular handsets and personal digital assistants PDAs . As an example cellular handsets typically require a certain amount of power usually 3 watts which should fit within a cavity of approximately 10 cc to 30 cc. In order for a fuel cell technology to accomplish this it must have the capability of operating at a high power density. Direct formic acid fuel cells in accordance with embodiments of the 852 publication and the 518 publication have been demonstrated as suitable to deliver such power in the small form factor suited to small portable electronics.

Commercial bulk grades of formic acid are made by a number of processes. Processes for making formic acid are disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 879 915 5 869 739 5 763 662 5 633 402 5 599 979 5 393 922 4 262 140 4 126 748 and 2 407 157. Commercial bulk grades of formic acid are used in a variety of industries and processes. It is used for example in animal feed additives to dye clothing and in the manufacture of vinyl resin plastics. It is also used to manufacture aspartame. There are also commercial purified grades of formic acid. The commercial purified grades have a smaller market. The commercial purified grades are used for example as a solvent in high performance liquid chromatography HPLC and as solvents for other measurement techniques.

A low contaminant formic acid fuel is especially suited toward use in a direct organic liquid fuel cell. A fuel of the invention provides high power output that is maintained for a substantial time and the fuel is substantially non flammable. Specific contaminants and contaminant levels have been identified as being deleterious to the performance of a formic acid fuel in a fuel cell and embodiments of the invention provide low contaminant fuels that have improved performance compared to known commercial bulk grade and commercial purified grade formic acid fuels. Preferred embodiment fuels and fuel cells containing such fuels including low levels of a combination of key contaminants including acetic acid and methyl formate.

The invention concerns a low contaminant formic acid fuel and is especially suited toward use in a direct organic liquid fuel cell. A fuel of the invention provides high power output that is maintained for a substantial time and the fuel is substantially non flammable. Specific contaminants and contaminant levels have been identified as being deleterious to the performance of a formic acid fuel in a fuel cell and embodiments of the invention provide low contaminant fuels that have improved performance compared to known commercial bulk grade and commercial purified grade formic acid fuels.

It has been discovered that commercial bulk mixtures show significant batch to batch variations in performance. This is true of bulk commercial bulk grades that were tested as well as commercial purified grades of formic acid that were tested. Particular contaminants are present in commercial bulk grade and commercial purified grade formic acids at levels that negatively impact the current density over time performance in a direct formic acid fuel cell. It has also been discovered that commercial bulk grades and certain commercial purified grades of formic acid are either flammable or have too low of a power density to be useful and are provided in a form that is inconvenient for use in a fuel cell.

Particular embodiments of the invention include formic acid fuels having low levels of acetic acid and methyl formate. Formic acid fuels in accordance with embodiments of the invention exhibit high power outputs and provide less current degradation over time when used in a direct liquid fuel cell than commercial bulk grades and commercial purified grades of formic acid that were tested. Embodiments of the invention include formic acid and water mixtures having negligible amounts of key catalyst contaminants that we have identified.

The invention also includes methods for making formic acid fuels. An embodiment of the invention includes starting with a commercially available formic acid and water mixture and then treating the mixture to eliminate key impurities. In an embodiment of the invention key impurities are removed by freezing a formic acid and water mixture to separate impurities and collecting the purified formic acid from the separated impurities.

The invention also includes fuel cells with low impurity formic acid fuels as well as cartridges with low impurity formic acid fuel for fuel cells. An exemplary fuel cell assembly of the invention is shown in . The fuel cell assembly includes an anode and a cathode with a solid polymer electrolyte sandwiched therebetween. A preferred solid polymer electrolyte membrane is a copolymer of tetrafluoroethylene and perfluorovinylether sulfonic acid with an example being the membrane available under the NAFION trade name from DuPont Chemical Co. Delaware. Other membrane materials can also be used with examples including membranes of modified perfluorinated sulfonic acid polymer polyhydrocarbon sulfonic acid membranes containing other acidic ligands and composites of two or more kinds of proton exchange membranes.

The anode cathode and solid polymer electrolyte can be formed as a unitary membrane electrode assembly MEA . For example an MEA can be formed when the anode and cathode are painted or otherwise deposited as a liquid ink or slurry form onto opposite surfaces of the membrane . Each of the anode and the cathode can include a catalyst layer with an example being finely comminuted platinum Pt and or palladium Pd particles either supported or unsupported and directly applied to opposite sides of the NAFION membrane. In preferred embodiments the catalyst is Pd. When the catalyst ink dries solid catalyst particles adhere to the membrane to form the anode and the cathode .

A cathode current collector covers a surface of the cathode . A plurality of slots through a portion of the cathode current collector provides access to the cathode . An insulator covers a portion of the cathode current collector . In the example the cathode of the exemplary cell remains open to the atmosphere although other cell configurations are contemplated in which oxygen can be supplied through other means. An anode current collector covers a surface of the anode . Like the cathode current collector the anode current collector has a plurality of slots that provide access to the anode and increase the operative surface area.

A conducting sheet can be interposed or sandwiched between the current collector and the anode to facilitate distribution of charge. Although not illustrated a conducting sheet can also be provided between the cathode current collector and the cathode . The conducting sheet can be gold mesh carbon cloth or the like. The conducting sheet can also provide some mass transfer functionality to facilitate transfer of fuel to the anode . For example a carbon cloth that has been modified to change its surface interactions with water is believed to offer useful benefits and advantages for operation of some cells of the invention. The anode and the anode current collector are attached to an anode enclosure that includes a cover plate and defines a chamber . When the fuel cell is assembled the chamber is operative to contain an organic fuel solution. A fill passage allows for communicating fluids to and from the chamber . The fill passage can be sealed to provide a self contained fuel cell that can be useful for instance as a miniature power source for small or microelectronics devices.

The anode and cathode current collectors and can be formed for example of tantalum foils electrochemically coated with gold. The anode enclosure formed for example of polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE commercially available under the trade name Teflon includes the chamber and the cover plate also for example of PTFE closes the chamber so that it can contain a formic acid fuel solution. Passages define a gas remover .

Gas bubbles formed on the anode will travel through the fuel solution held in the chamber to the passages through which they can then exit the chamber in the direction of the arrow. As gas bubbles are formed the pressure in the chamber increases and creates a pressure differential across the passages . The driving force of the pressure differential directs the gas bubbles out of the chamber .

The passages are configured to substantially prevent passage of the fuel solution while allowing gas to pass therethrough. It has been discovered that providing passages in a generally tubular shape and with a length to diameter ratio of at least 0.5 is beneficial to prevent liquid flow as is use of a hydrophobic surface on the interior surface of the passages . Preferably the passages have a diameter of no more than 0.031 inch 0.079 cm and more preferably no more than 0.01 in. 0.0254 cm and a length of at least 0.125 in. 0.3175 cm . At least about five passages are preferably provided and more preferably they are provided in a ratio of about twenty passages of no more than 0.031 inch 0.079 cm diameter per square centimeter of useful anode area. An exemplary hydrophobic construction material for the passages includes the fluorocarbon based polymer commercially available from 3M Corporation Minneapolis Minn. under their registered trademark KEL F. It is contemplated that the passages can be provided in more than one wall of the anode enclosure .

To promote circulation of the fuel solution the gas remover is preferably configured to cause the gas bubbles to travel some minimum distance through the chamber . For example the passages are preferably placed a distance A of at least 0.1 inches 0.254 centimeters from the anode current collector . Also it has been discovered that providing a passage entrance that is separated by a distance from the wall of the anode enclosure is also useful to promote useful circulation of the fuel solution. A distance of at least 0.01 in. 0.0254 cm is preferred.

The exemplary fuel cell embodiment of includes a replaceable fuel cartridge . The replaceable cartridge includes a fuel reservoir for holding a supply of a low contaminant formic acid fuel solution. The replaceable cartridge can be constructed of any suitable material with an example being a PTFE such as TEFLON. The anode enclosure is provided with a loading passage communicating with the chamber with the loading tube of being an exemplary loading passage. The loading tube is configured to mate with the replaceable cartridge . Preferably the loading tube includes a sealing mechanism such as a check valve . The check valve is configured to provide one way flow whereby flow is allowed into the chamber from the cartridge reservoir but reverse flow out of the chamber is prevented. Other sealing mechanisms and configurations are also contemplated.

The replaceable cartridge includes a recessed valve that is located at the terminal end of a loading port . An exemplary loading port comprises a generally tapered cavity configured to receive the loading tube and guide it into engagement with the recessed valve . The valve can comprise a spring loaded or like configured valve that opens when the loading tube engages it. Configurations like the exemplary recessed valve and loading port can be desirable to reduce the chances of exposure of a fuel solution to user contact during loading.

The replaceable cartridge is useful to load fuel solution into the chamber after depletion of existing fuel. It will be appreciated that the loading tube can extend for any practical distance so that a fuel cell of the invention can be within the body of an electronic device and yet remain accessible for re fueling.

The fuel cells and cartridge in include a low contaminant formic acid fuel that provides a sustained current performance. The low contaminant fuel is preferably substantially free from acetic acid and methyl formate. Exemplary embodiment fuels have been prepared and tested. Experiments and results will now be discussed. Various additional features of the invention and preferred embodiments of the invention will be illustrated by the following data while artisans will appreciate that the invention is not limited to the particular example fuels and exemplary methods of making that are described with respect to the experiments.

A preferred fuel composition was made by starting with 99 Reidel Puriss formic acid purchased from Sigma Aldrich St Louis Mo. stock 33015. About 122 cc of the fuel was placed in a 1 liter plastic bottle 10 ml of deionized water was added then the bottle was placed in a 20 C. freezer for 5 hours. Formic acid crystals formed along the walls of the bottle while liquid remained in the center. The liquid was poured out of the bottle. The crystals were then rinsed in deionized water and then the crystals were allowed to melt. 38 milliliters of the melted crystals was placed in a 50 ml graduated cylinder 12 milliliters of deionized water was added producing the preferred formic acid composition 1 listed in Table 1.

This method used to produce the preferred formic acid composition 1 works well with the purified commercial grades as a starting point. When commercial bulk grades are used as a starting point the steps may need to be repeated to reduce methyl formate and acetic acid levels. Alternately a preliminary distillation step can be conducted with a commercial bulk grade formic acid prior to freezing.

Tests on the preferred formic acid composition 1 were conducted commercial fuel cell test hardware from Fuel Cell Technologies. The MEA for these experiments was prepared as follows. Anode and cathode catalyst inks were prepared by mixing appropriate amounts of catalyst powders with 5 recast NAFION solution 1100 EW Solution Technology Inc. USA . Englehardt s020284 palladium black or Sigma Aldrich St. Louis Mo. 20 582 4 were used as anode catalysts while Johnson Mathey highspec 6000 platinum black was used as a cathode catalyst. Both the anode and cathode inks were applied onto either side of a NAFION 117 membrane Dupont which was fixed on a vacuum table. Ink application was typically performed at 60 C. after which the membrane was thermally cured at 80 C. for 15 minutes. The anode catalysts employed had a loading of about 10 mg cm. The geometric surface area of the MEAs employed in this work was 5 cm. The cathode ink formulation was approximately 90 by weight Pt black and 10 by weight NAFION. The cathode catalyst employed had a standard loading of 8 mg cm. The experiments were conducted by feeding 1 cc min of 10 M formic acid to the anode and 100 sccm standard cubic centimeters of dry air to the cathode. We ran the membrane for 1 hour at 0.53 volts and recorded the current as a function of time. Table 1 summarizes the results. Notice that the preferred fuel exhibits an energy density above 800 w hr liter shows less than 22 loss of current in 1 hour and is not flammable. Table 1 summarizes the measured contaminants. The results for the preferred fuel composition are the worst measured result. In many cases the impurity concentrations of methyl formate and acetic acid were below our measurement limit about 1 part per million ppm . By contrast for each of the commercial grades the best case test result is presented. While it is noted that there were batch to batch variations in the levels of contaminants noticed during testing in each test case the impurity levels were no lower that shown. Further higher levels of acetic acid and methyl formate produced worse results.

Only the preferred fuel and the Fluka fuel were non flammable. Despite the more concentrated mixture of the preferred fuel 84 compared to 50 for the Fluka the maximum measured methyl formate for the preferred fuel was 10 ppm while the Fluka level best case was 30 ppm. Other fuels tested here excepting the Fluka fuel also have much higher levels of acetic acid. The preferred fuel has much lower level of acetic acid and in some cases no measurable quantity was detected. The preferred fuel worst case scenario of current loss over an hour was 21 the lowest level of the fuels tested.

Table 2 shows the energy density of the fuel mixtures as a function of the fuel composition. Fuel concentration in the fuel reservoir must be at least 61 for the theoretical energy density to be at least 2 the 275 w hr lit reported for lithium batteries. This provides a practical fuel reservoir for commercial purposes. Mixtures with 88 or more formic acid have a flash point below 60 C. In preferred embodiments the fuel reservoir constitutes a fuel cartridge such as the cartridge 350 with at least about 61 and no more than about 88 formic acid. Fuel cells of the invention may at times operate with lower fuel concentrations contacting the anode. Adequate current for example to charge a battery from a fuel cell can be provided when the formic acid concentration drops to as low as about 10 . Having low concentrations of key contaminants at levels where the energy density is low such as at 10 is important to maintain current density. Items with flash points below 60 C. require special packaging during transport.

The various commercial formic acid samples were also analyzed by gas chromatography GC and the results are shown in Table 3. With the exception of Fluka HPLC grade formic acid the remaining commercial samples tested here contain significant amounts of methyl formate and or acetic acid while the preferred composition is substantially free of methyl formate and acetic acid and the Fluka HPLC grade while substantially free of acetic acid includes an appreciable amount of methyl formate that is ten times that of the preferred fuel even though the Fluka has only 50 formic acid while the preferred fuel was measured at 84 formic acid.

In addition the preferred composition and the Fluka Formic acid were analyzed by Ion coupled plasma mass spectroscometry ICP MS . Table 3 compares the results and shows that the preferred composition has less iron and silicon than the Fluka on a water free basis.

Experiments were also conducted to evaluate the effects of methanol which converts to methyl formate in a formic acid solution methyl formate and acetic acid. These constituents have been identified as key contaminants to a formic acid fuel and the preferred fuels are substantially free or have very low levels of these contaminants. In one test with Fluka HPLC grade formic acid as the starting material various amounts of methanol methyl formate and acetic acid were added. Table 4 summarizes the results. Measurable performance degradation was observed when as little as 100 ppm of methanol methyl formate or acetic acid were added to the HPLC grade formic acid. Particularly the current loss over time increased significantly.

The effect of methanol has also been explored. Because methanol itself is a fuel in certain direct fuel cells methanol has sometimes been considered in the art to be a beneficial in a formic acid fuel cell. However methanol has actually been shown to be deleterious to fuel cell performance. Methanol reacts with formic acid to form methyl formate in solution. The methanol is almost completely converted to methyl formate after about 1 hr. Methanol may therefore generally be considered to create methyl formate contamination in a formic acid fuel solution. shows the effect of methanol. Increasing quantities of methanol were added to the Fluka HPLC grade formic acid fuel. shows traces from top to bottom of a preferred low contaminant fuel of the invention the Fluka HPLC fuel and ten the Fluka fuel with addition of increasing levels of methanol 0.005 0.04 and 0.4 .

In it is seen that 50 ppm 0.05 of produces a noticeable degradation on performance while a substantial degradation is produced at 400 ppm 0.04 . To obtain the results in each of the samples was diluted with Millipore deionized water to produce a 10 M solution. 0.5 cc min of the 10 M formic acid solution was fed to the anode and 100 sccm of dry air was fed to the cathode of the MEA.

Other components that affect fuel cell performance have also been explored. Small quantities of boric acid and HBFreverse current loss. Tables 5 and 6 shows those results. The addition of 620 ppm of boric acid substantially improves the fuel cell performance but 1230 ppm is ineffective. A preferred embodiment fuel comprises at least about 620 ppm and less than 1230 ppm boric acid. Similarly 880 ppm of HBFsubstantially improves the fuel cell performance but poorer performance is seen with 1760 ppm. 2440 ppm produces unacceptable performance. A preferred embodiment fuel comprises at least about 880 ppm HBFand less than 1760 ppm HBF.

While specific embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that other modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

