---

title: Quad-gapped toroidal inductor
abstract: A high power, high frequency toroidal inductor is broken into four quadrant cores and uses bare rectangular conductors to form coils. One coil is wound centrally around each quadrant. The coils positioned centrally on the quadrants minimize the effect of damaging fringe flux and leakage flux. The coil inner winding ends are bent perpendicular to the coils to form tangential leads with one coil inner tangential lead joined to an adjacent outer coil radial lead by jumpers that span adjacent coils.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07808359&OS=07808359&RS=07808359
owner: 
number: 07808359
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051021
---
The United States Government has certain rights in this invention. This invention was made with Government support under Contract Number N00014 04 C 0288 awarded by the Department of the Navy.

The invention is to a high power high frequency toroidal inductor with the core in segments with centrally located coils that produces lower losses operates cooler is more compact and lighter in weight.

A typical inductor consists of a coil that creates flux a magnetic core that directs flux and an air gap that stores magnetic energy. The air gap is made of two flat faces of iron within the magnetic core.

Prior art magnet wires have limited use in making coil loops that carry large currents. The problem is exacerbated by the difficulty in transferring the heat produced by the wire into the air. Above 200 amps the design of the inductor is dictated more by thermal issues than by inductance issues.

Large currents can be carried by rectangular sectioned copper conductors that are pre insulated by coating. Such insulated conductors are called magnet wire. When the magnet wire is wound around a toroidal core it has to be bent 90 degrees four times in order to make one complete loop. When the magnet wire is thicker than 0.125 inch it becomes difficult to sharply bend magnet wire without damaging the insulation coating. Bending a thick magnet wire with sharp radius will bend the insulation coating also. During bending the inner insulation coating layer gets compressed while the outer insulation layer gets stretched. The stretching and compression introduce very large stresses in the insulating layer. The polymeric materials usually used are not as strong as metals and their ability to stretch or compress is extremely limited and their tensile strengths are extremely low when compared to that of copper. While the copper conductor can deform and bend sharply the insulation coating cannot stretch in the same way without cracking. A sharp bending will stretch the insulation coatings so severely that they crack.

Hernandez et al U.S. Pat. No. 5 396 212 issued 7 Mar. 1995 addresses wire bending and shapes that produce the best electrical characteristics. F. Benke U.S. Pat. No. 3 633 272 issued 11 Jan. 1972 addresses conductor thickness and width for insulation. Abe et al U.S. Pat. No. 6 531 946 issued 11 Mar. 2003 addresses high frequency effect and the effect of various gaps in toroidal cores.

When the coils are energized magnetic flux lines are concentrated through the cores. Most of such flux lines flow through iron and whenever there is an air gap they jump across the air gaps perpendicular to the flat faces of iron that form the air gap. The air gap in a typical inductor can be as small as 0.010 inch or as large as 0.062 inch. Large air gapped inductors are not preferred as they emit significantly more fringe fields that generate harmful electromagnetic interference and heat up any nearby copper conductors.

Any part of flux lines where relative permeability equals 1 is called an air gap. Air gaps can be of two types. One that is usually called the magnetic gap is formed by flat iron faces that are narrow. Another usually called fringe gap is formed by curved iron faces with flux lines that extend outwardly perpendicular from one iron section bend around an iron to iron gap and extend perpendicular back into the adjacent iron section. A small portion of flux called fringing flux emanates from one iron face and jumps by way of the fringe gap into the nearest iron face.

Some of the fringe flux lines may penetrate a copper conductor in their path. Such flux lines when changing rapidly create a voltage that induces eddy currents in the copper in accordance with the Lenz law. These eddy currents create so called fringe losses within the conductor. The fringe loss is especially severe at higher frequencies of 1 kHz and above. Modem pulse width modulated power converters produce such flux levels at higher frequencies. The fringe loss increases with the square of the frequency and flux density.

Magnetic gaps are introduced into the inductor by slitting the toroidal core. Some inductors used a single air gap M. DeGraff U.S. Pat. No. 6 492 893 issued 10 Dec. 2002 and R. Chu U.S. Pat. No. 6 762 666 issued 13 Jul. 2004 being examples. High power inductors require large amounts of energy to be stored. When large amounts of energy are stored in a single magnetic gap it is found that significantly more energy dissipation occurs. One approach to reduce eddy loss breaks up a magnetic gap into several small air gaps. This can reduce the amount of energy that is dissipated. Multiple air gapped toroids are proposed by Aldridge et al U.S. Pat. No. 4 199 744 issued 22 Apr. 1980 and R. Charles U.S. Pat. No. 5 165 162 issued 24 Nov. 1992.

Even though multiple air gaps can be used to reduce heat dissipation prior art inductors made no deliberate attempt to prevent fringing flux lines from penetrating the coil windings.

A second approach relies on using Litz wire to self cancel the eddy currents a described in W. T. McLayman U.S. Pat. No. 4 975 672 issued 4 Dec. 1990. The air gap made of two flat faces of iron is also exemplified by W. T. McLayman. Litz wire capable of carrying hundreds of amps is very large. Such large Litz wire is heavy voluminous costly and has poor life.

Bending large Litz diameter wires over sharp bending angles or small bend radius greatly increases bending stress in the insulation coating on the wire. After sustained operation over a long time excessive stress damages the insulation coating. Even in a simple AWG2 magnet wire with diameter of approximately 0.5 in. if bent at 90 degrees the insulation will crack and fail. One objective is to avoid this life degradation cost and weight penalties.

Because the Litz wire s copper fill factor is very low it occupies more space than conventional copper conductors thereby increasing the overall inductor volume. Copper fill factor is defined as the ratio of copper area and the geometrical winding window of the inductor. Larger diameter Litz wires increase the size of the coil. It also greatly increases the volume of the inductor since the wire occupies more space around it. The net result is that the Litz wire based high power inductors tend to be extremely heavy and large.

The present invention reduces the size and weight of the inductor. The fringe losses are reduced by increasing the number of core sections separated by air gaps. The coil windings are placed centrally within the core sections using rectangular conductors wound bare and later insulated to reduce flux leakage and minimize damaging fringe flux. The coil ends are joined by jumpers that conduct electricity between the coils.

The invention relates to high power inductors made of a toroidal magnetic core energized by conductor coil windings which surround the core. The result is a novel high power high frequency toroidal inductor that is cooler produces lower losses lasts longer is compact and light weight. The inductor core is broken into 4 quadrants and uses bare rectangular conductor wires wound around each quadrant. The conductor coils are positioned to minimize the effect of damaging fringe fluxes and leakage fluxes. This results in minimal loss in the inductor. As a result the life of the inductor is increased.

The inductors of interest carry large currents typically above 100 A. The thickness of the conductors to carry such a large current usually ranges from 0.1 to 0.5 in. The width is also of a similar range but it is always much wider than the thickness.

Even though many shape cores are available the core shape of interest is toroidal. The toroidal core is formed either by winding a thin strip of magnetic material continuously like a tape or by using powder iron that is pressed and compacted into toroidal shape.

The low loss inductor of the invention is shown in . It consists of a toroidal core windings and gaps . This inductor can be assembled from a core having 4 quadrants 4 coils and 3 jumpers as well as air gap spacers .

To avoid the difficulties of having large diameter Litz wires or crack prone magnet wire this invention uses conductors made of copper wires. The copper wire is designed to carry several hundred amperes. Such wires are typically rectangular in section. Conductors that carry hundreds of amperes of current are thicker and wider. These wires have two primary axes of bending. It is easy to bend along one axis. An easy bend is a bend made in the plane perpendicular to the longest plane or width of the rectangular cross section. It is more difficult to bend perpendicular to the depth or thickness plane. As shown in the winding is made by bending the conductor perpendicular along both the width or widest dimension and depth or thickness dimension .

As shown in the core has an inner diameter surface and an outer diameter surface . The inner diameter of the toroidal core is chosen to accommodate the required number of copper turns located at the center or midsection or mean radial section C of the quadrant. Cord DE joining the corners of the core at the air gaps and midpoint C enclose one turn of the coil . The inner diameter of the core and width of copper turn are proportioned such that at least one turn of the inner winding is hidden between the straight line inner end joining the corners of the iron section quadrant cord DE and the core. If the conductor parallel to the quadrant inner surface carries less current the thickness of the conductor could be smaller and more than one turn can be hidden between straight line cord DE and core inner surface . This hidden copper turn s placed between the parallel lines or center C and cord DE protects them from the damaging eddy currents as they are farthest from the fringe gaps. The configuration also uses more than one air gap which allows more energy to be stored. An inductor with 4 air gaps will store more magnetic energy than one with 1 or 2 air gaps. In the preferred embodiment the core with 4 air gaps will allow the coils to be protected from damaging fringe fields while increasing the number of turns thereby increasing inductance.

To make one quadrant core a complete closed toroidal iron core is fabricated by winding a tape and impregnating it with epoxy resin or using a powder. This closed core s edges or inner and outer radii radial corners are chamfered to accommodate the bending radius of the coil. The core is then precisely slit into 4 equal parts. Each quadrant makes an approximately 90 degree arc around the center as can be seen in .

It is well known that in a single isolated conductor carrying alternating current the current tends to crowd around the outer periphery of the conductor up to a thickness called skin depth. The conductor skin depth is concentrated near the conductor surface. The circular conductor has the least surface area for a given conductor volume. By increasing the surface area for a given conductor volume or cross sectional area the conductor skin depth is improved. While other shapes can be used the rectangle is preferred as it increases surface area for a given volume of conductor material is easier to work with and in coil form gives the lowest profile for conductor width. This configuration enables the greatest amperage with the most coil positioned within the arc formed between the core segment inner diameter and cord DE. This gives the maximum current flow with the minimum fringe loss. In the preferred embodiment the thickness of the conductor can be chosen to equal twice the skin depth 2 at the dominant operating frequency. The inner end of the rectangular conductor is first bent 90 degrees in the wide plane as shown in and so that it projects out perpendicular in the width plane of the conductor . This coil inner lead is called the tangential lead. It is then bent another 90 degrees in the narrow thickness plane around a core preform. The process is continued to make two or more complete turns . The number of turns depends on the inductance required and conductor material and size. In case of high power inductors this usually varies from 1 to 10 turns. This is in contrast with low power inductors that may have as many as 100 turns as the conductor size required is much smaller.

Insulating paper cut in the form of a strip can be inserted between successive conductor turns to prevent arcing. In this design one terminal the tangential lead projects out of the coil plane while the other outer terminal lead the radial lead is aligned with the coil windings. This bend first and insulate later approach has the advantage that it will eliminate bending stresses within the insulation when it is bent in the width plane. Such stress free insulation will not degrade as fast as one that is subjected to heavy stress and the inductor will last longer. The wound coil is then varnished or epoxied to protect it against environment deterioration. In an alternative embodiment one can bend the coil as shown and epoxy or varnish can be impregnated into the air space between successive turns. This approach reduces the cost of making the inductor.

At low frequencies the current distribution within the conductor is uniform since little eddy currents are created. At high frequencies the currents in an isolated conductor crowd around its outer surface up to its skin depth. Complex flux interaction is produced by the conductor with other conductors in proximity and out an iron core and produce nonuniform current densities in them.

It is believed that the construction operation and advantages of this invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art. It is to be understood that the present disclosure is illustrative only and that changes variations substitutions modifications and equivalents will be readily apparent to one skilled in the art and that such may be made without departing from the spirit of the invention as defined by the following claims.

