---

title: Method and system for signaling in broadcast communication system
abstract: A method and a system for providing signaling in cellular telephone system providing broadcast services to fully integrate broadcast services with the services provided by the cellular telephone systems. The signaling method coordinate interaction between an access network and the subscriber station to allowing the subscriber station to decode the broadcast service, to receive paging messages while receiving the broadcast service, to properly transition between operation states, and other functions known to one of ordinary skill in the art.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07689226&OS=07689226&RS=07689226
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 07689226
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050216
---
The present Application for Patent is a Divisional of patent application Ser. No. 09 933 978 entitled Method and System for Signaling in Broadcast Communication System filed Aug. 20 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 980 820 and assigned to the assignee hereof and hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein.

The present invention relates to broadcast communications otherwise known as point to multipoint in a wireline or a wireless communication system. More particularly the present invention relates to a system and method for signaling in such a broadcast communication system.

Communication systems have been developed to allow transmission of information signals from an origination station to a physically distinct destination station. In transmitting information signal from the origination station over a communication channel the information signal is first converted into a form suitable for efficient transmission over the communication channel. Conversion or modulation of the information signal involves varying a parameter of a carrier wave in accordance with the information signal in such a way that the spectrum of the resulting modulated carrier is confined within the communication channel bandwidth. At the destination station the original information signal is replicated from the modulated carrier wave received over the communication channel. Such a replication is generally achieved by using an inverse of the modulation process employed by the origination station.

Modulation also facilitates multiple access i.e. simultaneous transmission and or reception of several signals over a common communication channel. Multiple access communication systems often include a plurality of subscriber units requiring intermittent service of relatively short duration rather than continuous access to the common communication channel. Several multiple access techniques are known in the art such as time division multiple access TDMA frequency division multiple access FDMA and amplitude modulation multiple access AM . Another type of a multiple access technique is a code division multiple access CDMA spread spectrum system that conforms to the TIA EIA IS 95 Mobile Station Base Station Compatibility Standard for Dual Mode Wide Band Spread Spectrum Cellular System hereinafter referred to as the IS 95 standard. The use of CDMA techniques in a multiple access communication system is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 901 307 entitled SPREAD SPECTRUM MULTIPLE ACCESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEM USING SATELLITE OR TERRESTRIAL REPEATERS and U.S. Pat. No. 5 103 459 entitled SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR GENERATING WAVEFORMS IN A CDMA CELLULAR TELEPHONE SYSTEM both assigned to the assignee of the present invention.

A multiple access communication system may be a wireless or wire line and may carry voice and or data. An example of a communication system carrying both voice and data is a system in accordance with the IS 95 standard which specifies transmitting voice and data over the communication channel. A method for transmitting data in code channel frames of fixed size is described in detail in U.S. Pat. No. 5 504 773 entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR THE FORMATTING OF DATA FOR TRANSMISSION assigned to the assignee of the present invention. In accordance with the IS 95 standard the data or voice is partitioned into code channel frames that are 20 milliseconds wide with data rates as high as 14.4 Kbps. Additional examples of a communication systems carrying both voice and data comprise communication systems conforming to the 3rd Generation Partnership Project 3GPP embodied in a set of documents including Document Nos. 3G TS 25.211 3G TS 25.212 3G TS 25.213 and 3G TS 25.214 the W CDMA standard or TR 45.5 Physical Layer Standard for cdma2000 Spread Spectrum Systems the IS 2000 standard .

In a multiple access wireless communication system communications between users are conducted through one or more base stations. A first user on one wireless subscriber station communicates to a second user on a second wireless subscriber station by transmitting data on a reverse link to a base station. The base station receives the data and can route the data to another base station. The data is transmitted on a forward link of the same base station or the other base station to the second subscriber station. The forward link refers to transmission from a base station to a wireless subscriber station and the reverse link refers to transmission from a wireless subscriber station to a base station. Likewise the communication can be conducted between a first user on a wireless subscriber station and a second user on a landline station. A base station receives the data from the first user on the wireless subscriber station on a reverse link and routes the data through a public switched telephone network PSTN to the second user on a landline station. In many communication systems e.g. IS 95 W CDMA IS 2000 the forward link and the reverse link are allocated separate frequencies.

The above described wireless communication service is an example of a point to point communication service. In contrast broadcast services provide central station to multipoint communication service. The basic model of a broadcast system consists of a broadcast net of users served by one or more central stations which transmit information with a certain contents e.g. news movies sports events and the like to the users. Each broadcast net user s subscriber station monitors a common broadcast forward link signal. Because the central station fixedly determines the content the users are generally not communicating back. Examples of common usage of broadcast services communication systems are TV broadcast radio broadcast and the like. Such communication systems are generally highly specialized purpose build communication systems. With the recent advancements in wireless cellular telephone systems there has been an interest of utilizing the existing infrastructure of the mainly point to point cellular telephone systems for broadcast services. As used herein the term cellular systems encompasses communication systems utilizing both cellular and PCS frequencies. 

Introduction of a common broadcast forward link to a cellular telephone systems requires integration of broadcast services with the services provided by the cellular telephone systems. The subscriber station needs to be able support functions allowing the subscriber station to function in both the broadcast mode and communication mode. There is therefore a need in the art for a method and a system for a signaling in cellular telephone system providing broadcast services allowing the subscriber station to consummate both services.

Embodiments disclosed herein address the above stated needs by providing a method for a subscriber station registration in a broadcast communication system comprising receiving a HSBS channel modulating a first frequency monitoring a timer status for the HSBS channel and if the timer status is expired then performing a broadcast service registration with a sector transmitting the HSBS channel setting status of the timer for the HSBS channel to enabled and start a timer for the HSBS channel. The base station receives the broadcast service registration from the subscriber station at a sector adds a paging identifier to the subscribers station paging set and starting a timer for the paging identifier.

In accordance with another aspect the base station sends a paging message to the subscriber station in accordance with a status of the paging set.

In accordance with another aspect the above stated needs are addressed by providing methods for paging a subscriber station in a broadcast communication system without the need for registration by the subscriber station.

The word exemplary is used herein to mean serving as an example instance or illustration. Any embodiment described herein as exemplary is not necessarily to be construed as preferred or advantageous over other embodiments.

The terms point to point communication is used herein to mean a communication between two subscriber stations over a dedicated communication channel.

The terms group service point to multipoint communication push to talk or dispatch service are used herein to mean a communication wherein a plurality of subscriber stations are receiving communication from typically one subscriber station.

The term packet is used herein to mean a group of bits including data payload and control elements arranged into a specific format. The control elements comprise e.g. a preamble a quality metric and others known to one skilled in the art. Quality metric comprises e.g. a cyclical redundancy check CRC a parity bit and others known to one skilled in the art.

The term access network is used herein to mean a collection of base stations BS and one or more base stations controllers. The access network transports data packets between multiple subscriber stations. The access network may be further connected to additional networks outside the access network such as a corporate intranet or the Internet and may transport data packets between each access terminal and such outside networks.

The term base station is used herein to mean the hardware with which subscriber stations communicate. Cell refers to the hardware or a geographic coverage area depending on the context in which the term is used. A sector is a partition of a cell. Because a sector has the attributes of a cell the teachings described in terms of cells are readily extended to sectors.

The term subscriber station is used herein to mean the hardware with which an access network communicates. A subscriber station may be mobile or stationary. A subscriber station may be any data device that communicates through a wireless channel or through a wired channel for example using fiber optic or coaxial cables. A subscriber station may further be any of a number of types of devices including but not limited to PC card compact flash external or internal modem or wireless or wireline phone. A subscriber station that is in the process of establishing an active traffic channel connection with a base station is said to be in a connection setup state. A subscriber station that has established an active traffic channel connection with a base station is called an active subscriber station and is said to be in a traffic state.

The term physical channel is used herein to mean a communication route over which a signal propagates described in terms of modulation characteristics and coding.

The term logical channel is used herein to mean a communication route within the protocol layers of either the base station or the subscriber station.

The term communication channel link is used herein to mean a physical channel or a logical channel in accordance with the context.

The term reverse channel link is used herein to mean a communication channel link through which the subscriber station sends signals to the base station.

A forward channel link is used herein to mean a communication channel link through which a base station sends signals to a subscriber station.

The term soft hand off is used herein to mean a communication between a subscriber station and two or more sectors wherein each sector belongs to a different cell. The reverse link communication is received by both sectors and the forward link communication is simultaneously carried on the two or more sectors forward links.

The term softer hand off is used herein to mean a communication between a subscriber station and two or more sectors wherein each sector belongs to the same cell. The reverse link communication is received by both sectors and the forward link communication is simultaneously carried on one of the two or more sectors forward links.

As discussed a basic model of a broadcast system comprises a broadcast net of users served by one or more central stations which transmit information with a certain contents e.g. news movies sports events and the like to the users. Each broadcast net user s subscriber station monitors a common broadcast forward link signal. illustrates conceptual block diagram of a communication system capable of performing High Speed Broadcast Service HSBS in accordance with embodiments of the present invention.

The broadcast content originates at a content server CS . The content server may be located within the carrier network not shown or outside Internet IP . The content is delivered in a form of packets to a broadcast packet data serving node BPDSN . The term BPSDN is used because although the BPDSN may be physically co located or be identical to the regular PDSN not shown the BPSDN may be logically different from a regular PDSN. The BPDSN delivers the packets according to the packet s destination to a packet control function PCF . The PCF is a control entity controlling function of base stations for the HSBS as a base station controller is for regular voice and data services. To illustrate the connection of the high level concept of the HSBS with the physical access network shows that the PCF is physically co located or even identical but logically different from a base station controller BSC . One of ordinary skills in the art understands that this is for a pedagogical purposes only. The BSC PCF provides the packets to base stations .

The communication system enables High Speed Broadcast Service HSBS by introducing a forward broadcast shared channel F BSCH capable of high data rates that can be received by a large number of subscriber stations . The term forward broadcast shared channel is used herein to mean a single forward link physical channel that carries broadcast traffic. A single F BSCH can carry one or more HSBS channels multiplexed in a TDM fashion within the single F BSCH. The term HSBS channel is used herein to mean a single logical HSBS broadcast session defined by the session s broadcast content. Each session is defined by a broadcast content that may change with time for example 7 am News 8 am Weather 9 am Movies etc. illustrates the discussed concept of physical and logical channels for the HSBS.

As illustrated in an HSBS is provided on two F BSCHs each of which is transmitted on a separate frequency fx fy. Thus for example in the above mentioned IS 2000 communication system such a physical channel can comprise e.g. a forward supplemental channel F SCH forward broadcast control channel F BCCH forward common control channel F CCCH other common and dedicated channels and the channel s combination. The use of common and dedicated channels for information broadcast is disclosed in a provisional U.S. patent Application Ser. No. 60 279 970 entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR GROUP CALLS USING DEDICATED AND COMMON CHANNELS IN WIRELESS NETWORKS filed Mar. 28 2001 and assigned to the assignee of the present invention. One of ordinary skills in the art understands that other communication systems utilize channels performing similar function therefore the teaching is applicable to other communication systems. The F BSCHs carry the broadcast traffic which may comprise one or more broadcast sessions. The F BSCHs carries one HSBS channel two HSBS channels are multiplexed onto the F BCCH . The content of an HSBS channel is formatted into packets comprising a payload and a header .

One of ordinary skill in the art recognizes that the HSBS broadcast service deployment as illustrated in is for pedagogical purposes only. Therefore in a given sector the HSBS broadcast service can be deployed in several manners in accordance with features supported by an implementation of a particular communication system. The implementation features include e.g. the number of HSBS sessions supported number of frequency assignments number of broadcast physical channels supported and other implementation features known to one skilled in the art. Thus for example more than two frequencies and F BSCHs may be deployed in a sector. Furthermore more than two HSBS channels may be multiplexed onto one F BSCH. Furthermore a single HSBS channel can be multiplexed onto more than one broadcast channel within a sector on different frequencies to serve the subscribers residing in those frequencies.

Because one or more different HSBS channels may be multiplexed onto the same F BSCH physical channel the different HSBS channels must be distinguished from one another. Consequently the base station assigns each packet of a particular HSBS channel a broadcast service reference identifier BSR ID which distinguishes one HSBS channels from another. Based on the value of the BSR ID in the received packet the demultiplexer at the subscriber station distinguishes which packets are to be delivered to the decoder for the monitored HSBS channel. Consequently the BSR ID has over the air significance that is between subscriber station and BS .

As discussed a HSBS channel means a single logical HSBS broadcast session defined by HSBS channel s broadcast content. Therefore although the BSR ID allows the subscriber station to separate physical broadcast transmissions of HSBS channels an identifier for each logical HSBS channel is required so that the subscriber station can map a content of a HSBS channel to the physical broadcast transmissions of HSBS channel i.e. the subscriber station must distinguish e.g. a movie HSBS form a news HSBS. Therefore each HSBS channel has a unique identifier HSBS ID which links the HSBS Content Service that the subscriber station has subscribed to and the corresponding physical broadcast transmissions. Consequently the HSBS ID has end to end significance that is between a subscriber station and a Content Server . The value of HSBS ID is known through external means that is when subscriber station user subscribes to a broadcast content service the subscriber station user needs to obtain the HSBS ID corresponding to that HSBS channel. For example for special sporting events the entire schedule of the games is known beforehand and advertised e.g. in mass media the service provider campaign and the like. Alternatively news is broadcasted on a periodic schedule. Alternatively the external means may comprise e.g. e mail short message system SMS broadcast and other means known to one of ordinary skills in the art. In one embodiment the schedule is provided within the HSBS broadcast sessions.

Finally since the HSBS channels are multiplexed onto a F BSCH physical channel and there are various possibilities for how the HSBS channels could be carried in the F BSCH channels the subscriber station needs to know which HSBS channel HSBS ID BSR ID is carried on which F BSCH FBSCH ID . Such information is specified by a logical to physical mapping. In the described embodiment the logical to physical mapping is completely specified by the set HSBS ID BSR ID FBSCH ID.

Because the base station carries out logical to physical mapping this logical to physical mapping information needs to be signaled over the air to the subscriber stations so that a subscriber station desiring to monitor a given HSBS channel can determine which F BSCH channel it should monitor. Therefore a broadcast physical channel parameters broadcast logical channel parameters and logical to physical mapping need to be signaled to the subscriber station over the air interface.

In one embodiment the broadcast service parameters are signaled in existing overhead messages on channel s provided by a communication system for overhead messages. However because all subscriber stations must monitor the overhead messages even the subscriber stations not subscribed to or not capable of an HSBS receive this message and need to decode at least a header of the message. In one embodiment the header provides information e.g a sequence number that informs the subscriber station whether a contents of a message has changed. If only the content of the message pertaining to the overhead parameters has changed all subscriber station must decode the remainder of the message.

Consequently in another embodiment the broadcast service parameters are signaled in an overhead message specific to broadcast service BSPM . Only subscriber station subscribed interested in the HSBS service need to monitor this message. Because a subscriber station may begin monitoring an HSBS channel at any time the Broadcast Service Parameters Message needs to be continually transmitted by each sector that has configured one or more broadcast channels in any one of the sector s frequencies. In accordance with one embodiment the Broadcast Service Parameters Message is sent on channel s provided by a communication system for overhead messages. In a communication system in accordance with the IS 2000 standard such on channel s provided by a communication system for overhead messages can comprise e.g. a forward paging channel F PCH a forward broadcast control channel F BCCH and other channel s provided by a communication system for overhead messages known to one of ordinary skills in the art. One of ordinary skills in the art understands that other communication systems utilize channels performing similar function therefore the teaching is applicable to other communication systems.

However the subscriber station is able to monitor channel s provided by a communication system for overhead messages only when in an idle state.

Consequently when the subscriber station is monitoring the F BSCH while engaged in another call i.e. in a dedicated mode the subscriber station does not have access to the Broadcast Service Parameters Message. Therefore in one embodiment the broadcast service parameters are signaled to a subscriber station in a dedicated mode via an existing message on one or more dedicated channels. However because this embodiment requires use of a dedicated channel instead of sending the message once on channel s provided by a communication system for overhead messages the message must be sent separately to each subscriber station. Consequently in an alternative embodiment the subscriber station continues to use the parameters received in the Broadcast Service Parameters Message while acknowledging that these parameters may be out of date.

One of ordinary skills in the art recognizes that the Broadcast Service Parameters Message may be utilized for signaling additional broadcast related information. For example the Broadcast Service Parameters Message also includes for each physical channel a list of neighbors that are transmitting identical information such that a subscriber station can perform a handoff. The handoff method and system is described in detail in a co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 933 978 entitled METHOD AND SYSTEM FOR A HANDOFF IN A BROADCAST COMMUNICATION SYSTEM filed Aug. 20 2001. Additionally the Broadcast Service Parameters Message may include information related to Broadcast Service Registration described in detail below. Furthermore the Broadcast Service Parameters Message may include HSBS Schedule Signaling described in detail below.

The subscriber station users need to know the start time of HSBS sessions so that they can monitor an HSBS session. The users may also need to know the duration or end time of the HSBS session. In general signaling of HSBS channel content schedule is beyond the scope of the air interface communication system because as discussed the users subscribed to a HSBS service may know the schedule of the HSBS broadcast sessions. However a user may require the convenience not to rely on an external means and be able to retrieve an HSBS schedule using a subscriber station.

Consequently in one embodiment the base station informs the subscriber station of the start of a HSBS session by signaling message on a paging channel. This could be in the form of a broadcast paging message or broadcast short message system SMS . This message indicates the start time of this HSBS session. All subscriber station monitoring the paging channel receive this message and only subscriber station configured to act to this message inform the subscriber station users. If the subscriber station user elects to monitor the HSBS session the subscriber station tunes to the appropriate frequency to monitor the F BSCH. However the subscriber station may start monitoring the F BSCH without prompting the user if it has been so programmed.

Because the subscriber station user may decide to monitor the HSBS session at a time later than the start time of the session it is not sufficient for the base station to send the message to the subscriber station only once before the start of the session since subscriber station that were not monitoring the paging channel at that time will not have received this message. The subscriber station could not monitor the paging channel for various reasons e.g. being powered off in fade in voice call and other reasons known to one of ordinary skills in the art. Therefore the message needs to be repeated throughout the duration of the HSBS session. The more frequent the message repetition is the lower the average delay for a given subscriber station to join an on going session.

In another embodiment the base station informs the subscribers of the start of a HSBS session by signaling message such as the Broadcast Service Parameter Message on channel s provided by a communication system for overhead messages. The information conveyed is identical to the one sent on a paging channel specifically start time and duration or end time. However because the overhead messages are repeated the information is sent continually. To prevent a subscriber from repeatedly reading the same message with no change in content a sequence number is added into the overhead message. The subscriber station ignores messages containing the same sequence number. Such use of sequence numbers is well known to one of ordinary skills in the art. In the embodiment utilizing the Broadcast Service Parameters Message the sequence number of the Broadcast Service Parameters Message is incremented only when any of it s content changes such as when the session first starts and when it ends.

The end off the HSBS session to the subscribers currently monitoring the F BSCH is indicated by a special end message send on the F BSCH. This requires that multiplex sublayer knows which frames correspond to broadcast data and which ones correspond to signaling data the end message . In one embodiment a value of BSR ID e.g. BSR ID 000 indicates that the packet carries a signaling data. In another embodiment the special message is unnecessary the base station sends NULL frames on the F BSCH. In yet another embodiment the base station turns off the F BSCH. The subscriber station detects that no energy is being transmitted on F BSCH and conclude that the HSBS session is over.

Alternatively each of the above discussed embodiments indicating the start of the session can be used for indicating the end of the session. In one embodiment the content of the message indicating the start of the session includes information on the duration or end of the session. In another embodiment an explicit message can be sent to indicate the end of the HSBS session.

Because a subscriber station engaged in another call may also desire to simultaneously monitor the F BSCH the start of a HSBS sessions must be signaled to the subscriber station in dedicated mode as well. The signaling methods according to discussed embodiments are equally applicable.

A basic requirement for broadcast services is that a subscriber station in a common channel mode i.e. not engaged in another call be able to monitor an HSBS service. Likewise a subscriber station should be able to receive make calls while receiving broadcast service. Therefore while the subscriber station monitors a F BSCH the subscriber station is able to receive page notifications send call originations and perform registrations.

To enable the mode of operation the subscriber station must be able to simultaneously monitor F BSCH and channel s provided for overhead information. Such channels comprise e.g. a forward common control channel F CCCH and forward paging channel F PCH in a communication system in accordance with the IS 2000. One of ordinary skills in the art understands that references to IS 2000 are for pedagogical purposes only and other communication standards provide channels providing similar functionality. Furthermore the subscriber must be able to simultaneously monitor F BSCH and channel s provided for overhead information. Such channels comprise e.g. a forward common control channel F CCCH and forward paging channel F PCH with or without a forward quick paging channel F QPCH in a communication system in accordance with the IS 2000. Additionally the subscriber station must be able to respond to pages perform call originations perform registrations respond to MS directed messages and perform other functions known to one skilled in the art while monitoring F BSCH. Therefore a communication system in accordance with the IS 2000 may utilize e.g. reverse access channel R ACH reverse enhanced access channel R EACH and reverse common control channel R CCCH . The above mentioned channels must be available on the same frequency modulated by the F BSCH.

A possible enhancement to the above introduced call model is the subscriber station ability to simultaneously listen to the HSBS channel and participate in another call such as a voice call . Therefore the F BSCH and the dedicated traffic channels allocated for voice call etc. must be in the same frequency since current models of subscriber station cannot monitor multiple frequencies simultaneously. The subscriber station can monitor the HSBS channel while in either common channel mode or dedicated channel mode. Additionally the subscriber station must be able to simultaneously monitor F BSCH and channels for traffic associated with other calls and or signaling traffic. Such channels comprise e.g. forward fundamental channel F FCH forward dedicated control channel F DCCH a communication system in accordance with the IS 2000. Finally the subscriber station must be able to transmit on one or more channels for traffic associated with other calls and or signaling traffic while monitoring F BSCH. Such channels comprise e.g. reverse fundamental channel R FCH reverse dedicated control channel R DCCH in a communication system in accordance with the IS 2000

When the subscriber station desires to originate another call while monitoring the HSBS channel the subscriber station stop monitoring the HSBS channel or if a simultaneous participation in HSBS and another call is supported proceeds with origination.

When the subscriber station receives a page while monitoring the HSBS channel the subscriber station refuses to accept the incoming call and continues monitoring the HSBS channel. In accordance with one embodiment the subscriber station sends a message to a paging base station indicating that the subscriber station is not interested in incoming calls potentially indicating which service options is the subscriber station not interested in. In accordance with another embodiment the subscriber station sends a Page Response Message with a special service option to indicate that the subscriber station is not interested in this incoming call. Alternatively the subscriber station transitions to the dedicated mode receives the caller identification and decides whether to accept the call or not while continuing to monitor HSBS channel or while temporarily discontinuing the HSBS monitoring

In accordance with another embodiment when the subscriber station receives a page while monitoring the HSBS channel the subscriber station channel accepts the incoming call and stop monitoring the HSBS channel. Alternatively if simultaneous participation in HSBS and another call is supported accepts the incoming call while continuing monitoring the HSBS channel.

In one embodiment a subscriber station not communicating on a traffic channel monitors an HSBS channel in common channel mode even if the subscriber station is capable of monitoring the an HSBS channel from the dedicated channel mode since monitoring the HSBS channel from the dedicated channel mode requires more system resources. Consequently when the subscriber station simultaneously monitors an HSBS channel communicates on a traffic channel and the communication ends the subscriber station releases the dedicated channel and transitions to the common channel mode.

When a base station receives request to communicate with a subscriber station the base station generates a paging message for the subscriber station. The base station then determines which paging channel the subscriber station monitors and transmits the paging message on the paging channel. Because base stations of communication systems may support multiple paging channels per frequency and or multiple frequencies a method of determining both at the base station and the subscriber station which frequency and a paging channel the subscriber station monitors have been developed. A method based on IS 2000 standard is described. One of ordinary skills in the art understands that the choice of the IS 2000 standard is for pedagogical purposes and any method that assures agreement between a base station and a subscriber station can be readily substituted.

Upon a power up a subscriber station enters a system determination substate in which the system upon which to perform an acquisition attempt is selected. In one embodiment after having selected a system for system determination the subscriber station transitions into a pilot acquisition substate in which the subscriber station attempts to demodulate a pilot signal based on the acquisition parameters retrieved in the system determination substate. The subscriber station attempts to acquire a CDMA pilot signal in accordance with the acquisition parameters. When the subscriber station detects a pilot signal with energy above a predetermined threshold value the subscriber station transitions into a Sync channel acquisition substate and attempts acquisition of the Sync channel. Typically the Sync channel as broadcasted by the base stations includes basic system information such as the system identification SID and the network identification NID but most importantly provides timing information to the subscriber station. The subscriber station adjusts the subscriber s station timing in accordance with the Sync channel information and then enters the subscriber station idle state. The subscriber station begins the idle state processing by receiving an overhead channel identified in the Sync channel message and if a base station which the subscriber station acquired supports multiple frequencies both the subscriber station and the base station use a hash function to determine which frequency to use for communication. The subscriber station and base station then use the hash function to determine a paging channel which the subscriber station monitors. In one embodiment the hashing function accepts number of entities to hash e.g. frequencies paging channels and the like and an international subscriber station identifier IMSI and outputs one entity.

The above described method hereinafter referred to as current hashing method works well in point to point communication systems. However the current hashing method cannot be directly applied to broadcast services as explained in reference to . illustrates two HSBS channels multiplexed on a F BSCH channel that is transmitted on a frequency fx and one HSBS channel multiplexed on a F BSCH channel that is transmitted on a frequency fy. There are no HSBS channels on frequency fz. Paging channels and are transmitted on the respective frequencies fx fy and fz. Although only one paging channel per frequency is shown in one of ordinary skills in the art recognizes that this is for pedagogical purposes only because mapping of a subscriber station on a particular paging channel is determined by the hashing function. If a subscriber station is subscribed to all three HSBS channels it can freely change reception from one HSBS channel to another HSBS channel . The term subscribe is used herein to mean that the subscriber station is allowed to receive a particular HSBS channel.

Let us assume without loss of generality that at time t a subscriber station is powered up. Using e.g. the above described hashing method the subscriber station tunes to frequency fz registers with the base station and starts monitoring paging channel . The base station performs identical hashing method to determine that the subscriber station is monitoring paging channel at frequency fz. At time t the subscriber station decides to monitor a HSBS channel . As explained above a subscriber station desiring to receive a HSBS channel must monitor the frequency containing the F BSCH channel modulated by the HSBS channel. Consequently the subscriber station tunes to frequency fx and starts receiving the HSBS channel . Because of limitation at the subscriber station which allows the subscriber station to be tuned only to one frequency the subscriber station monitors the paging channel on frequency fx. Because the subscriber station is required to be able to receive paging messages while receiving a HSBS channel the paging messages to the subscriber station must be sent on a paging channel on frequency fx. However the current hashing method does not account for a scenario in which the subscriber station may change frequencies. Therefore the base station which hashed the subscriber station on paging channel at frequency fz is not aware of the subscriber station re tuning. Consequently a page message sent by the base station on paging channel at frequency fz would fail. Therefore a method and system is needed to appraise a base station at which frequency to page a subscriber station. One of ordinary skills in the art recognizes that once the frequency is determined current paging channel determination methods can be utilized.

Therefore in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention a subscriber station registers with a base station the identity of each HSBS channel the subscriber station has subscribed to and is interested in monitoring. Since each HSBS channel modulates a corresponding F BSCH on a specific frequency the base station knows which set of frequencies the subscriber station can be found on and hence can page the subscriber station successfully. The registration of an HSBS channel is utilized during handoff. The objective of the handoff is to transfer a subscriber station from the HSBS channel transmitted by a first base station to the HSBS channel transmitted by a second base station. However the HSBS channel may be modulating different frequencies at the first and second base station however the HSBS has the same unique identifier HSBS ID since each base station knows the frequency on which a given HSBS ID is transmitted via the logical to physical mapping the base station can successfully page the subscriber. Thus registration of the identity of each HSBS channel aids the handoff. In accordance with another embodiment the subscriber station registers with the base station the frequency modulated by the HSBS channel the subscriber station has subscribed to and is interested in monitoring. The registration is performed periodically in accordance with a status of a timer for a particular HSBS channel.

To allow for such a registration the subscriber station maintains a status of a timer for each HSBS channel HSBS TIMER STATUSs to which the subscriber station has subscribed to and is interested in monitoring. The HSBS channel is identified by a unique identifier HSBS ID . Each timer s HSBS TIMER STATUSs is either Enabled i.e. the timer running or Expired i.e. the timer is not running. The subscriber station further maintains a counter Broadcast Service Registration Timer for each HSBS channel THSBS that the subscriber station is interested in monitoring. The counter is incremented at a pre determined time intervals. When the counter reaches a pre determined value HSBS REG TIMER the subscriber station indicates timer expiration and set HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Expired .

Upon power up a subscriber station initializes the HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Expired for all channels. The subscriber station then tunes to a frequency in accordance with current hashing method and registers with a base station transmitting the frequency. When the subscriber station tunes to a frequency modulated by an HSBS channel identified by HSBS ID i if HSBS TIMER STATUSs i is set to Expired the subscriber station performs a broadcast service registration with the base station for the HSBS channel sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs i to Enabled and starts a counter THSBS I . When the counter THSBS I expires while the subscriber station is still monitoring the HSBS channel i the subscriber station again performs the broadcast service registration with the base station for the HSBS channel i set HSBS TIMER STATUSs i to Enabled and starts the counter THSBS I . When the subscriber station is tuned to a particular frequency either as a result of initial power up registration procedure or as a result of monitoring a HSBS channel i and desires to monitor HSBS channel j on the same frequency then if HSBS TIMER STATUSs j is set to Expired the subscriber station performs a broadcast service registration with the base station for the HSBS channel j set HSBS TIMER STATUSs j to Enabled and starts the counter THSBS j .

Each base station maintains for each subscriber station a paging set PAGE SET . Upon receiving a power up registration from an i th subscriber station the PAGE SETj for the subscriber station is initialized to contain the frequency to which the subscriber station tuned to in accordance with current hashing method i.e. PAGE SETj fpower up. When the base station receives a broadcast service registration from the subscriber station for a HSBS channel identified by HSBS ID i base station adds the HSBS channel identifier HSBS ID to the paging set PAGE SETj fpower up i and starts a counter THSBS I . If the counter THSBS I corresponding to a HSBS channel i for the subscriber station expires the base station removes the HSBS ID i from the paging set. When there is an incoming call for the subscriber station the base station uses the logical to physical mapping to determine the frequency or frequencies corresponding to all HSBS channels having identifiers in the paging set. The base station then sends a paging message to the subscriber station on all these frequencies. Consequently the timer at the subscriber station and the timer at the base station must be synchronized or the timer at the base station must not expire before the timer at the subscriber station expires. If the timer at the base station expired before the timer at the subscriber station expired the base station would remove the HSBS ID i from the paging set while the subscriber station could still be at the HSBS channel.

As discussed the registration is performed periodically when the counter THSBS I reaches a value determined by a value HSBS REG TIMER which is a configurable parameter transmitted to the subscriber station by the base station. The value HSBS REG TIMER is determined as an optimum between the signaling load ensuing from subscriber station broadcast service registration and signaling load ensuing from uncertainty as to at what frequencies the subscriber station needs to be paged. To decrease signaling load the broadcast service registration may be combined with another type of registration e.g. a time based registration distance based registration zone based registration and other types of registration as known to one of ordinary skills in the art. For example in the time based registration the base station configures a subscriber station to register in a pre determined time intervals. If a subscriber station performs a broadcast service registration the subscriber station does not need to perform a time based registration for that period because the base station determines the whereabouts of the subscriber station from the broadcast service registration.

Referring back to the method performed by a subscriber station and a base station in accordance with the above described embodiment of the present invention is illustrated. At time t the subscriber station powers up tunes to frequency fz using a current procedure sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Expired for all HSBS channels and registers. The base station initializes the subscriber station s page set to frequency fz. PAGE SETi fz . The subscript i identifies the subscriber station 

At time t the subscriber station desires to monitor an HSBS channel . HSBS ID 1 . The subscriber station tunes to frequency fx sends a broadcast service registration for HSBS channel sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Enabled and starts a counter THSBS . The base station sets the PAGE SETi 1 fz 

At time t the subscriber station is no more interested in monitoring the HSBS channel but desires to monitor an HSBS channel . The subscriber station sends a broadcast service registration for HSBS channel sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Enabled and starts a counter THSBS . The base station sets the PAGE SETi 2 1 fz.

At time t the subscriber station is no more interested in monitoring the HSBS channel but desires to monitor an HSBS channel . The subscriber station tunes to frequency fy sends a broadcast service registration for HSBS channel sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Enabled and sets a counter THSBS . The base station sets the PAGE SETi 3 2 1 fz.

At time t the counter THSBS expires consequently the subscriber station sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Expired. Because the subscriber station is no more monitoring the HSBS channel therefore the subscriber station need not send a broadcast service registration for HSBS channel consequently the base station removes the HSBS ID 1 from the paging set. Therefore the PAGE SETi fz.

At time t the counter THSBS expires consequently the subscriber station sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Expired. Because the subscriber station is no more monitoring the HSBS channel therefore the subscriber station need not send a broadcast service registration for HSBS channel consequently the base station removes the HSBS ID 2 from the paging set. Therefore the PAGE SETi 3 fz.

At time t the counter THSBS expires consequently the subscriber station sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Expired. Because the subscriber station monitors the HSBS channel the subscriber station sends a broadcast service registration for HSBS channel sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Enabled and restarts the counter THSBS . The base station keeps the PAGE SETi 3 fz

In one embodiment the subscriber station tunes to fz and enters an idle state. There is no change in the PAGE SET 3 fz. In another embodiment the subscriber station remains on a frequency fy.

At time t the counter THSBS expires. In accordance with the embodiment in which the subscriber station tunes to fz and enters an idle state the subscriber station sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Expired. Because the subscriber station is no more monitoring the HSBS channel the subscriber station need not send a broadcast service registration for HSBS channel consequently the base station removes the HSBS ID 3 from the paging set. Therefore PAGE SETi fz. In accordance with the embodiment in which the subscriber station stays at fy and enters an idle state the subscriber station sends a broadcast service registration for HSBS channel sets HSBS TIMER STATUSs to Enabled and restarts the counter THSBS . The base station keeps the PAGE SETi 3 fz.

In alternative embodiments there is no need for a registration. In one embodiment HSBS channels are transmitted on all frequencies of a sector.

Consequently the current hashing method can be utilized. Under certain circumstances the embodiment may be impractical because the resource allocation to deploy the F BSCH on all frequencies may become too burdensome. Furthermore the F BSCH modulated by the HSBS channels is high power channel therefore it acts as an interferer.

Therefore in another embodiment the base station sends a paging message on paging channel of the frequency to which a subscriber station initially tuned in accordance with current hashing method and on paging channel of all the frequencies modulated by HSBS channels. The embodiment trades an easy paging decision utilizing current hashing method and no need to know subscriber station HSBS subscription details against an increased paging load at multiple frequencies and multiple paging channels.

To decrease the paging load in accordance to another embodiment the subscriber stations are divided into two classes. First class comprises the subscriber stations that are not subscribed to or not capable of an HSBS service second class comprises subscriber stations subscribed to an HSBS service. The base station is provided with subscription information of the subscriber station to be paged. The subscription information is provided e.g. from a home location register HLR an HSBS content server or similar entity in the communication system. If no HSBS session is in progress all the subscriber stations tune to frequencies in accordance with current hashing method. The base station thus pages a subscriber station at the appropriate frequency and a paging channel. When an HSBS service begins the subscriber stations belonging into the second class that are interested in an HSBS session tune to an appropriate HSBS channel. The base station pages the subscriber stations belonging to the first class according to current paging methods. The base station knows whether an HSBS session is on or of and knows the subscriber profile of each subscriber station belonging to the second class. Therefore the base station sends a paging message to a subscriber station belonging into the second class on the paging channel on the frequencies to which the subscriber stations initially tuned and on the paging channels on the frequencies modulated by the HSBS channels to which the subscriber station is subscribed to. The embodiment trades low paging load no need to modify current hashing method against the need to know subscriber stations subscription information.

To prevent uneven subscriber station distribution among frequencies due to subscriber stations tuning to a different frequency modulated by a HSBS channel the above described embodiment may be modified by entering only frequencies not modulated by an HSBS to a hash function for the subscriber stations belonging to the first class. Furthermore if an HSBS session is in progress only frequencies modulated by an HSBS may be entered to a hash function for the subscriber stations belonging to the second class. One of ordinary skills in the art recognizes that other combinations of frequencies can be used in accordance with usage pattern of the access network.

Consequently in another embodiment a subscriber station notifies a base station upon beginning or ending monitoring of a HSBS channel. Thus a subscriber station initially tunes to a frequency in accordance with current hashing method. When the subscriber station desires to monitor a HSBS channel the subscriber station sends a Notification Message to the base station indicating the desire to monitor the HSBS channel and tunes to the frequency which the HSBS channel modulates. When the subscriber station is no more interested in the HSBS channel reception the subscriber station sends a Notification Message indicating the desire to cease monitoring the HSBS channel and tunes back to the original frequency. This embodiment assumes a trust relationship between a subscriber station and an access network. If such relationship has not been established upon receiving the Notification Message the base station ascertains that the subscriber station is subscribed to the requested HSBS channel and either grants or denies the request. Only upon receiving the access grant does the subscriber station tunes to the frequency which the HSBS channel modulates. Because the base station is explicitly notified about the current frequency which the subscriber station is tuned to it can successfully page the subscriber station. The embodiment trades an easy paging decision no need to modify the current hashing method no need to know a subscriber station s subscription against a large reverse link signaling load which is potentially bursty e.g. upon beginning and ending of popular programs.

To decrease the reverse link signaling load in another embodiment a subscriber station notifies a base station only if the subscriber station changes frequency. Thus a subscriber station initially tunes to a frequency in accordance with current hashing method. When the subscriber station desires to monitor a HSBS channel which modulates a different frequency than the subscriber station monitors the subscriber station sends a Notification Message to the base station indicating the desire to monitor the HSBS channel and tunes to the frequency which the HSBS channel modulates. When the subscriber station is no more interested in the HSBS channel reception the subscriber station discontinues HSBS monitoring. No action on the part of the subscriber station is necessary because the subscriber station does not change frequency. Because the base station is explicitly notified about the current frequency which the subscriber station is tuned to it can successfully page the subscriber station. As in the above described embodiment a request response may be required if no trust relationship has been established between a subscriber station and an access network. The embodiment trades an easy paging decision no need to modify the current hashing method no need to know a subscriber station s subscription against a large reverse link signaling load which is potentially bursty e.g. upon beginning and ending of popular programs.

One skilled in the art will appreciate that although the flowchart diagrams are drawn in sequential order for comprehension certain steps can be carried out in parallel in an actual implementation.

Those of skill in the art would understand that information and signals may be represented using any of a variety of different technologies and techniques. For example data instructions commands information signals bits symbols and chips that may be referenced throughout the above description may be represented by voltages currents electromagnetic waves magnetic fields or particles optical fields or particles or any combination thereof.

Those of skill would further appreciate that the various illustrative logical blocks modules circuits and algorithm steps described in connection with the embodiments disclosed herein may be implemented as electronic hardware or combinations of hardware and software. To clearly illustrate this interchangeability of hardware and software various illustrative components blocks modules circuits and steps have been described above generally in terms of their functionality. Whether such functionality is implemented as hardware and software depends upon the particular application and design constraints imposed on the overall system. Skilled artisans may implement the described functionality in varying ways for each particular application but such implementation decisions should not be interpreted as causing a departure from the scope of the present invention.

The various illustrative logical blocks modules and circuits described in connection with the embodiments disclosed herein may be implemented or performed with a general purpose processor a digital signal processor DSP an application specific integrated circuit ASIC a field programmable gate array FPGA or other programmable logic device discrete gate or transistor logic discrete hardware components or any combination thereof designed to perform the functions described herein. A general purpose processor may be a microprocessor but in the alternative the processor may be any conventional processor controller microcontroller or state machine. A processor may also be implemented as a combination of computing devices e.g. a combination of a DSP and a microprocessor a plurality of microprocessors one or more microprocessors in conjunction with a DSP core or any other such configuration.

The steps of a method or algorithm described in connection with the embodiments disclosed herein may be embodied directly in hardware in a software module executed by a processor or in a combination of the two. A software module may reside in RAM memory flash memory ROM memory EPROM memory EEPROM memory registers hard disk a removable disk a CD ROM or any other form of storage medium known in the art. An exemplary storage medium is coupled to the processor such the processor can read information from and write information to the storage medium. In the alternative the storage medium may be integral to the processor. The processor and the storage medium may reside in an ASIC. The ASIC may reside in a user terminal. In the alternative the processor and the storage medium may reside as discrete components in a user terminal.

The previous description of the disclosed embodiments is provided to enable any person skilled in the art to make or use the present invention. Various modifications to these embodiments will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art and the generic principles defined herein may be applied to other embodiments without departing from the spirit or scope of the invention. Thus the present invention is not intended to be limited to the embodiments shown herein but is to be accorded the widest scope consistent with the principles and novel features disclosed herein.

A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material which is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

