---

title: Systems and methods for facilitating communications involving hearing-impaired parties
abstract: A method for providing communication services for the hearing-impaired may include receiving a telephone call from a hearing-impaired party or a hearing party. The method may also include forwarding the telephone call to a communication assistant and establishing a communication link, such an Internet protocol link, that links the hearing-impaired party, the communication assistant and the hearing party.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07573985&OS=07573985&RS=07573985
owner: Verizon Business Global LLC
number: 07573985
owner_city: Basking Ridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050621
---
The present invention relates generally to providing communication services and more particularly to providing communication services for hearing impaired parties.

A conventional telecommunication device for the deaf teletype TDD TTY enables people who are hearing impaired or deaf to communicate with other parties via standard telephone lines. For example one way in which a deaf party may communicate with another party is if both parties use a TDD TTY. In this case a calling party may type using a standard keyboard included with the TDD TTY and the called party reads the message on a display associated with his her TDD TTY. The called party may similarly type a message using his her TDD TTY and the calling party may read the message using his her display.

A second way in which a hearing impaired deaf person may communicate via standard telephone lines is referred to as relay. In this case a hearing party wishing to communicate with a hearing impaired party calls a designated telephone number associated with a relay service provider typically an 800 number or a 711 number. The hearing party may then be connected to a communication assistant CA also referred to as a relay operator . The CA may then ask the hearing party for the telephone number of the hearing impaired party with whom he she would like to communicate. The CA may then dial the telephone number of the hearing impaired party who may be using a TDD TTY and establish a connection with the hearing impaired party. The CA may then type messages corresponding to messages voiced by the hearing party for display on the hearing impaired party s TDD TTY. The CA also sends voice messages corresponding to text typed by the hearing impaired party. A similar process may occur when a hearing impaired party wishes to initiate communications with a hearing party.

One problem with the methods described above is that the hearing party and the hearing impaired party must communicate via conventional analog telephone lines. This limits the ability of hearing impaired parties to communicate with others.

According to one aspect of the invention a method for providing communication services is provided. The method includes receiving a request from a hearing impaired party for establishing a communication link to a hearing party. The method also includes identifying a communication assistant and forwarding the request to the communication assistant. The method further includes establishing by the communication assistant a communication link from the hearing impaired party to the hearing party using voice over Internet protocol VoIP .

According to another aspect of the invention a system including a server an automatic call distributor and a first device is provided. The server is configured to receive a request from a hearing impaired party or a hearing party for establishing a communication link between the hearing impaired part and the hearing party. The automatic call distributor is configured to receive the request identify a communication assistant and forward the request to the communication assistant. The first device is associated with the communication assistant and is configured to establish a conference call including the hearing impaired party the hearing party and the communication assistant using an Internet protocol.

In still another aspect of the invention a method is provided that includes receiving a telephone call from a hearing impaired party or a hearing party. The method also includes forwarding the telephone call to a communication assistant and establishing a VoIP communication link linking the hearing impaired party the communication assistant and the hearing party.

Other features and advantages of the present invention will become readily apparent to those skilled in this art from the following detailed description. The embodiments shown and described provide illustration of the best mode contemplated for carrying out the invention. The invention is capable of modifications in various obvious respects all without departing from the invention. Accordingly the drawings are to be regarded as illustrative in nature and not as restrictive.

Network may include one or more packet switched networks such as the Internet an intranet a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN or another type of network that is capable of transmitting data from a source device to a destination device. Network may also include one or more wireless networks and may include a number of transmission towers for receiving wireless signals and forwarding the wireless signals toward the intended destination.

Network may include one or more public switched telephone networks PSTNs or other type of switched network. Network may also include one or more wireless networks.

Network gateway may include one or more devices that allow divergent transport networks to communicate and cooperatively carry traffic. For example network gateway may provide for interoperation at two levels e.g. between different signaling schemes and between different media forms. For example network gateway may adapt between SS7 signaling of network and session initiation protocol SIP or H.323 protocols used by network . Network gateway may also adapt analog or pulse code modulation PCM encoded voice signals to a packetized data stream suitable for transport over network .

User device consistent with the present invention may include any device that is able to transmit and or receive Internet protocol IP based data. For example user device may include a personal computer PC a laptop a personal digital assistant PDA or a web based appliance that is able to transmit and receive IP data via a network such as network . The IP data may include text data video or image data email data voice data etc. In an exemplary implementation user device may transmit voice data via network using voice over Internet protocol VoIP . For example user device may be a SIP based telephone device or another VoIP based telephone device. In either case the telephone device may take the form of a standalone device e.g. a SIP telephone designed and configured to function and appear like a conventional telephone. A SIP based telephone device may also include a software client that may run for example on a conventional PC laptop computer or other computing device. User device may also include any wireless device such as a cellular telephone a PDA or a pager that executes a wireless application protocol WAP or another protocol that enables user device to transmit and receive text and or voice data via network .

Telephone device may include any type of device that is capable of transmitting and receiving voice signals to from a data network such as network . For example telephone device may include any client such as a computer device a web based appliance etc. that is configured to provide telephone functions. Telephone device may for example be a SIP based telephone device or another VoIP based telephone device. In either case the telephone device may take the form of a standalone device e.g. a SIP telephone designed and configured to function and appear like a conventional telephone.

Telephone device may include any conventional telephone such as those used by a hearing party that interfaces with the PSTN to place and receive telephone calls. Telephone device may be a standard telephone a cordless telephone a cellular telephone or any other type of conventional telephone. Telephone device may also include a conventional plain old telephone system POTS phone with a text screen to display text messages

Server may include any server computing device that is able to connect to network and transmit and receive data via network . Server may include a firewall not shown that provides security related services for server . Server may also include a gateway not shown that supports persistent full duplex transmission control protocol TCP Internet Protocol IP connections between server and other devices in system such as user device ACD and CA . For example the gateway may include one or more call processors that enable a client application programming interface API to maintain a persistent socket connection between a client application executed by user device and server and or CA . Server as described in more detail below enables a hearing impaired user to establish communications with a CA to facilitate communications with a desired party.

ACD may include any automatic call distributor that receives telephone calls forwarded by server such as telephone calls received from a number of user devices e.g. user device . ACD may then forward the call to an appropriate destination such as a CA e.g. CA . ACD may interface with any number of different types of CA systems consoles.

CA may represent any conventional CA workstation computer and operator used to facilitate communications between a hearing impaired party and a hearing party. CA may include a workstation or computer such as a personal computer or laptop. CA consistent with the present invention may also include any device capable of performing IP based messaging such as VoIP to transmit voice and or text via network . CA may be used in any telerelay services TRS environment such as a voice carry over VCO environment a hearing carry over HCO environment a speech to speech STS environment etc. CA consistent with the present invention may be coupled to networks and to facilitate communications with both hearing impaired parties and hearing parties.

In an exemplary implementation consistent with the invention CA may include a voice recognizer that performs voice or speech recognition. The voice recognizer may include software and or hardware that is able to automatically convert received voice data into text. The operator associated with CA may merely edit the output of the voice recognizer in situations where the voice recognizer does not accurately generate the text output. For example if the operator at CA notices that the output of the voice recognition process does not accurately reflect what was voiced CA may retype all or a portion of the text to reflect what was actually voiced before the text is transmitted to the particular terminating device where the text will be displayed.

CA may also include a high speed text input device such as a stenographic device a communication access real time translation CART device etc. These high speed text input devices may enable an operator at CA to keep up with a conversation between a hearing party and a hearing impaired party.

CA may also include any conventional telephone not shown such as one used by a hearing party that interfaces with the PSTN to place and receive telephone calls. For example the telephone device may be a standard telephone a cordless telephone a cellular telephone or any other type of conventional telephone. The telephone device may also include any type of device that is capable of transmitting and receiving voice signals to from a data network. For example the telephone device may include any client such as a computer device a web based appliance etc. that is configured to provide telephone functions. The telephone device may for example be a SIP based telephone device. In this case the SIP based telephone device may take the form of a standalone device e.g. a SIP telephone designed and configured to function and appear like a conventional telephone. A SIP based telephone device may also include a software client that may run for example on a conventional PC laptop computer or other computing device.

In an exemplary implementation consistent with the invention server ACD and CA enable a hearing impaired party to communicate with a hearing party via VoIP. Server and CA are illustrated in as being connected via ACD and network . In alternative implementations server ACD and CA may be connected directly to each other connected via a LAN connected via a private network etc. In still other alternative implementations the functions performed by server and ACD described in more detail below may be performed by a single device platform. In still further alternative implementations the functions performed by server ACD and CA may be performed by a single device platform.

Processor may include any type of conventional processor or microprocessor that interprets and executes instructions. Memory may include a random access memory RAM or another dynamic storage device that stores information and instructions for execution by processor . Memory may also be used to store temporary variables or other intermediate information during execution of instructions by processor .

ROM may include a conventional ROM device and or another static storage device that stores static information and instructions for processor . Storage device may include a magnetic disk or optical disk and its corresponding drive and or some other type of magnetic or optical recording medium and its corresponding drive for storing information and instructions.

Input device may include one or more conventional mechanisms that permit an operator to input information to server CA such as a keyboard a mouse a pen voice recognition and or biometric mechanisms etc. Output device may include one or more conventional mechanisms that output information to the operator including a display a printer one or more speakers etc. Communication interface may include any transceiver like mechanism that enables server CA to communicate with other devices and or systems. For example communication interface may include a modem or an Ethernet interface to a LAN. Alternatively communication interface may include other mechanisms for communicating via a network.

Server consistent with the present invention provides a platform through which user device may establish communications with CA . CA consistent with the present invention provides a platform through which a hearing impaired party at user device may communicate with a party at telephone device or telephone device . According to an exemplary implementation server CA may perform various processes in response to processor executing sequences of instructions contained in memory . Such instructions may be read into memory from another computer readable medium such as storage device or from a separate device via communication interface . It should be understood that a computer readable medium may include one or more memory devices or carrier waves. Execution of the sequences of instructions contained in memory causes processor to perform the acts that will be described hereafter. In alternative embodiments hard wired circuitry may be used in place of or in combination with software instructions to implement the present invention. Thus the present invention is not limited to any specific combination of hardware circuitry and software.

Billing database may store information associated with calls made to from user device . For example billing database may store charges associated with long distance calls made by a party at user device .

ANI database may store names and other information corresponding to telephone numbers associated with user device and telephone devices and . For example ANI database may store a telephone number associated with user device and a name and other information associated with the party to whom the telephone number has been assigned. Such information may facilitate assigning a CA to service a call from user device and also facilitate communications involving a hearing impaired party at user device . For example the ANI database may indicate that the party at user device speaks Spanish. ACD may use this information to identify an appropriate CA to handle calls from user device . For example server may identify a telephone number associated with a call from user device using an ANI process. Server may forward the identified telephone number to ACD which may then access ANI database to identify any particular requirements associated with user device .

Customer profile database may include information associated with a hearing impaired party at user device . In an exemplary implementation customer profile database may include information identifying one or more methods by which the hearing impaired party at user device would like to communicate.

For example a number of different methods or services associated with communications involving hearing impaired parties may be available. These services may include for example a number of methods of communicating via the Internet referred to herein as Internet protocol IP relay. IP relay may allow a hearing impaired party to receive text and or voice messages via any computer device PDA wireless device etc. IP relay may include a number of individual types of communications such as VoIP video relay service VRS short message service SMS instant messaging email etc. Other types of services that may be available include paging TDD TTY telephone with text display etc. These services will be described briefly below. It should be understood that additional methods services may also be used to facilitate communications involving hearing impaired parties such as other Internet related communication methods. Server may provide a list of methods services available for selection by hearing impaired parties via a user interface provided to hearing impaired parties. Alternatively an operator associated with server may receive selections from hearing impaired parties over the telephone. For example a hearing impaired party or a party affiliated with a hearing impaired party may contact an operator associated with server and may provide the preferred methods services by which the hearing impaired party wishes to communicate. The preferred methods service information may be communicated to the operator via telephone email or any other convenient method. The operator may then enter this information into server e.g. customer profile database .

IP relay as discussed above may include a VoIP service. VoIP is a service used in a VCO environment in which the hearing impaired party s voice is of sufficient clarity to be understood by others. In a VCO environment therefore the hearing impaired party s voice messages may be transmitted directly to the hearing party without re translation by a CA. In the VoIP service the hearing impaired party s voice may be transmitted to the terminating party using VoIP as described in more detail below.

VRS is a service that allows a hearing impaired party to communicate with other parties using sign language. For example a hearing impaired party and a CA may be coupled via a high speed Internet link that allows each party having a camera to transmit video images over the high speed link. The hearing impaired party may then send sign language images to a video interpreter i.e. the operator at CA . The operator at CA may receive the video images and voice a message to the hearing party corresponding to the received sign language images. The operator at CA may also translate the hearing party s voice messages to sign language and transmit the sign language images to the hearing impaired party via the video link. In VRS the hearing impaired party at user device and the operator at CA may communicate via for example H.323 SIP or another protocol.

In an alternative implementation associated with VRS if the hearing impaired party at user device has an adequate speaking voice but is unable to transmit images to CA VRS may operate in conjunction with VoIP. In this case the hearing impaired party s voice is transmitted to the terminating party without retranslation by the operator at CA . The operator at CA however receives voice input from the hearing party and transmits sign language images corresponding to the voice input for transmission via the video link to the hearing impaired party at user device . In this case since video images are not transmitted from user device to CA an Internet web based streaming video protocol may be used to display the video as opposed to using for example an H.323 or SIP protocol. This enables CA to communicate via video with a large number of user devices that do not support H.323 or SIP protocols.

In another implementation associated with VRS avatars or animated figures may be used to provide sign language images to the hearing impaired party. In this case a received data stream e.g. audio may be converted into a text stream and input into an avatar signing device program that converts the text into avatars e.g. animated images that display sign language images corresponding to the received data stream. Alternatively the audio stream may be input directly into the avatar signing device program. In either case the output of the avatar signing device program is images performing sign language where the sign language images represent the same information as that which would result if a live signing interpreter was used. Advantageously the avatar signing device program may eliminate the need for an operator capable of signing. In addition avatars require less bandwidth than full live video and may also be useful when the hearing impaired party s user device e.g. user device is unable to view live video.

SMS is a service that allows a hearing impaired party to receive and send short text messages via a wireless device such as a cellular telephone or PDA. Using SMS the operator at CA may transmit SMS messages that correspond to voice messages from a hearing party for display on the hearing impaired party s wireless device. The hearing impaired party may also transmit SMS messages to the operator at CA who relays voice messages corresponding to the SMS messages. Alternatively the hearing impaired party may voice messages which may be transmitted to the terminating party.

Instant messaging is a service that utilizes conventional instant messaging software such as AOL Instant Messenger AIM Microsoft Messenger etc. to transmit the text messages. One or more bots not shown in may be located in system and may be used to facilitate communication between the hearing impaired party at user device and CA via instant messages IMs . For example user device may connect to a bot via network . The bot may receive communications from a number of user devices such as user device wishing to communicate with a CA via IMs. The bot may forward these requests via network to an appropriate CA such as CA . The bot may for example be implemented in server or elsewhere in system that is accessible to network . The operator at CA may then receive IMs from the hearing impaired party and voice the corresponding message to the hearing party. The operator at CA may also receive voice messages from a hearing party and type corresponding IMs for transmission to the hearing impaired party.

Paging is a service that allows a hearing impaired party to receive and send text messages via a pager device. Using paging the operator at CA may transmit messages that correspond to voice messages from a hearing party for display on the hearing impaired party s pager. The hearing impaired party may also transmit messages via the pager to the operator at CA who relays voice messages corresponding to the pager messages.

TTY TDD is a service that allows a hearing impaired party to receive and send text messages via a conventional TTY TDD.

Telephone with text display is a service that allows the hearing impaired party to receive phone calls via a conventional telephone with a text display. The telephone may be used for situations such as VCO where the hearing impaired party can speak but is unable to hear. In this case the operator at CA may type text messages corresponding to received voice messages for display on the text display associated with the hearing impaired party s telephone. The hearing impaired party may read the text message and voice a reply for transmission to the hearing party without retranslation by the operator at CA . In this service the telephone used by the hearing impaired party may be a POTS telephone device a VoIP based telephone or another type of conventional telephone.

For example in customer profile database illustrated in preferences order field may store a number of sub fields labeled through . In the example illustrated in fields through in the first entry in customer profile database store VoIP VRS IM SMS and TTY respectively. This indicates that the hearing impaired party at telephone number 571 123 4567 would most like to communicate via VoIP. If VoIP is unavailable for some reason the party at telephone number 571 432 0802 would like to communicate via VRS followed by IM SMS and TTY in that order. Therefore the order associated with fields through may represent the most preferred communication method to the least preferred communication method for the hearing impaired party.

Other field may store additional information such as the name associated with the hearing impaired party associated with user device an IM screen name associated with the hearing impaired party etc. For example other field in the first entry in stores the name Bill Smith and the screen name BSMITH.

Server ACD and or CA uses the information in database when attempting to establish communications with the hearing impaired party as described in more detail below.

Referring back to fraud and validation database may store telephone numbers associated with fraudulent users. Fraud and validation database may also store validation information that may be used to verify that the identity of the party at user device .

Operator data database may store information associated with various CAs such as CA . For example operator data database may store data associated with how many callers each particular operator has assisted the length of each call etc.

Databases may be used to facilitate communications between hearing impaired parties and hearing parties. Databases may also be used to generate reports to enable the service provider associated with system to obtain data associated with the use of system .

Assume that the hearing impaired party at user device establishes communications with server and that user device is able to execute IP based messaging. For example assume that user device is a SIP based telephone device or another device that is able to transmit and receive data using VoIP.

Server receives the call and determines that the call is from a SIP based telephone device. For example server may determine that user device is a SIP based telephone device based on the manner in which the actual call was received e.g. received via an IP based switch in network and or the protocol associated with the received call. Server may forward the call to ACD act .

ACD may access ANI database and or customer profile database to identify any particular requirements associated with the caller at user device . For example one or both of ANI database and customer profile database may identify language requirements associated with the hearing impaired party at user device . ACD may use this information to identify an appropriate CA to assist the caller.

ACD may also access customer profile database to identify the preferred method by which the hearing impaired party also referred to as the calling party in this example wishes to communicate act . For example assume that the calling party has the telephone number 571 123 4567 i.e. entry in customer information database in . The telephone number may be identified for example using ANI techniques. ACD may then access customer profile database and identify that the calling party at user device would like to communicate via VoIP i.e. field in corresponding to telephone number 571 123 4567 . ACD may then use this preference information to route the call to an appropriate CA.

For example ACD may identify a particular CA that is able to communicate with the calling party using the preferred communication method act . For example ACD may search a table containing a list of CAs and their respective statuses. The status of each CA may indicate whether that particular CA is currently handling a call e.g. involved in a conversation between a hearing impaired party and a hearing party is off line not available or is available to help a caller. The table may also include information indicating the particular types of calls that the CA can handle e.g. VoIP calls VRS calls IM calls TDD TTY calls etc. . The table may further include information regarding particular skills of the respective operators at each CA workstation such as whether the operator speaks a foreign language e.g. Spanish French etc. . The table may be stored for example in ACD or in another device accessible by ACD . In the above example in which the calling party wishes to communicate via VoIP ACD identifies a CA that includes a workstation platform capable of communicating via VoIP e.g. a CA executing a VoIP client program .

Assume that CA is executing a VoIP client program and that ACD identifies CA as the appropriate CA to handle the call from the calling party at user device . ACD may then route the call to CA act .

The operator at CA or an automated voice response unit at CA may request that the hearing impaired party at user device identify a telephone number to which he she would like to be connected. The hearing impaired party may voice the terminating number or enter the terminating telephone number via a text input device. In this example since the hearing impaired party has selected VoIP as the preferred communication method this means that the hearing impaired party has adequate clarity in his her speaking voice to be understood. Therefore in this case assume that the hearing impaired party voices the terminating telephone number. The voiced terminating number may be transmitted to CA over network using VoIP. The operator at CA may receive the terminating number and place the telephone call to the desired terminating telephone number.

Assume that the terminating telephone number is associated with telephone device and that telephone device is a SIP based telephone. Further assume that a hearing party at telephone device answers the call and a communications link between user device CA and telephone device is established act . The communications link may be a conference call bridge in which all three parties i.e. the hearing impaired party at user device CA and the hearing party at telephone device are linked in a full duplex mode which allows both voice and text to be simultaneously transmitted between the parties. The communication link may then be used to facilitate the conversation between the hearing impaired party at user device and the hearing party at telephone device .

For example once the connection is established the hearing party at telephone device may answer the call from the hearing impaired party. The hearing impaired party at user device may voice a message such as Hi Bill this is Jim how are you As discussed previously the hearing impaired party s voice transmitted via user device may be of a sufficient clarity to allow the hearing impaired party to verbally communicate to a hearing party without the assistance of CA . In an exemplary implementation the voice data transmitted by the hearing impaired party at user device may be transmitted to telephone device as VoIP data. In other words the voice data may be transmitted end to end originating party at user device to terminating party at telephone device as VoIP data without requiring any conversion to analog data at either ACD or CA . This is in contrast to conventional systems in which an ACD receives analog voice data which is then forwarded to a CA and or a terminating party in analog form. In this manner an end to end IP based conversation may proceed between the parties at user device and telephone device .

The hearing party at telephone device may then voice his response. CA receives the response and types text corresponding to the voice response and transmits the text to user device via network . The hearing impaired party at user device may then read the text on a display associated with user device . In this manner CA may facilitate a conversation between the hearing party and the hearing impaired party using a full duplex end to end IP e.g. VoIP system. The conversation between the hearing party at telephone device and the hearing impaired party at user device may then proceed in this manner with CA acting to convert voice messages received from telephone device into text messages for transmission over network to user device .

In the event that the connection to the called party at user device is not able to be established e.g. the called party at telephone device was not able to receive the call or the VoIP software at telephone device was not activated or functioning properly CA may attempt to establish a link via the next preferred method of communicating. That is CA may read the information in field to identify the next preferred method of communicating VRS in the example in .

In this case CA may attempt to establish a link to the terminating party using VRS. If CA is unable to perform VRS services ACD may forward the call to another CA capable of handling VRS calls.

If the hearing party does not respond to the second preferred method CA or another CA may try the third preferred method by reading the information stored in field and so on until a connection is established. If CA is unable to establish a connection via any of the methods stored in database CA may inform the hearing impaired party at user device that the called party is not available. In some implementations CA may prompt the hearing impaired party to leave a message for the hearing party and may save the message for retrieval by the hearing party. In this case an indicator may be provided to the hearing party at telephone device that a message has been saved.

A similar process may occur when a hearing party wishes to establish communications with a hearing impaired party. For example a hearing party may contact server to establish communications with the hearing impaired party at user device . ACD may identify an appropriate CA and forward the connection from the hearing party to the CA. The CA may then retrieve the information stored in database to identify the preferred communication method and attempt to establish a connection with user device . The hearing impaired party via user device and the hearing party at telephone device may then communicate via for example VoIP streaming text messages video images IMs etc. with CA acting as the conduit for the conversation between the hearing party at telephone device and the hearing impaired party at user device .

The connection between user device CA and telephone device as described above may be a persistent full duplex link. As described herein the term persistent full duplex refers to a communication link that is always connected and allows both parties to simultaneously transmit information. Such links do not require either the hearing impaired party or the party at the opposite end e.g. an operator at CA to press a send or receive button. Further such full duplex links allow each party to view messages in a streaming manner as the messages are being typed in real time or near real time without waiting for the sending party to complete the message and press send . This helps prevent the conversation between the hearing impaired party at user device and the operator at CA from getting out of synchronization when communicating with each other. The full duplex link may be implemented using for example Java C C or another programming language.

Systems and methods described herein facilitate communications between hearing parties and hearing impaired parties by allowing a hearing impaired party to communicate with a hearing party using IP based relay methods such as VoIP or other IP based relay methods. Systems and methods described herein also provide increased flexibility with respect to allowing hearing impaired parties to communicate with other parties.

In this disclosure there is shown and described preferred embodiments of the invention but as aforementioned it is to be understood that the invention is capable of use in various other combinations and environments and is capable of changes or modifications within the scope of the inventive concept as expressed herein.

For example the implementations described above focus on establishing communications between user device and telephone device utilizing VoIP. In other implementations user device may communicate with a conventional PSTN telephone device e.g. telephone device . In this case data may be transmitted via IP e.g. VoIP over a portion of the path from user device to telephone device. For example VoIP data from user device may be transmitted via network and converted into analog form by for example network gateway for transmission to an analog telephone device such as telephone device via network .

It should also be understood that text streaming video images or other data may be transmitted in system using an Internet or Internet based protocol. In addition switch control data may be transmitted to from for example server ACD and or CA using an IP or IP based protocol.

Further voice recognition software may be used in one or more of the methods described above to automatically generate text messages based on the received voice messages and automatically send the text messages to the hearing impaired party via a text messaging program. Further text messages received by a CA in some implementations consistent with the invention may be automatically translated into voice messages using text to voice software. This may eliminate the need for a human operator at CA workstations.

Lastly a series of acts has been described with respect to the order of the acts may be varied in other implementations consistent with the present invention. Moreover non dependent acts may be performed in parallel.

No element act or instruction used in the description of the present application should be construed as critical or essential to the invention unless explicitly described as such. Also as used herein the article a is intended to include one or more items. Where only one item is intended the term one or similar language is used.

