---

title: Method and apparatus for optimizing operation of a power generating plant using artificial intelligence techniques
abstract: A method and apparatus for optimizing the operation of a power generating plant using artificial intelligence techniques. One or more decisions D are determined for at least one consecutive time increment, where at least one of the decisions D is associated with a discrete variable for the operation of a power plant device in the power generating plant. In an illustrated embodiment, the power plant device is a soot cleaning device associated with a boiler.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07584024&OS=07584024&RS=07584024
owner: Pegasus Technologies, Inc.
number: 07584024
owner_city: Mentor
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050208
---
This invention was made with Government support under Contract No. DE FC26 02NT41425 awarded by the U.S. Department of Energy. The Government has certain rights in the invention including a paid up license and the right in limited circumstances to require the patent owner to license others on reasonable terms.

The present invention relates generally to the operation of a power generating plant and more particularly to a method and apparatus for optimizing the operation of a power generating plant using artificial intelligence techniques.

In a conventional fossil fuel fired e.g. coal fired power generating unit a fossil fuel air mixture is ignited in a boiler. Large volumes of water are pumped through tubes inside the boiler and the intense heat from the burning fuel turns the water in the boiler tubes into high pressure steam. The high pressure steam from the boiler passes into a turbine comprised of a plurality of turbine blades. Once the steam hits the turbine blades it causes the turbine to spin rapidly. The spinning turbine causes a shaft to turn inside a generator creating an electric potential. It should be understood that as used herein the terms power plant and plant refer to a group comprised of one or more power generating units. Each power generating unit includes systems for generation of electrical power.

Boiler combustion or other characteristics of a fossil fuel fired power generating unit are influenced by dynamically varying plant parameters including but not limited to operating conditions boiler configuration slag soot deposits load profile fuel quality and ambient conditions. Changes to the business and regulatory environments has increased the importance of dynamic factors such as fuel variations performance criteria emissions control operating flexibility and market driven objectives e.g. fuel prices cost of emissions credits cost of electricity etc. .

In most cases efficient combustion and soot cleaning are treated as separate operational issues typically having separate control systems that may be evaluated and adjusted on a periodic basis under controlled settings. The high interrelationship between efficient combustion and soot cleaning demands an optimal combination of dynamically varying plant parameters and cleanliness strategies to achieve the most benefits. The techniques are best to be adaptive to accommodate volatile operating conditions and fuel variations and must be automated to provide both tangible benefits around the clock and to minimize burdening power plant operators.

One of the effects of burning fossil fuels in boilers is the buildup of soot and slag on the heat transfer surfaces within the boiler. Soot and slag buildup causes a redistribution reduction of the heat transferred and hence heat absorbed across various sections of the boiler. In addition it affects furnace gas flows that for example may cause metal temperature hot spots imbalances in reheat or superheat sections or possible tube erosion. This condition if left uncontrolled often leads to a heat rate penalty increased NOx emissions and reduced tube metal life. Adverse heat rate impacts arise from numerous factors including but not limited to 1 incomplete combustion or related effect 2 unbalanced steam generation 3 excessive use of desuperheater sprays 4 high exit gas temperatures 5 forced deslagging events 6 increased gas flow losses as well as 7 excessive use of soot cleaning energy. It is well documented that thermal NOx generation is largely a function of temperatures within and around the combustion zone. As the boiler sections become excessively slagged heat transfer ability is impaired which leads to higher temperatures and higher NOx levels.

As used herein heat rate refers to the number of units of total thermal input i.e. fuel heat input required to generate a specific amount of electrical energy i.e. electrical power output . Heat rate provides a measure of thermal efficiency and is typically expressed in units of Btu kWh in North America.

Incorrect accumulation of soot i.e. fouling of the boiler leads to poor efficiencies due to the fact that heat that could normally be transferred to the working transfer medium remains in the flue gas stream and exits to the environment without beneficial use or transfers its energy in a less desired less efficient portion of the power generating unit. This loss in efficiency translates to higher consumption of fuel for equivalent levels of electricity generation which in turn may produce more gaseous particulate and other emissions. Another less obvious problem owing to fouling is the intensity of peak temperatures within and around a combustion zone. Total NOx generation is often a function of fuel bound prompt and thermal NOx. The levels of oxygen predominately influence fuel bound NOx which may comprise 20 40 of the total NOx generated. Thermal NOx which may comprise approximately 20 50 of the total NOx is a function of temperature. As the fouling of the boiler increases and the rate of heat transfer decreases peak temperature increases and so does the thermal NOx production.

Due to the composition of the fossil fuel particulate matter PM is also a by product of fuel combustion. Modern day boilers may be fitted with electrostatic precipitators ESP to aid in the collection of particulate matter. Although extremely efficient these devices are sensitive to rapid changes in inlet mass concentration as well as total mass loading. Without extreme care and due diligence excursions or excessive soot can overload an ESP resulting in the release of high levels of PM. Furthermore the ESP efficiency can be adversely affected by an increase in gas temperature at the point of particulate collection.

Fossil fuel fired power generating units employ soot cleaning devices including but not limited to sootblowers sonic devices water lances and water cannons or hydro jets. These soot cleaning devices use steam water or air to dislodge slag and clean surfaces within a boiler. The number of soot cleaning devices on a given power generating unit can range from several to over a hundred. Random manual manual sequential and time based sequencing of soot cleaning devices have been the traditional methods employed to improve cleanliness within boilers. These soot cleaning devices are generally automated and are initiated by a master control device. In most cases the soot cleaning devices are activated based on predetermined criteria established protocols sequential methods time based approaches operator judgment or combinations thereof. These methods result in indiscriminate cleaning of the entire boiler or sections thereof regardless of whether sections are already clean. The time based methods are now slowly being replaced by criteria based methods such as cleaning the boiler in accordance with maintaining certain cleanliness levels.

Traditional methods of soot cleaning even when they are effective in assuring that a boiler is clean fail to optimize the heat transfer rates therein so as to maximize its operation relative to emissions and power generating unit performance. Traditional methods may also lead to accelerated tube failure through erosion blowing on clean surfaces or metal fatigue creating large temperature differentials when a large layer of soot has built up and is cleaned .

It may appear that the goals or objectives of soot cleaning are simple and easy to ascertain i.e. maintain the boiler heat transfer surfaces in a clean state so as to maximize heat transfer from the combustion gas side to the steam water side of the boiler. However the effects of boiler soot cleaning are complex and interrelated with combustion and or power generating unit characteristics. There are multiple trade offs between achieving a cleaner surface and the cost of operating a soot cleaning device. Furthermore cleaning the waterwalls in the lower furnace has the desirable effect of improving heat transfer in the steam generation circuits leading to increased steam production. It also results in a reduced Furnace Exit Gas Temperature FEGT and reduced heat transfer in the convection pass and possible reductions in spray flows. Thus main steam and reheat steam temperatures are reduced with an associated cost penalty manifested as an increase in unit heat rate. Trade offs occur as furnace walls can become too clean and result in non optimal steam temperature as a result of excessive heating in the furnace area and lead to either an effect of excessive steam attemperation spray or conversely insufficient temperatures in one or another steam paths. Both affects can result from over cleaning or under cleaning of a furnace area.

Additionally trade offs must be considered when cleaning the convective pass of the boiler. Under some operating conditions convective pass cleaning may necessitate excessive desuperheating spray in order to maintain superheat or reheat steam temperatures within operational limits. This directly results in an increase in unit heat rate. Hence soot cleaning should be considered within the wider context of overall optimization of power generating units including the distribution of unit heat transfer as well as combustion or other system optimization including affects such as heat rate NOx CO PM metal fatigue erosion keeping the power generating unit in control range e.g. spray flows or burner tilts etc.

Operators of power plants are challenged with a number of non linear and conflicting objectives some of which are discussed above while ensuring that power generating units are stable and capable of meeting system dispatch requirements. Simultaneously optimizing the objectives of NOx PM heat rate opacity or other requirements is difficult and unrealistic for a control room operator to do manually even more so when that operator is also required to maintain control of the balance of the power generating unit s equipment. Owing to business demands and regulatory issues present day boilers are subject to volatile changes in operation and fuel types or blends.

In recent years the industry has been introduced to a number of Intelligent Rule Based systems that derive their knowledge base from operator experiences static design data general thermal principles and periodic testing. Rule based systems are only as good as the rules that drive them and established rules alone cannot accommodate the diverse set of operating conditions that may be encountered on a daily basis. Furthermore time or rule based systems alone are not the best answer due to the complexity of the individual components combinations thereof and the desire to satisfy multiple objectives in a dynamic real time environment. While the rule based systems are an improvement over conventional hard coded techniques these techniques do not deal with some of the dynamic and transitional operational characteristics of present day boilers.

Examples of some current Intelligent Rule Based systems for soot cleaning will now be briefly described. Advise IT Sootblowing Advisor module from ABB Inc. calculates sectional surface cleanliness values in real time as well as the temperature of gas entering each section. The thermal principles based model is configured tuned to unit specific boiler data. The results obtained from this module support power plant operators and engineers in optimizing current power plant sootblowing strategy. EtaPRO software package from General Physics provides calculated cleanliness data i.e. cleanliness parameters for different zones in a boiler. The use of such cleanliness data may be site and application specific. A water cannon system from Clyde Bergemann provides calculated heat flux value for each zone mapped by the system. The use of such calculated heat flux data may be site and application specific.

The present invention provides a method and apparatus for optimizing the operation of a power generating plant using artificial intelligence techniques that overcome these and other deficiencies of the prior art.

In accordance with the present invention there is provided a method for optimizing the operation of a power generating plant having a plurality of power plant devices the method comprising generating a model that models operation of the power generating plant said model receiving a plurality of input parameters associated with operation of the power generating plant and generating one or more output parameters in response to said plurality of input parameters wherein each said output parameter is associated with a goal for the power generating plant determining for one or more consecutive time increments one or more decisions D that realize a desired goal for the power generating plant wherein at least one of said decisions D is associated with at least one discrete variable for operation of a power plant device based upon said model and operating the power generating plant in accordance with at least one of the decisions D.

In accordance with another aspect of the present invention there is provided a method for operating a power generating plant including a plurality of power plant devices the method comprising providing a model of the operation of the power generating plant determining at least one decision D that realizes a desired goal for the power generating plant for each of one or more time increments wherein at least one of said decisions D is associated with at least one discrete variable for operation of a power plant device based upon said model and selecting at least one of said decisions D to optimize operation of the power generating plant.

In accordance with still another aspect of the present invention there is provided a system for optimizing the operation of a power generating plant comprised of a plurality of power plant devices the system comprising means for generating a model that models operation of the power generating plant said model receiving a plurality of input parameters associated with operation of the power generating plant and generating one or more output parameters in response to said plurality of input parameters wherein each said output parameter is associated with a goal for the power generating plant means for determining for one or more consecutive time increments one or more decisions D that realize a desired goal for the power generating plant wherein at least one of said decisions D is associated with at least one discrete variable for operation of a power plant device based upon said model and means for operating the power generating plant in accordance with at least one of the decisions D.

In accordance with still another aspect of the present invention there is provided a system for operating a power generating plant including a plurality of power plant devices the system comprising a model of the operation of the power generating plant means for determining at least one decision D that realize a desired goal for the power generating plant for each of one or more time increments wherein at least one of said decisions D is associated with at least one discrete variable for operation of a power plant device based upon said model and means for selecting at least one of said decisions D to optimize operation of the power generating plant.

In accordance with still another aspect of the present invention there is provided a method for optimizing the operation of at least one soot cleaning device group in a power generating plant wherein each said soot cleaning device group is comprised of one or more soot cleaning devices the method comprising generating a model that models operation of the power generating plant said model receiving a plurality of input parameters associated with operation of the power generating plant and generating one or more output parameters in response to said plurality of input parameters wherein each said output parameter is associated with a goal for the power generating plant repeatedly adjusting at least one of said plurality of input parameters received by the model to obtain output parameters that achieve a desired goal for the power generating plant determining one or more decisions D for activation of a soot cleaning device group that is associated with achievement of said desired goal for the power generating plant ranking the decisions D in accordance with a predetermined criteria and selecting at least one soot cleaning device group for activation at the present time in accordance with said ranked decisions D.

In accordance with yet another aspect of the present invention there is provided a system for optimizing the operation of at least one soot cleaning device group in a power generating plant wherein each said soot cleaning device group is comprised of one or more soot cleaning devices the system comprising means for generating a model that models operation of the power generating plant said model receiving a plurality of input parameters associated with operation of the power generating plant and generating one or more output parameters in response to said plurality of input parameters wherein each said output parameter is associated with a goal for the power generating plant an optimizer for repeatedly adjusting at least one of said plurality of input parameters received by the model to obtain output parameters that achieve a desired goal for the power generating plant means for determining one or more decisions D for activation of a soot cleaning device group that is associated with achievement of said desired goal for the power generating plant means for ranking the decisions D in accordance with a predetermined criteria and means for selecting at least one soot cleaning device group for activation at the present time in accordance with said ranked decisions D.

An advantage of the present invention is the provision of a soot cleaning optimization system and method that uses soot cleaning calculations based on actual operating data acquired from soot cleaning device control system s .

Another advantage of the present invention is the provision of a soot cleaning optimization system and method that does not use cleanliness information parameters for soot cleaning calculations.

Another advantage of the present invention is the provision a soot cleaning optimization system and method that can optimize soot cleaning for simultaneous and non complimentary goals.

Another advantage of the present invention is the provision of a soot cleaning optimization system and method that has goals that can be altered to enhance buildup of soot in strategic areas thereby achieving optimal performance faster after an a periodic event such as an outage.

Still another advantage of the invention is the provision of a soot cleaning optimization system and method that has the ability to include natural slag events.

Still another advantage of the present invention is the provision of a soot cleaning optimization system and method that optimally determines when and which soot cleaning device s to select and signal for activation.

Still another advantage of the present invention is the provision of a path forecasting system that uses a combination of multiple artificial intelligence techniques.

Still another advantage of the present invention is the provision of a path forecasting system that use a neural network or other modeling component as a modeling tool applied within a decision tree structure.

Yet another advantage of the present invention is the provision of a method and apparatus for optimizing the operation of a power generating plant wherein one or more decisions D are determined for at least one consecutive time increment where at least one of the decisions D is associated with a discrete variable for operation of a power plant device.

These and other advantages will become apparent from the following description of a preferred embodiment taken together with the accompanying drawings and the appended claims.

It should be appreciated that while an embodiment of the present invention is described herein with reference to a power generating unit that uses coal the present invention is applicable to boilers used in connection with power generating systems using other combustible fuels and with systems other than power generating units.

It should also be understood that the various systems described in the illustrated embodiments of the present invention may take the form of computer hardware computer software or combinations thereof. The computer hardware may take the form of a conventional computer system including a processor data storage devices input devices e.g. keyboard mouse touch screen and the like and output devices e.g. display devices such as monitors and printers or be embodied as part of another computer system.

The main components of a fossil fuel fired power generating unit will now be briefly described. A typical power generating unit includes one or more forced draft FD fans that are powered by motors. The forced draft fans supply air to mills and to burners via an air preheater. Ambient air is heated as it passes through the air preheater. The mills include pulverizers that are powered by motors. The pulverizers grind coal or other fuel into small particles i.e. powder . The air received by the mills from the forced draft fans is used to dry and carry the coal particles to the burners. Air from the forced draft fans that is supplied to the burners via the air preheater facilitates combustion of the coal at the furnace. Hot flue gases are drawn out of the furnace by one or more induced draft ID fans and delivered to the atmosphere though a stack or chimney. The induced draft fans are powered by motors. Water is supplied to a drum by control of a feedwater valve. The water in the drum is heated by the furnace to produce steam. This steam is further heated by a superheater. A superheater spray unit can introduce a small amount of water to control the temperature of the superheated steam. A temperature sensor provides a signal indicative of the sensed temperature of the superheated steam. The superheated steam is supplied to a turbine that produces electricity. Steam received by the turbine is reused by circulating the steam through a reheater that reheats the steam. A reheater spray unit can introduce a small amount of water to control the temperature of the reheated steam. A temperature sensor provides a signal indicative of the sensed temperature of the reheated steam.

A boiler includes but is not limited to the burners furnace drum superheater superheater spray unit reheater reheater spray unit mills and a boiler economizer. The boiler economizer recovers the waste heat from the boiler s hot stack gas and transfers this heat to the boiler s feedwater.

Soot cleaning devices including but not limited to sootblowers water lances and water cannons or hydro jets use steam water or air to dislodge deposits such as slag and clean surfaces throughout various locations in the boiler. Soot cleaning is required to maintain performance and efficiency of the power generating unit. The number of soot cleaning devices on a given power generating unit can range from several to over a hundred. Furthermore the soot cleaning devices may be grouped together by location e.g. zones in the boiler . Each group of soot cleaning devices may be comprised of one or more soot cleaning devices. For example a boiler may have eight 8 soot cleaning device groups each group comprising five 5 individual soot cleaning devices.

It should be understood that a typical power generating unit also includes additional components well known to those skilled in the art including but not limited to tubes for carrying fluids and additional sensing devices for sensing a wide variety of system parameters e.g. temperature pressure and flow rate .

Referring now to the drawings wherein the showings are for the purposes of illustrating a preferred embodiment of the invention only and not for the purposes of limiting same shows a block diagram of a soot cleaning optimization system according to an embodiment of the present invention while shows a block diagram illustrating data communications between components of soot cleaning optimization system plant data sources and other system components of a power generating plant as will be described below. It should be understood that the data communication configuration shown in illustrate an embodiment of the present invention and that it is contemplated that many alternative data communication configurations are also suitable for use in connection with the present invention.

According to an illustrated embodiment of the present invention soot cleaning optimization system includes a data server program module an SBCalcs calculation engine a data store a neural network model a neural network model retrainer an optimizer a pre optimization processor and a post optimization processor . Each component of soot cleaning optimization system will be described in detail below.

Soot cleaning optimization system preferably uses uni directional and or bi directional data communications link programs to acquire data measured and calculated from plant data sources pertaining to various plant parameters described below .

Data server acts to facilitate bi directional exchange of data from a variety of sources e.g. plant data sources and other system components including program modules internal to soot cleaning optimization system . Furthermore data server manages data acquired synchronously or asynchronously from one or more plant data sources and or other system components . Recommended adjustments in the form of biases setpoints or activation signals may be communicated to the appropriate control systems at varying intervals. Alarm signals and status indicators may be written back to the appropriate control systems or reporting systems at varying intervals. Industry standard data communication protocols such as TCP IP Modbus Serial etc. as well as proprietary protocols or combinations thereof may be employed to facilitate bi directional data communications with different plant data sources and or other system components .

With reference to plant data sources include but are not limited to soot cleaning device control system s sensor measurement system s fuel parameters a performance calculation system a plant data historian a distributed control system DCS and emissions monitoring systems . By way of example and not limitation fuel parameters may include sensors or calculations that provide data indicative of the volume and type of fuel being consumed or ready to be consumed. This data may include such items as fuel flow the analysis composition of the fuel such as carbon content and other trace elements especially those that affect slag and fouling attributes. The fuel parameters may be determined by external sensors or calculations or may be internally determined by soot cleaning optimization system . By way of example and not limitation plant data historian may include any short term or long term historical data base or retention system and may include manual entry and recording of data. One commercial example of a plant data historian is the PI system produced by OSI.

Sensor measurement system s sense or measure various plant parameters described below. Commercially available sensing devices include but are not limited to fuel measurement and elemental analyzers SmartGauge sensors strain gauge or weight sensing technology heat flux sensors temperature measurement systems based on thermocouples acoustics lasers optics etc. resistivity measurement systems downstream systems such as continuous emissions monitoring systems voltage current flow pressure temperature optical microwave instruments etc.

Performance calculation system is a computer or manually collected data system that determines full or partial plant heat rate calculations efficiencies or controllable loss components for steam generation. These controllable loss components can be summed to produce an efficiency reference index ERI . A performance calculation system is described in further detail in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 985 705 filed Nov. 10 2004 entitled System for Optimizing a Combustion Heating Process. This patent application is fully incorporated herein by reference.

Distributed Control System DCS is a computer system that provides control of the combustion process by operation of system devices including but not limited to valve actuators for controlling water and steam flows damper actuators for controlling air flows and belt speed control for controlling flow of coal to mills. Sensors including but not limited to oxygen analyzers thermocouples resistance thermal detectors pressure sensors and differential pressure sensors sense parameters associated with the boiler and provide input signals to DCS . DCS may also provides parameters to performance calculation system .

Emissions monitoring systems provides data associated with emissions or byproduct information from the power plant.

Soot cleaning optimization system may acquire data from plant data sources using a data acquisition program that may be a separate program module or part of data server program module . In particular soot cleaning device control system s provides soot cleaning optimization system with data pertaining to a set of parameters e.g. flow current duration mode state status time etc. for one or more soot cleaning device groups . Each soot cleaning device group is comprised of one or more soot cleaning devices. Accordingly each soot cleaning device group may consist of a single soot cleaning device or a plurality soot cleaning devices. Soot cleaning device control system s may include but are not limited to sootblower control systems hydrojet control systems water cannon control systems etc. It should be appreciated that activation of one group of soot cleaning devices can effect multiple areas of the boiler including areas of the boiler served by other soot cleaning device groups.

Soot cleaning optimization system may self calculate or acquire information and data from any of the aforementioned systems that pertains to predicted and non predicted natural cleaning events. Natural cleaning events are events wherein a soot cleaning device such as a sootblower may not be the direct cause of cleaning of the power generating unit. An example of a natural cleaning event is a physical or thermal shock or a load change.

Soot cleaning optimization system may be employed to work in combination with soot cleaning device control system s and intelligently influence their operation. Soot cleaning device control system s may be configured to receive activation signals ON OFF alarms or reports driven on the basis of SBCalcs parameters and plant parameters described below from soot cleaning optimization system for one or more soot cleaning devices. In such cases the actual action of activating soot cleaning devices is still performed by the relevant soot cleaning device control system s but the determination of which soot cleaning device s to activate and when to active a soot cleaning device is determined by soot cleaning optimization system .

It should be understood that soot cleaning device control system s may communicate directly with soot cleaning optimization system . Alternatively the soot cleaning device control capability may exist as part of DCS . Similarly functionality of one or more of the other plant data sources such as sensor measurement systems performance calculation systems plant data historians and emissions monitoring systems may exist separately or may be combined as part of one of the other plant data sources or other system components . It will be appreciated that actual configuration will be specific to the power plant.

In accordance with the present invention data from plant data sources and other system components SBCalcs parameters described below plant parameters described below or combinations thereof are used to a determine which soot cleaning devices to activate and when to activate the soot cleaning devices b derive optimal biases setpoints for various plant parameters using artificial intelligence techniques of the present invention and c support alarming and reporting features.

SBCalcs Calculation Engine examines data acquired from one or more plant data sources and generates calculated parameters referred to herein as SBCalcs parameters. SBCalcs parameters are derived for one or more soot cleaning device groups . As indicated above each soot cleaning device group is comprised of one or more soot cleaning devices. The SBCalcs parameters are used for analysis neural network modeling pre optimization processing optimization post optimization processing and eventually to determine when and which soot cleaning device s to select for activation as will be described in detail below.

The SBCalcs parameters establish a basis for generating information on the interrelationships between soot cleaning device groups and or on the relationship between soot cleaning device groups and the physical conditions of the boiler including but not limited to heat absorption energy usage gas flow obstruction development or cleaning and interaction with upstream or downstream devices and processes that interact with the boiler air preheater sections or all locations serviced by soot cleaning devices.

SBCalcs parameters provide a foundation for exploring relationships between soot cleaning device groups and the location of the soot cleaning device groups within the furnace and with physical relationship to one another. The SBCalcs parameters provide information on the dependency and interrelationship of soot cleaning device groups.

SBCalcs parameters are time value parameters that may be determined by use of timers user defined values e.g. thresholds and calculated values. It should be appreciated that SBCalcs parameters may be used as inputs to calculations or constraints for calculations or other dynamically changing or predicted plant parameters. SBCalcs parameters may include but are not limited to the following time value parameters 

Soot cleaning optimization system of the present invention utilizes the above described SBCalcs parameters that are based on actual operating data acquired from soot cleaning device control system s . The SBCalcs parameters are independent of thermo dynamic models boiler design considerations fuel fluctuations rules simplifying assumptions etc. The SBCalcs parameters of the present invention are used in conjunction with various techniques described herein to optimally determine when and which soot cleaning devices to select and signal for activation along with other applicable plant parameters as will be described below.

A neural network model or alternatively another type of system model is developed using parameter values including but not limited to the SBCalcs parameters described above and various plant parameters described in detail below. Neural network model is used in connection with an optimizer .

Plant parameters may include but are not limited to combustion parameters fuel parameters post combustion parameters emissions parameters performance parameters given conditions and state indicators. Combustion parameters include but are not limited to temperatures pressures flows speeds weights volumes voltages currents wattages resistances positions velocities mass sizes vibration measurements flue gas constituents grind measurement viscosity and the like related to pre combustion combustion and post combustion stages in a power plant. Fuel parameters include but are not limited to fuel composition parameters various flue gases derived from the combustion of fuel fuel processing inputs such as vibrations fuel handling flow rates grind viscosity particle size variables and the like. Emissions parameters include but are not limited to levels of nitrous oxides NOx carbon dioxide CO carbon monoxide CO sulfur oxides SOx mercury Hg particulate matter PM ammonia NH and the like. Post combustion parameters include but are not limited to parameters related to post combustion systems such as Selective Catalytic Reduction SCR system Flue Gas Desulfurization system Electrostatic Precipitator system Carbon in ash analysis measurement improvement system mercury analysis measurement reduction system and the like. Performance parameters include but are not limited to efficiency energy loss calculations heat rate enthalpy heat transfer tube metal life thermal stress metal fatigue and the like. Given conditions include but are not limited to ambient atmospheric conditions temperature pressure humidity and the like prevailing equipment conditions and the like. State indicators include but are not limited to 0 1 on off open close manual auto local remote in calibration out of service in hold not in hold power plant device states e.g. soot cleaning device states and the like.

Soot cleaning optimization system may communicate with various systems in a power plant and exchange data pertaining to plant parameters. In this regard relevant plant parameters are acquired from plant data sources to develop neural network model . In the exemplary embodiment illustrated in soot cleaning optimization system may communicate with plant data sources as well as other system components including but not limited to pre combustion systems a combustion optimization system COS post combustion systems a multi unit coordination system . Pre combustion systems may include any system acting prior to the combustion of fuel such as but not limited to automatic or manually derived fuel management systems fuel elemental scanning devices or fuel handling systems. Post combustion system may be represented by such systems that do subsequent processing of flue gas such as Flue Gas De sulfurization FGD systems. A multi unit coordination system may include process variables associated with more than one power generating unit in a power generating plant such as a combustion variable associated with two separate boilers.

COS is a computer system that optimizes the combustion process by optimizing air flows fuel flows distributions pressures air fuel temperatures and heat absorption to achieve optimal combustion conditions. Output data of COS i.e. the control value recommendations may be received by Distributed Control System DCS to provide real time optimal control of the combustion process. Accordingly fuel blending systems scrubbers SCR systems sootblowing and the like can also be optimized.

As shown in neural network model receives input parameters and generates output parameters. The input parameters may include but are not limited to parameter values associated with SBCalcs parameters and plant parameters. Each input parameter may be categorized as being 1 a controllable variable also referred to as a manipulatable variable or 2 an input or given variable also referred to as a disturbance variable . Controllable or manipulatable variables are variables that can be controlled by the power plant operator while given or disturbance variables are inputs that cannot be controlled by the power plant operator and in some cases cannot be measured. Examples of given variables are temperature humidity fuel composition etc.

The output parameters of neural network model may include but is not limited to one or more goals also referred to as controlled variables . Output parameters may be a function of one or more input parameters. In the embodiment illustrated in the output parameters include NOx and heat rate.

As an example one such neural network model for representing combustion and soot cleaning relationships was developed using the list of input parameters and output parameters identified below in Tables 1 and 2.

It should be appreciated that the neural network input and output parameters described below are only an example set of model input and output parameters for illustrating the present invention and that an actual set of model input and output parameters will be site specific. Furthermore classification of a input parameter as Given Disturbance or Controllable Manipulatable is also site specific.

Neural network model is trained using normal power plant operation parametric testing and or historical data. A training process involves adjustments of the nodal connection strengths i.e. neural network weights based on iterative examination of input parameters. In this regard neural network model is trained to predict output parameters based upon input parameters. Neural network model thus developed is then utilized in conjunction with an optimizer to determine appropriate adjustments to input parameters for achieving the desired goals within defined constraints as will be described in detail below.

It should be appreciated that neural network model allows complex relationships between soot cleaning air fuels emissions temperatures pressures opacity heat rate and the like can be effectively modeled. The models are developed using historical data parametric testing data normal plant operating data outputs from other neural networks or combinations thereof.

In an embodiment of the present invention some SBCalcs parameters and plant parameters may be defined as controllable variables for optimization purposes so that the objective of optimizer is to achieve optimization goals e.g. NOx emissions and heat rate by adjusting the controllable SBCalcs parameters and relevant plant parameters if included under given constraints e.g. keeping reheat and superheat spray flows in a control range maintaining the system to allow burner tilts to be effective in a combustion optimization system COS maintaining a temperature window for a precipitator etc . Optimization constraints for the SBCalcs parameters and relevant plant parameters as well as the objective function relationship for neural network model output parameters such as NOx emissions and heat rate may be configured by the user or adjusted in real time on the basis of plant and equipment design conditions other systems data other neural networks thermal principles engineering knowledge operational experience established policies safety considerations and or dynamically acquired plant operation information data values from the plant data sources .

Pre optimization processor performs pre processing operations that can examine and dynamically alter the configuration of optimizer . Accordingly various operational constraints real time events and trigger conditions are considered. For instance pre optimization processor may determine which input parameters to neural network model cannot be changed and designate input parameters that are controllable. For input parameters that can be changed i.e. controllable input parameters pre optimization processor can identify any limits to the changes. The actual list of operational constraints real time events and trigger conditions is site and application specific. However the following list may serve as an example including but not limited to 

Optimizer queries neural network model with various controllable input parameters to obtain predicted output parameters. In this regard optimizer iteratively varies one or more controllable input parameters to neural network model until the predicted output parameters are substantially equal to desired output parameters. More specifically optimizer triggers automatically on the basis of time and or plant operational events. It queries neural network model in an iterative fashion to perform what if scenarios. Results of each iteration of the what if operation are evaluated for further analysis and processing. Each run of optimizer ends upon an exhaustive search and evaluation of many possible variations for different controllable variables e.g. plant parameters and or SBCalcs parameters and their corresponding predicted effects on goals e.g. NOx and heat rate . Optimization results are generated in the form of recommended adjusted controllable input parameters determined necessary by optimizer to achieve optimization goals while considering operational safety and system constraints.

It should be appreciated that in accordance with the present invention the objective function for optimizer goals can also be adjusted in real time. Thus the capability to dynamically adjust various optimizer parameters prior to or during each execution of optimizer run permits soot cleaning optimization system to always search for a better operating condition than the one obtained previously while considering the current operating constraints and objectives.

The objective function is the mathematical relationship between all of the inputs and the goals of the neural network. The objective function includes the goals and their relative weighting i.e. importance vis vis total desired outcome of all the optimizer goals combined as well as the weighting of all of the inputs relative to one another in the neural network. The optimizer solves for the total best desired outcome while the neural network relates all inputs to each separate output.

Post optimization processor performs post processing operations. One operation performed by post optimization processor is the validation and further evaluation of the results obtained by optimizer . In this regard post optimization processor examines the results of each optimization run and evaluates the operating conditions of the power generating unit to derive the control adjustments necessary. For example at a given power plant not all available soot cleaning devices may be simultaneously operable because of steam header pressure limitations and power plant operational issues. Various plant parameters may also be evaluated prior to sending adjustment signals in the form of biases setpoints or activation signals to the relevant plant control systems. Post optimization processor also facilitates conversion of optimization results to control signals adjustments necessary to achieve the desired optimization goals. Post optimization processor may output parameter values in the form of a biases or setpoints for various controllable plant parameters b activation indicators turn ON or keep OFF for one or more soot cleaning devices c information signals and d alarm signals. Such parameter values are written to data server for access by other system components and communicated to the relevant control systems i.e. distributed control systems DCS soot cleaning device control systems etc. for pertinent control actions and reporting. Soot cleaning optimization system then gathers new data and the entire processing cycle repeats itself as indicated in .

As indicated above one of the operations performed by post optimization processor is to evaluate the results of optimizer . One such evaluation involves a ranking process that will now be described in detail. Optimization results are further processed to by post optimization processor to facilitate identification of soot cleaning devices that should be turned on or kept off. In this respect for each soot cleaning device group a Target Factor is calculated for at least one associated SBCalcs parameter e.g. DutyCycle . For example Target Factor may take the form of the formula shown Target Factor OptResult CurrentValue OptCycleTime where OptResult is the optimization result for a soot cleaning device group DutyCycle i.e. the adjusted DutyCycle value resulting in the optimized output parameters as determined by optimizer CurrentValue is the current value of DutyCycle for the soot cleaning device group and OptCycleTime may be the optimization cycle time i.e. the chosen period for running optimizer for example every 15 minutes .

The calculated Target Factor is then compared against predefined threshold ranges. The number of threshold ranges and their values are site and or application specific. As an example a site may use the threshold range designations described below in Table 3 

As shown in Table 3 above based on the comparison against Threshold Ranges each calculated Target Factor is assigned a weight value referred to as Target Factor Weight. Soot cleaning optimization system ranks each soot cleaning device group based on their associated Target Factor and Target Factor Weight values. Accordingly the greater the value of Target Factor for a soot cleaning device group the higher its rank. The Target Factor Weight value facilitates determining whether the relevant soot cleaning device group with the highest rank should be activated or not. For example the soot cleaning device group having the largest associated Target Factor value that indicates May Activate or Activate and meeting all operational limitations may be selected for activation. Once at least one soot cleaning device group is identified for activation the relevant signals i.e. signals to turn on at least one soot cleaning device may be transmitted to the respective soot cleaning device control system . It should be understood that it is possible that none of the soot cleaning device groups are activated because none of the associated Target Factor values rise above the level associated with Do Not Activate or May Not Activate.

It should be appreciated that in addition to Target Factor and Target Factor Weight values other operational conditions of the power generating unit and power plant may be evaluated to decide which soot cleaning device group to activate.

The above described ranked selection of soot cleaning device groups for activation may optionally be further processed by use of a path forecasting analysis that will now be described with reference to . Soot cleaning optimization system may also rank soot cleaning device groups according to their importance while also considering past present and anticipated plant operating conditions. In this regard soot cleaning optimization system may include a path forecasting system that provides look ahead capability when determining which soot cleaning device group s to activate. Path forecasting system facilitates optimal selection of one or more soot cleaning device groups for activation taking into account current and past operation safety and operational constraints operational events and predicted power generating unit operation as it relates to one or more of the soot cleaning optimization goals in the future. Path forecasting system may include the use of a neural network or alternatively another modeling technique an optimizer a decision tree rule based system ranking techniques fuzzy logic vector machines and other artificial intelligence techniques.

In many decision making events the consequence of the first action taken will affect future actions and possibilities. These consequences include 1 possible future actions can be limited by selection of the first action or possible future actions may be increased by the first selection 2 net beneficial effects may be decreased by selection of the first action or net beneficial effects may be increased by selection of the first action and 3 safety considerations may be limited even violated by the impact of the first action while on the other hand proper first actions may be a requirement for safe operation. In controlling a process the implication of one control act may have impact on the next opportunity for optimal result over time. Importantly a present time i.e. time zero t decision can impact future time events benefits optimal results and the potential of future rules violations.

Path forecasting system applies the techniques of a neural network model optimizer and decision tree rule based system for their respective area of strength and uses a combination of all techniques in a hybrid artificial intelligence solution. In this case a neural network in combination with an optimizer is used for their prediction capabilities. A decision tree is used to store and explore various predictions made by the neural network at several steps in time. This tree structure is developed using a set of expert rules guiding the constriction of the tree based on domain specific knowledge the rules established as constraints in pre or post processing new data historical assumptions other neural networks or combinations thereof. Finally a search algorithm is used to explore the decision tree and select the best path to the goal. In this way each technique is used only for its strength while another technique makes up for its weakness the overall effect being a synergy in which decisions are made more accurately and intelligently than any of the individual techniques could make in isolation.

Referring now to there is shown a flow diagram illustrating operation of path forecasting system according to an embodiment of the present invention. It should be understood that the path forecasting system includes several iterative steps for developing a decision tree . In this regard one or more decisions D are determined that represent a decision to activate a soot cleaning device group. Each decision D is investigated at least one step into the future through an iterative process using a neural network to model changes in the problem state and an optimizer to select further decisions. Expert logic is used to constrain the decision steps. At the end of processing a set of final decisions are provided for multiple steps e.g. 3 5 steps into the future.

Operation of path forecasting system will now be described in further detail. Pre processing step is substantially the same as the pre processing operation of pre optimization processor described above optimization step is substantially the same as the optimization operation described above in connection with and post processing step is substantially the same as the post processing operation of post optimization processor described above.

Post processing step includes the step of ranking each soot blowing device group. The ranked outputs are shown at step A as decision Dand decision D. Drepresents a first decision to activate a first soot cleaning device group at time t while Drepresents a second decision to activate a second soot cleaning device group at time t.

For each possible decision D at time t a neural network is used to predict parameter values at time t 1 step . The predicted parameter values may include but are not limited to the goals and plant parameters discussed above calculated values for use in other systems neural network predictions for other external uses such as for maintenance prediction or combinations thereof. It should be appreciated that ranking information may be included in the input parameters fed to the neural network at step . The output parameters of the neural network at step are stored for later use and are also input to a rule base at step to determine whether any rules e.g. relating to physical or other constraints are violated by the predicted parameter values. In other words boundaries can be checked at step . If it is determined that rules are violated then the associated decision D at time t is considered to follow a terminated path. It should be understood that the rules applied at step may change with each iteration.

If it is determined at step that no rules are violated then the stored values associated with that decision D are used in the subsequent iteration of processing steps and in the same manner as described above.

Ranked outputs are shown at step B as decision D D D and D. Drepresents a first decision to activate a first soot cleaning device group at time t Drepresents a second decision to activate a second soot cleaning device group at time t Drepresents a third decision to activate a third soot cleaning device group at time t and Drepresents a fourth decision to activate a fourth soot cleaning device group at time t.

Once again for each possible decision D at time t the neural network at step is used to predict parameter values at time t 1. The output parameter values are stored for later use and are also input to a rule base at step to determine whether any rules are violated by the predicted parameter values. If it is determined that rules are violated then the associated decision D at time t is considered to follow a terminated path. If it is determined that no rules are violated then the stored values associated with that decision D are used in a subsequent iteration of processing steps and in the same manner as described above.

This foregoing process may continue for each decision D for one or more iterations. illustrates an exemplary decision tree developed as a result of the foregoing iterative process. As illustrated in four 4 iterations are developed for decision tree . It should be understood that decision tree as shown in is exemplary and is provided to illustrate operation of path forecasting system of the present invention.

After a complete decision tree has been developed for the desired number of iterations historical achievement by each decision D is analyzed step . In this regard the results obtained by following each possible path is analyzed. The analysis is preferably performed by use of a decision tree search algorithm. For example the sum of the goals achieved at each step in the path could be summed to find a winning path. At step a decision for time t i.e. the current decision regarding selection of a soot cleaning device group for activation is made based upon this analysis. Accordingly the output of path forecasting system is the current decision to be taken.

Path forecasting system allows a future output or an input to be predicted based upon a choice made at time zero. Before a decision is made by path forecasting system a path of related decisions are explored and the net effect of the decision path over multiple paths can be projected scored and result in influencing the time zero decision.

It should be appreciated that the present invention also allows substitution of any neural network model in the path with another element such as simple logic a rule a different neural network a constant or other substitute. This allows great flexibility while also allowing certain paths to be eliminated from needing to be evaluated and thus reducing complex calculation time. Actions such as this can eliminate calculating all factorial combinations of possibilities which in turn helps with computer loading. Multiple goals model output parameters can be evaluated in the path. This simplest manner of doing this is the summation or other mathematical combination of these goals.

In the illustrated embodiment of the present invention path forecasting is applied in optimizing soot cleaning operations by determining one or more decisions D for at least one time increment wherein at least one of the decisions D is associated with a discrete variable for operation of at least one soot cleaning device. A discrete variable refers to a variable that has a finite or countable set of values i.e. not continuous . In the illustrated embodiment the discrete variable has a value of ON or OFF with regard to activation of a soot cleaning device group.

It should be understood that while the path forecasting aspect of the present invention has been described above with reference to optimization for soot cleaning operations in a power generating plant it is contemplated that path forecasting may also be used for optimizing the operation of other power plant devices including but not limited to SCRs boiler FGDs fuel sources Electro Static Precipitators ESPs turbine and balance of plant. In addition the present invention can be used for determining a decision associated with both continuous and discrete variables. For example a continuous variable is a variable that can take on the full range of values between a minimum and maximum value. As indicated above a discrete variable can only take on a finite set of values. For example a path forecasting system may be used to determine the air fuel mixture in a boiler the operational state of sootblowers and the operational states of the pumps of an FGD over a certain time horizon. The parameters associated with the air fuel mixture are continuous variables while the operational states of the sootblower and FGD are discrete variables. The goal in this example may be to reduce emissions NOx and SO and improve heat rate. Another example would be to determine mill burner and fuel sources as a load profile changes over time in order to improve heat rate in the power generating plant. In this regard path forecasting may also be used in connection with other power plant devices and other discrete variables.

Neural network model retrainer periodically retrains neural network model . This on line retraining capability permits neural network models to adapt to changing power plant operation equipment and fuel conditions. A retraining process can be initiated on the basis of event trigger conditions or elapsed time. Soot cleaning optimization system sorts new data records by examining values of SBCalcs parameters and plant parameters and comparing them to user configurable data sort definitions.

User configurable data sort definitions are identified on a site and or application specific basis. User configurable data sort definitions are configured utilizing state definitions and cluster definitions. State definitions are comprised of any mathematical and or logical combination such as but not limited to arithmetic operations AND OR NOT EQUAL TO NOT EQUAL TO LESS THAN LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO GREATER THAN GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO etc. of various plant parameters. For example states may be defined as 

Cluster definitions are comprised of any mathematical or logical combination of state definitions and or various plant parameters. Accordingly examples of Cluster Definitions may be stated as 

During the data sorting process each new data record is compared with the various cluster definitions to determine the data cluster s into which each record may get stored. Data records that do not satisfy the criteria for any of the cluster definitions can be stored separately. Configuration parameters permit specification of maximum number of data records to retain pertaining to each cluster. Such clustered data and or relevant historical data may be utilized for retraining neural network model . Such a scheme helps retain important data records while culling out the insignificant and or out dated ones. The retrained neural network model is utilized for subsequent optimization runs. The maintenance and tracking of the resulting model changes over time may also facilitate diagnostics.

Referring now to there is shown a flow chart illustrating operation of soot cleaning optimization system according to an embodiment of the present invention. At step data is obtained from plant data sources. SBCalcs parameters are calculated at steps and . Step describes pre processing operations step describes optimization and step describes post processing operations. Step describe path forecasting steps that are explained in detail with reference to . Steps describe further post processing steps. Steps describe retraining of the neural network model .

In accordance with the present invention numerous sootblowing optimization objectives or goals have been identified. Some of the goals are conflicting and application and or plant specific. The neural network model output parameters identified above in Table 2 represent one such set of goals. The present invention facilitates the trade offs between various goals. Optimization goals include but are not limited to 

In summary the present invention applies a neural network and optimization technology to optimize for single or multiple simultaneously objectives goals such as reducing harmful environmental emissions and improving the heat rate efficiency at fossil fired power generating units. By improving the heat rate of a boiler the present invention enables a power plant to generate equivalent amounts of electric energy with decreased fuel input and without changing the physical configuration of the power plant. Neural network and optimization technology facilitates the creation of a model representing the plant process. Such a model is used in conjunction with an optimizer to optimize boiler combustion and or process performance taking into account various safety environmental and operational constraints and or desires goals.

Other modifications and alterations will occur to others upon their reading and understanding of the specification. It is intended that all such modifications and alterations be included insofar as they come within the scope of the invention as claimed or the equivalents thereof.

