---

title: Apparatus, system, and method for protecting a motion-sensitive device
abstract: An apparatus, system, and method are disclosed for protecting a motion-sensitive device. The apparatus includes an identification module, a determination module, and a scheduler. The identification module identifies a use-intensive task involving the motion-sensitive device. The determination module determines a motion forecast that predicts a substantially motionless time interval. The scheduler schedules the use-intensive task such that the use-intensive task executes within the substantially motionless time interval. In this manner, a historical movement pattern is used to schedule future tasks such that the coincidence of task use of the motion-sensitive device and movement of the motion-sensitive device is minimized.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07600054&OS=07600054&RS=07600054
owner: Lenovo Singapore Pte Ltd
number: 07600054
owner_city: Singapore
owner_country: SG
publication_date: 20051114
---
This invention relates to portable computing devices and more particularly relates to protecting motion sensitive devices within the portable computing devices.

The capabilities and complexity of portable computing devices continues to increase. More and more computing functionality is performed using portable computing devices such as laptops Personal Digital Assistants PDAs portable music players cell phones tablet PCs and the like. Other computing systems are used in contexts where motion of the computing system is inherent. For example vehicle mounted or installed computer systems and robots may include standard or compact computing devices installed.

Typically these computing devices include one or more internal devices having mechanically moving parts. Even devices such as a PDA that ordinarily include internal devices with non moving parts may temporarily include a storage device such as a microdrive that includes mechanically moving parts. The devices having mechanically moving parts that are internal to or operate in conjunction with the computing devices are referred to herein as motion sensitive devices. 

Unfortunately motion sensitive devices remain highly susceptible to serious damage when operation of the motion sensitive device is combined with movement of the motion sensitive device itself. Typically movement of the computing device also moves the motion sensitive device. These movements may include careful calculated movements bumping jarring drops movement of the base on which the computing device rests and the like. Often these movements adversely affect the movement of the internal parts of the motion sensitive device. The interference caused by movement of the computing device can cause serious damage to the internal moving parts as well as to other parts in the motion sensitive device.

The actual damage caused as well as the probability for damage due to movement of the motion sensitive device is typically greatest during periods of time when the motion sensitive device is most active and the motion sensitive device is simultaneously in motion. Placing the motion sensitive device in motion increases the likelihood of a damaging movement. Operating the motion sensitive device during the movement enhances the risk that damage will result from movement of the motion sensitive device. Limiting the movement of the motion sensitive device during periods of high use of the motion sensitive device is inconvenient and often impractical because users place such a high value on portability of the computing device.

From the foregoing discussion it should be apparent that a need exists for an apparatus system and method for protecting a motion sensitive device. Beneficially such an apparatus system and method would minimize operation of the motion sensitive device during time periods when the computing device is likely to be in motion. The apparatus system and method would schedule and or advise use intensive tasks involving the motion sensitive device during substantially motionless time intervals for the computing device.

The present invention has been developed in response to the present state of the art and in particular in response to the problems and needs in the art that have not yet been fully solved by currently available portable computing devices. Accordingly the present invention has been developed to provide an apparatus system and method for protecting a motion sensitive device that overcome many or all of the above discussed shortcomings in the art.

The apparatus is provided with a logic unit containing a plurality of components configured to functionally execute the necessary steps. These components in the described embodiments include an identification module a determination module and a scheduler.

The identification module identifies a use intensive task involving the motion sensitive device. A monitor may monitor use of the motion sensitive device by at least one operating task. The monitor may measure based on a variety of measures such as number of accesses per unit of time. A task manager may record use data representative of use of the motion sensitive device by the at least one operating task. The task manager may also classify the one or more operating tasks as use intensive tasks according to a use threshold.

The determination module determines a motion forecast that predicts a substantially motionless time interval. The scheduler schedules the use intensive task such that the use intensive task executes within the substantially motionless time interval.

The determination module may include a tracking module configured to track movements of the motion sensitive device in relation to at least one reference time interval. A classification module of the determination module may classify the movements based on a severity threshold. A pattern generator may generate a movement pattern representative of movement of the motion sensitive device during a predefined time period. A forecaster of the determination module may cooperate with the pattern generator to define a motion forecast having at least one substantially motionless time interval. The motion forecast is based at least in part on the movement pattern.

A system is also presented for protecting a motion sensitive device. The system includes components substantially similar to those described above in relation to different embodiments of the apparatus. In addition the system may include a hard disk drive a processor and an accelerometer. The accelerometer provides movement information to a pattern generator which generates a movement pattern. The forecaster may use the movement pattern to define a motion forecast. The schedule schedules a task that uses the hard disk drive during a substantially motionless time interval as indicated by the motion forecast.

A method is also presented for protecting a motion sensitive device. The method in the disclosed embodiments substantially includes the steps necessary to carry out the functions presented above with respect to the operation of the described apparatus and system.

As used herein the term motion sensitive device refers to any device having mechanical moving parts such that movement of the motion sensitive device increases the risk of damage to the mechanical moving parts and or other parts of the motion sensitive device. Examples of motion sensitive devices include Hard Disk Drives HDD microdrives CD ROMS and DVD ROMS including read write versions and the like. Those of skill in the art will recognize the variety of conventional and future technologies which may serve as a motion sensitive device. As used herein the term use intensive task refers to any computing operation that uses operates interacts with references or causes operation of a computing device with a frequency above a predefined threshold.

Reference throughout this specification to features advantages or similar language does not imply that all of the features and advantages that may be realized with the present invention should be or are in any single embodiment of the invention. Rather language referring to the features and advantages is understood to mean that a specific feature advantage or characteristic is included in at least one embodiment of the present invention. Thus discussion of the features and advantages and similar language throughout this specification may but do not necessarily refer to the same embodiment.

Furthermore the described features advantages and characteristics of the invention may be combined in any suitable manner in one or more embodiments. One skilled in the relevant art will recognize that the invention may be practiced with fewer or more of the specific features or advantages of a particular embodiment. These features and advantages of the present invention will become more fully apparent from the following description and appended claims or may be learned by the practice of the invention as set forth hereinafter.

The I O interface may be connected to a display device and or a user input device such as a keyboard a mouse speakers a microphone and the like. Similarly the network interface may connect to a wireless network such as a cellular network or computer network. Optionally the network interface may connect to a wired network as such a network is available. Preferably the I O interface and network interface facilitate the portability of the system .

The system may also include a protection module configured to monitor use and motion of motion sensitive devices within the system . Based on the use and motion information for a motion sensitive device the protection module controls use of the motion sensitive devices by other components in the system . In the embodiment of the protection module may be configured to control use of one or more data storage devices . Examples of data storage devices include CDROM drives DVD drives CDRW drives DVDRW drives Hard Disk Drives HDD and the like.

In systems that are portable operation of motion sensitive devices while these devices are in physical motion increases the likelihood of damage due to bumping jarring and possibly dropping of the system . Other devices such as the processor memory I O interface and network interface have few if any moving parts and are therefore not as susceptible to damage.

Advantageously the protection module is configured to protect the motion sensitive devices by limiting use of the motion sensitive devices to time periods when motion of the system or devices is less likely. Avoiding concurrent use and motion of the motion sensitive devices minimizes potential for damage to the motion sensitive device . Where use of the motion sensitive device can not be limited without affecting user satisfaction the protection module may minimize use during movement by scheduling certain use intensive tasks involving the motion sensitive device such that these tasks begin and complete during a forecaster period of non motion of the motion sensitive device .

In one embodiment use intensive tasks are predefined and stored in a data structure accessible to the identification module . Examples of tasks that may be considered use intensive tasks may include Hard Disk Drive HDD backup operations HDD defragmentation operations HDD virus and or spyware scanning operations HDD data migration operations and the like. Those of skill in the art will recognize that the type of task considered use intensive may change depending on the type of motion sensitive device .

The determination module determines a motion forecast that predicts a substantially motionless time interval in the future for the motion sensitive device . Preferably the motion forecast for the motion sensitive device correlates to the motion forecast for the system . Alternatively the motion sensitive device may be moveable independent of the system and therefore have different motion forecast .

The determination module may use a variety of techniques described in more detail below to determine a motion forecast . In one embodiment the determination module references a set of movement patterns recorded for a particular period of time. Typically the movement patterns are historical information about the movement of the motion sensitive device . A forecasting algorithm may use the movement patterns to predict the likelihood that the motion sensitive device will experience substantially no movement within a future time period.

The determination module provides the motion forecast to the scheduler . The scheduler schedules use intensive tasks such that the use intensive task executes within the substantially motionless time interval predicted in the motion forecast . The scheduler may automatically schedule the use intensive tasks based on the motion forecast . Alternatively the scheduler cooperates with the user to schedule the use intensive tasks.

Together the identification module determination module and scheduler cooperate to ensure that use intensive tasks are executed during periods of substantially no motion of the motion sensitive device . Consequently damage to the motion sensitive device and in particular to the moving parts within the motion sensitive device is minimized. The effectiveness of the protection module depends at least in part on the accuracy of the motion forecast .

Certain embodiments of the protection module may include additional optional modules such as a monitor a task manager an execution module a detector and a suspension module . Those of skill in the art recognize that these optional modules may be integrated with or separate from the protection module . Furthermore functionality provided by these optional modules may alternatively be provided by other modules in a system .

The monitor and task manager may cooperate to facilitate identifying use intensive tasks. Preferably the monitor tracks or monitors use of the use intensive device by one or more operating tasks. The monitor may comprise a software module monitoring Input Output I O traffic such as reads and writes to and from a HDD for example. Preferably I O traffic is monitored in relation to a period of time such as a second a minute an hour or the like. The monitor may communicate use data for a particular task to the task manager . The task manager may record the use data. In addition the task manager may classify one or more of the operating tasks by comparing the use data with a use threshold.

Typically a use intensive task is a computing task that involves a use frequency above the use threshold. The use frequency may comprise the number of operations involving the motion sensitive device within a particular time period. The use threshold may be predefined and user configurable.

For example where the motion sensitive device is a HDD the use threshold may comprise about one hundred reads and or writes per minute. The monitor may detect use of a HDD above this threshold for example two hundred reads and or writes per minute. The task manager records the use data. Because the use threshold is exceeded the task manager classifies the task using the HDD as a use intensive task. In certain embodiments the task manager may include a plurality of classifications including high use low use average use and the like. Each classification may include an associated use threshold.

In certain embodiments a user may adjust the values for the use thresholds. Alternatively the user may adjust which classifications of tasks result in the scheduler scheduling those tasks to operate during substantially motionless time intervals. In this manner the user may control the level of risk the motion sensitive device is exposed to during movement of the system .

The execution module detector and suspension module cooperate to further minimize damage risk for the motion sensitive device . The execution module executes the use intensive task during one of the substantially motionless time intervals indicated by the motion forecast . Preferably the motionless time interval is a specific time period within a particular twenty four hour period. The motion forecast may also indicate a particular time period within a particular day of the week. The execution module may comprise a utility within an operating system such as a service or background process manager.

The detector monitors motion of the motion sensitive device while the execution module executes the use intensive task within the motionless time interval. If the detector detects motion of the motion sensitive device or motion above a suspension threshold the detector communicates with suspension module . The suspension threshold may be user configurable. In response to this communication the suspension module suspends operation of the use intensive task. In one embodiment the suspension module sends an interrupt to the processor . In response to the interrupt the processor may interrupt operation of the task and place the task into a hibernation or suspended state.

The processor may suspend the task for a specific period of time. Alternatively the detector and suspension module may continue to communicate and monitor motion of the motion sensitive device . If the motion sensitive device experiences a motionless period of predefined length the suspension module may signal the task to resume operation. Preferably when the task suspends operation the state of the task is preserved such that the task can be readily resumed.

In one embodiment the tracking module is highly sensitive to acceleration. The tracking module may comprise a separate component or may comprise logic that communicates with existing hardware such as an existing accelerometer. Examples of accelerometers that may be used in the tracking module include IMEMS accelerometers available from Analog Devices of Norwood Mass.

The classification module communicates with the tracking module . The classification module classifies movements detected by the tracking module according to a magnitude of severity. Preferably the classification module includes one or more severity thresholds of increasing magnitude. As movements are detected by the tracking module that exceed the severity thresholds the classification module assigns a particular classification to the movement. For example movements may be classified into categories such as no movement typical subtle movement or shifting transport movement and drop or free fall movement. Of course a variety of categories may be defined each associated with a certain magnitude of acceleration within a given time interval.

The pattern generator communicates with the classification module to generate a movement pattern . The pattern generator preferably stores the movement pattern on a storage device such as a hard drive. In one embodiment the pattern generator updates the movement pattern in response to movement variations detected by the tracking module after a movement pattern is defined. A movement variation is defined as a movement that differs from a movement recorded for a corresponding past time period in the movement pattern . The pattern generator may update the movement pattern periodically in response to a user command or in response to movements detected above a certain severity threshold.

The form and structure of the movement pattern may vary in different embodiments of the present invention. Preferably the movement pattern correlates classified movements of the motion sensitive device to a historical passage of time measured in units of hours days weeks months or the like. For example the tracking module may detect forty movements of the motion sensitive device within a five minute time interval. The pattern generator determines that the five minute period was during the 2 o clock hour in the afternoon. Consequently the movement pattern may comprise a mapping of movements to times within an hour or day. In addition the movement pattern may include a mapping of movements within days of a week or weeks of a month.

By mapping movements to a chronologic timeline the tracking module inherently defines periods when there are substantially no movements. In addition the movement pattern preferably includes an indication of classification for each movement. The pattern generator may generate a plurality of movement patterns distinguished by time of day day of week or the like.

The forecaster preferably defines a motion forecast comprising at least one motionless time interval. The motion forecast is based at least in part on the movement pattern . In one embodiment the motion forecast comprises strictly a prediction of the motionless time intervals. Alternatively or in addition the motion forecast may comprise a prediction of the classifications and severity of movements that can be expected for the motion sensitive device . In one example a motion forecast may indicate that there is substantially no motion of the motion sensitive device between the hours of 10 00 pm and 5 00 am. Consequently the motion forecast may indicate one motionless time interval between 10 00 pm and 5 00 am. Alternatively the motion forecast may indicate seven motionless time intervals between 10 00 pm and 5 00 am one for each hour period.

Preferably the forecaster combines historical movement information captured in the movement patterns projections based on probabilities from a probability engine one or more prediction algorithms and one or more motion indicators . The probability engine may determine a probability that there will be movement for each time interval included in the motion forecast . In particular the probability engine may determine a probability of movement within the substantially motionless time interval. Typically this probability is below a probability threshold. The probability threshold maybe user configurable. In one embodiment substantially motionless time intervals are associated with movement probabilities below about ten percent.

In this manner different degrees of risk of movement can be communicated in the motion forecast . Other logic analyzing the motion forecast can then determine whether the risk of movement is acceptable or not. Preferably the probability engine uses well known probability algorithms that consider historical information related to time intervals.

The motion indicators may further increase the accuracy of the forecaster . Motion indicators are indicators of a potential for motion of the motion sensitive device . The motion indicators may comprise sensors signals values or the like from hardware specific to the present invention or hardware used for other purposes. One example of a motion indicator is a flag indicating whether the motion sensitive device is coupled to an A C power source such as a wall socket. If the flag is set the likelihood that the motion sensitive device will move is reduced. Another motion indicator may comprise a flag indicating whether a portable electronic device such as a laptop or Personal Digital Assistant PDA that houses the motion sensitive device is coupled to a docking station. Of course those of skill in the art can identify other suitable motion indicators including a motion sensor a light sensor a chassis sensor to determine whether a clam shell type chassis is open or closed and the like. Each of these motion indicators may provide additional information that the forecaster may use to make the motion forecast more accurate.

The HDD is well known in the art and may comprise a conventional hard disk drive or a microdrive available from Hitachi Global Storage Technologies of San Jose Calif. of various capacities. In certain embodiments of the present invention the HDD serves as the motion sensitive device See discussed above. The HDD typically includes multiple moving parts such as read write heads connected to arms spinning platters and the like that are activated when the HDD is in use. Intensive use of the HDD may cause these internal moving components to move very rapidly. Simultaneous physical movement of the HDD and intensive use can cause damage to the internal components resulting in partial or complete failure of the HDD .

The processor is also well known and may execute various instructions to execute tasks defined within operating software such as an operating system and the associated applications running thereon. The processor may communicate with the HDD memory accelerometer and optional I O module and or network interface using a system bus . The bus may comprise a Peripheral Connect Interface PCI bus or the like. The I O module may include well known I O drivers and hardware components for communicating output to and receiving input from a user. The network interface is also well known and may include wired or wireless connections to other electronic devices.

The accelerometer may send interrupt signals to the processor in response to detecting movement of the device that exceeds certain threshold levels. Preferably the accelerometer includes logic to detect and report physical movement of the device . One example of an accelerometer suitable for use in the system is an IMEMS accelerometer available from Analog Devices of Norwood Mass. The accelerometer may measure acceleration using a capacitive piezoelectric piezoresistive Hall Effect Magnetoresistive or heat transfer methodologies. The accelerometer preferably performs substantially the same functions and features as the tracking module described above.

The memory stores logic data and executing instructions for the processor to implement one embodiment of a protection module . The protection module may include a classification module a pattern generator a forecaster and a scheduler . Preferably the classification module comprises data structures and software logic for implementing the features and functionality of the classification module described in relation to . In addition the classification module may communicate with the accelerometer to obtain measurements for acceleration events and timing information relating the event to a particular time interval. The classification module may include logic to associate the time interval with a chronologic time period.

The pattern generator and forecaster may similarly include suitable data structures and software logic for implementing the features and functionality of the pattern generator and forecaster described in relation to . The scheduler may comprise data and software suitable for implementing the scheduler described in relation to . In other words the scheduler preferably schedules use intensive tasks that use the HDD for execution within a substantially motionless time interval indicated by the motion forecast from the forecaster .

In certain embodiments the scheduler operates automatically or in response to commands. Automatic operation may comprise the scheduler reviewing tasks provided by an operating system or a system utility. The scheduler may determine the expected duration for a task and then communicate with the forecaster to obtain a forecast See . The scheduler may then automatically schedule the task for a substantially motionless time interval indicated by the forecast .

Alternatively or in addition the scheduler may respond to commands. The commands may come from third party software applications or from a user using a User Interface UI . In one embodiment the present invention comprises a published Application Programming Interface API . The API may provide a plurality of functions and or data structures that enable the third party software applications to use the classification module pattern generator forecaster and or scheduler to gather information about use of a motion sensitive device and or physical movement of the motion sensitive devices .

For example a third party software application may issue an API call to the present invention using the API to obtain a motion forecast . The third party software application may provide a start time an operating duration and a motion sensitive device indicator. The start time indicates when the third party software application plans to start a task using the motion sensitive device. The operating duration indicates how long the third party software application expects the task to take. In certain embodiments the pattern generator may derive the operating duration based on historical information for past executions of the task. The motion sensitive device indicator preferably uniquely identifies the motion sensitive device that will be involved with the task.

In response to these inputs the API function may communicate with the forecaster to obtain a motion forecast . Preferably the forecast identifies at least one substantially motionless time interval that is preferably of greater length than the operating duration. Alternatively the substantially motionless time interval may last for a majority of the operating duration.

In certain embodiments the third party software application comprises utilities provided in an operating system. The utilities may be used for maintenance quality control security and the like. Examples of such utilities include hard drive defragmentation tools spyware scanning tools anti virus scanning tools and the like. These utilities may interface with the present invention through the API automatically.

Alternatively each third party software application may involve a user through a separate User Interface UI . Alternatively certain embodiments provide a UI that may be used for scheduling a plurality of tasks. For example in certain operating systems such as MICROSOFT WINDOWS operating system certain tasks may be scheduled by a user. The UI may comprise a set of wizard assistance windows or a single window allowing a user to edit the properties and or scheduling of the task.

In one embodiment the UI may include a button or menu item allowing the forecaster to propose a start time for the task. The start time may correspond to the substantially motionless time interval such that the task starts and completes within the substantially motionless time interval. Based on the user defined start time and the expected task duration the UI may prompt the user to manually schedule the task based on the motion forecast . The prompting may be done in response to active manual scheduling by the user. Alternatively the system may passively observe user actions and thereby conclude that the user is scheduling a task that could benefit from the information in the motion forecast .

In certain embodiments configuration settings may determine how closely manual scheduling corresponds to motionless time intervals in the forecast . For example in one embodiment the start time may precede the motionless time interval by a certain percentage of the expected task duration. Alternatively configuration settings may dictate that the task be scheduled to at least start within the motionless time.

In yet another embodiment the user is permitted to schedule the task for anytime and the UI is configured to advise the user of a start time that corresponds with the motion forecast and a motionless time interval. This advice may be provided in a pop up window and the user may be permitted to accept or reject the suggestion. In this manner manual scheduling may be permitted while other suggested scheduling times are advised.

The tracking module may include an accelerometer similar to that described above. Movements above a certain threshold may cause the tracking module to record a movement event. Preferably the movement events are stored along with an identifier and a timestamp that correlates to a chronological period of time. Alternatively the tracking module may be coupled to the motion sensitive device instead of the apparatus .

The pattern generator and forecaster may operate in substantially the same manner as the tracking module and forecaster described above in relation to . The scheduler and UI may operate in substantially the same manner as the scheduler and UI described above in relation to . The forecaster produces a motion forecast in response to a command from the scheduler . The pattern generator may generate one or more movement pattern periodically or based on the number of movements detected.

In contrast to the determination module of and the system of the apparatus may not include a classification module . Consequently the movement pattern may not include a classification indicator. Instead each movement above a sensitivity level may be tracked by the tracking module incorporated into the movement pattern by the pattern generator and included in the motion forecast by the forecaster .

Consequently a user using the UI or a software application interacting with the apparatus through an API See may classify the information in the motion forecast . For example the motion forecast may include a severity indicator that is made available through the UI or API . One example motion forecast may predict that movement of the motion sensitive device is anticipated for the coming weekend as the motion sensitive device has historically been transported from one workspace to another. Advantageously the example motion forecast may also indicate the severity level of the movement. A user may configure the scheduler to trigger a use intensive task based on projected periods when the severity level is below a certain level. In this manner the classification of the movements in the motion forecast is left to the user. Consequently the classification maybe more flexible than the classifications a classification module might provide.

In one embodiment the method begins by monitoring physical movement of the motion sensitive device . Monitoring may be performed by the tracking module an accelerometer or the like. Next the pattern generator records the movement data associated with the motion sensitive device in the form of a movement pattern . Of course the pattern generator and tracking module may track and monitor a plurality of motion sensitive devices . In certain embodiments a classification module classifies the movements based on a severity indicator. The classification may occur on movement data before movement patterns are generated. Alternatively the movement patterns may include severity indicators such that the movement classification module classifies the movement patterns .

Next the identification module identifies use intensive tasks involving the motion sensitive device . In certain embodiments the use intensive tasks are identified as those performing a predefined number of operations within a time interval. Consequently the identification module may monitor use of the motion sensitive device by any task a class of tasks or predefined tasks. The predefined number of operations and time interval may be user configurable such that the user can control which operations tasks are considered use intensive. A user may change the predefined number of operations and a time interval by editing a configuration file or using a user interface .

Automatically or in response to a request from a third party software application or a user the determination module and or forecaster determines a motion forecast . Preferably the motion forecast covers time intervals with sufficient granularity such as minutes or seconds. In this manner the likelihood that suitable motionless time intervals exist is higher.

Preferably the scheduler schedules an identified use intensive task to operate during one or more substantially motionless time intervals. The identified use intensive tasks are preferably not time sensitive meaning these tasks can be performed at any time within a particular time window. The window may be a twenty four hour period a five or seven day period or the like. The scheduler may operate automatically in response to an API call or in response to a user command.

According to the schedule the execution module executes the identified use intensive tasks. In one embodiment the scheduler executes the identified use intensive tasks. Preferably the use intensive tasks complete before a motionless time interval ends.

During task execution the detector or tracking module may continue to monitor movement of the motion sensitive device . In certain circumstances a substantially motionless time interval is interrupted by movement of the motion sensitive device . To account for this possibility protection module determines whether the motion sensitive device moves above a certain threshold during execution of identified use intensive tasks. If so the suspension module suspends the use intensive tasks. In certain embodiments the suspension module may additionally trigger other steps to protect the motion sensitive device such as parking the heads of a hard drive. If no movement is detected the tasks may complete or continue execution and the method may continue monitoring movement of the motion sensitive device .

In one embodiment if a task is suspended due to movement of the motion sensitive device a task manager may determine whether to update the movement pattern . The task manager may execute an algorithm to determine whether the movement is representative of a pattern that justifies changing the movement pattern or an anomaly that can be ignored. If the task manager decides to update the movement pattern the determination module may update the movement pattern to reflect the movement that was detected. Once an update is made or if the task manager determines that an update is not necessary the method returns to monitoring in step .

The method may initiate automatically in the form of a windows service or daemon and terminate when a computer system is shutdown. Alternatively a user may initiate and shutdown the method . Preferably the method continuously performs steps such that movement patterns and motion forecasts can be constantly improved and refined.

The present invention minimizes operation of motion sensitive devices such as hard drives during periods of high risk of damage such during movement of the motion sensitive device. In particular the present invention facilitates scheduling of use intensive tasks during substantially motionless time intervals to minimize the coincidence of physical movement of the motion sensitive device and operation of use intensive tasks. Furthermore the present invention may interrupt use intensive tasks operating when the motion sensitive device is moved.

Many functional units described herein are labeled as components in order to more particularly emphasize their implementation independence. For example a component may be implemented as a hardware circuit comprising custom VLSI circuits or gate arrays off the shelf semiconductors such as logic chips transistors or other discrete components. A component may also be implemented in programmable hardware devices such as field programmable gate arrays programmable array logic programmable logic devices or the like.

Components may be implemented in software for execution by various types of processors. An identified component of executable code may for instance comprise one or more physical or logical blocks of computer instructions which may for instance be organized as an object procedure or function. Nevertheless the executables of an identified component need not be physically located together but may comprise disparate instructions stored in different locations which when joined logically together comprise the component and achieve the stated purpose for the component.

Indeed a component of executable code may be a single instruction or many instructions and may even be distributed over several different code segments among different programs and across several memory devices. Similarly operational data may be identified and illustrated herein within components and may be embodied in any suitable form and organized within any suitable type of data structure. The operational data may be collected as a single data set or may be distributed over different locations including over different storage devices.

Reference throughout this specification to one embodiment an embodiment or similar language means that a particular feature structure or characteristic described in connection with the embodiment is included in at least one embodiment of the present invention. Thus appearances of the phrases in one embodiment in an embodiment and similar language throughout this specification may but do not necessarily all refer to the same embodiment.

Furthermore the described features structures or characteristics of the invention may be combined in any suitable manner in one or more embodiments. In the following description numerous specific details are provided such as examples of programming software components user selections network transactions database queries database structures hardware components hardware circuits hardware chips etc. to provide a thorough understanding of embodiments of the invention. One skilled in the relevant art will recognize however that the invention may be practiced without one or more of the specific details or with other methods components materials and so forth. In other instances well known structures materials or operations are not shown or described in detail to avoid obscuring aspects of the invention.

The schematic flow chart diagrams included are generally set forth as logical flow chart diagrams. As such the depicted order and labeled steps are indicative of one embodiment of the presented method. Other steps and methods may be conceived that are equivalent in function logic or effect to one or more steps or portions thereof of the illustrated method. Additionally the format and symbols employed are provided to explain the logical steps of the method and are understood not to limit the scope of the method. Although various arrow types and line types may be employed in the flow chart diagrams they are understood not to limit the scope of the corresponding method. Indeed some arrows or other connectors may be used to indicate only the logical flow of the method. For instance an arrow may indicate a waiting or monitoring period of unspecified duration between enumerated steps of the depicted method. Additionally the order in which a particular method occurs may or may not strictly adhere to the order of the corresponding steps shown.

The present invention may be embodied in other specific forms without departing from its spirit or essential characteristics. The described embodiments are to be considered in all respects only as illustrative and not restrictive. The scope of the invention is therefore indicated by the appended claims rather than by the foregoing description. All changes which come within the meaning and range of equivalency of the claims are to be embraced within their scope.

