---

title: Function of autophagy genes in cell death
abstract: The present invention relates to a new molecular pathway in which activation of the receptor-interacting protein (RIP, a serine-threonine kinase) and Jun N-terminal kinase induce cell death with the morphology of autophagy. Further, autophagic death is induced by caspase 8 inhibition and expression of the mammalian genes ATG7 and beclin.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07838645&OS=07838645&RS=07838645
owner: National Institutes of Health
number: 07838645
owner_city: Bethesda
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050502
---
This application claims the benefit from U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 566 857 filed Apr. 30 2004 the content of which is hereby incorporated by reference herein for all purposes.

This invention was made with governmental support under Grant No. GM59136 awarded by The National Institutes of Health. The government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates generally to cell death and more particularly to methods and compositions for regulating cell death through activating the autophagic pathway.

Apoptosis is a well studied pathway of programmed cell death conserved from to humans 1 . Caspases a family of cystinyl aspartate requiring proteases produce the morphological changes associated with apoptotic death 2 3 . Non apoptotic forms of cell elimination include those with features of necrosis and autophagy 4 7 . Autophagy is a process that liberates free amino acids and nucleotides and enables cells to survive under nutrient deprivation conditions as well as to undergo structural remodeling during differentiation. Necrosis can result when cell metabolism and integrity are compromised by a nonphysiological insult.

During autophagy isolation membranes are used to sequester cytoplasmic components such as proteins and organelles including mitochondria and target these membrane bound structures for degradation by fusion with lysosomes 8 29 . Genetic studies of autophagy induced by nutrient starvation in the yeast resulted in the identification of the ATG genes 30 33 . ATG genes are involved in the activation of the signaling complex that triggers formation of autophagic structures from isolation membranes that are known as autophagosomes and this process involves two ubiquitination like pathways 8 . Autophagosomes then dock and fuse with lysosomes where they are degraded.

Autophagy has been observed in various eukaryotic organisms and the ATG genes appear to be conserved in organisms that are as different as yeast and humans 10 . The ATG genes appear to be a survival response to nutritional starvation involving membrane bound vacuoles that target organelles and proteins to the lysosome for degradation 8 9 .

Morphological studies of dying cells during embryogenesis resulted in the identification of at least two prominent forms of physiological cell death 34 35 . These dying cells were distinguished based on how they are degraded and removed dying cells. Cells undergoing autophagy digest themselves by formation of autophagosomes that transport degraded cargo to the lysosome. In contrast during apoptosis phagocytes eat dying cells and the dead cells are degraded by the lysosome of the phagocyte. Apoptosis has been a subject of intense investigation in recent years and two general mechanisms has been described for inducing this type of cell death 1 . The intrinsic apoptosis pathway relies on the mitochondria for regulatory components that are involved in the activation of caspase proteases that cleave death inducing protein substrates. The extrinsic apoptosis pathway depends on extracellular death ligands such as TNF and Fas and these ligands are bound by trimeric death receptors that recruit adapter proteins such as FADD and TRADD that recruit caspases 8 and 10. The proximity of these caspases within signaling complexes results in their proteolytic activation and cell death.

Several groups have observed necrosis like cell death that appears to occur in a caspase independent manner 16 . Furthermore non apoptotic cell death appears to provide a compensatory mechanism for cell killing when apoptotic regulators such as caspases and Apaf1are compromised 36 37 . Thus it would be beneficial to determine methods enzymatic pathways and compounds that induce such non apoptotic mechanisms to compensate when programmed death by apoptosis is compromised.

The present invention relates to composition and methods for regulating cell death by inducing the autophagic pathway.

In one aspect the present invention relates to a composition for inducing autophagic cell death the composition comprising a Caspase 8 inhibitor and at least one protein expressed by an ATG gene or variant thereof. Preferably the ATG gene includes Atg 7 and beclin or mammalian homologs thereof. Atg 7 is a key autophagy gene encoding a protein resembling E ubiquitin activating enzyme that is used in both of the ubiquitin like pathways required for autophagic vacuoles in yeast 16 17 . Beclin encodes a Bcl 2 interacting candidate tumor suppressor and antiviral protein 18 19 .

In another aspect the present invention relates to a nucleotide sequence comprising at least two ATG genes selected from APG6 Beclin 1 Atg 7 HsGSA7 and human homologs thereof for inclusion in an expression vector for transfection in cells.

In another aspect the present invention relates to a method for inducing autophagic cell death in a mammalian cancer cell line the method comprising administering a caspase 8 inhibitor to the cell either alone or in combination with at least one nucleotide sequence for ATG genes selected from APG6 Beclin 1 Atg 7 HsGSA7 and human homologs thereof.

In still another aspect the present invention relates to a method for inhibiting cell death in a mammalian cell the method comprising reducing expression of receptor interacting protein RIP and inhibiting caspase 8 in the mammalian cell.

Another aspect of the present invention relates to a method for inducing and increasing autophagic cell death in mammalian cells the method comprising reducing expression of caspase 8 and increasing expression of ATG7 HsGSA7 mAPG7 or Beclin 1.

Yet another aspect of the present invention relates to a method for increasing cell death by the autophagy pathway the method comprising increasing expression of ATG7 HsGSA7 mAPG7 or Beclin 1 or human homologs thereof.

A further aspect of the present invention relates to a method of treating a viral infection caused by a virus expressing a caspase 8 inhibitor the method comprising administering an effective amount of a composition comprising ATG genes including mammalian Beclin and or Atg7. Preferably both ATG genes are included in an expression vector.

Another aspect of the present invention relates to a method of inducing the autophagic pathway the method comprising increasing expression of receptor interacting protein RIP and or Jun N terminal kinase JNK and inhibiting cleavage of RIP.

Still another aspect of the present invention relates to a method for determining compounds that induce the autophagy pathway the method comprising 

Other features and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the following detailed description figures and claims.

Autophagy is used to degrade components of the cytoplasm and functions as a cell survivor mechanism during nutrient deprivation. Autophagic structures have also been observed in many type of dying cells but heretofore experimental evidence for autophagy playing a role in the regulation of programmed cell death was limited. Results set forth herein show that the autography genes Atg7 and Beclin 1 are required for the death of certain cells when induced by caspase 8 inhibition. Further a new molecular pathway was discovered in which activation of the receptor interacting protein RIP and Jun N terminal kinase JNK induced cell death with the morphology of autophagy. Additionally the results set forth herein indicate that signaling through the serine threonine kinase RIP is essential for autophagic cell death. Further it was observed that RIP is cleaved and inactivated by caspase 8 providing a mechanism for the prevention of autophagic cell death. Thus inhibition of caspase 8 allows RIP to transmit the signal needed to kill the cell through the autophagic pathway.

In order to facilitate review of the various embodiments of the invention and provide an understanding of the various elements and constituents used in making and using the present invention the following terms used in the invention description have the following meanings.

A gene as used herein means a nucleic acid molecule the sequence of which includes all the information required for the normal regulated production of a particular protein including the structural coding sequence promoters and enhancers.

 Amino acid sequence as used herein refers to an oligopeptide peptide polypeptide or protein sequence and fragment thereof and to naturally occurring or synthetic molecules. Fragments of a polypeptide comprise amino acid sequences that retain the biological activity or the immunological activity of the full polypeptide.

The term caspase 8 inhibitor as used herein refers to any compound molecule or agent that inhibitors the apoptosis activity of caspase 8. The caspase 8 inhibitor may include but is not limited to antibodies that form a complex with caspase 8 benzyloxycarbonyl valyl alanyl aspartic acid O methyl fluoro methylketone zVAD small interfering RNAs for silencing the gene that express caspase 8 Z IETD FMK etc.

The term biologically active as used herein refers to a protein having structural regulatory or biochemical functions of a naturally occurring molecule. The terms complementary or complementarity as used herein refer to the natural binding of polynucleotides under permissive salt and temperature conditions by base pairing. For example the sequence A G T binds to the complementary sequence T C A. Complementarity between two single stranded molecules may be partial in which only some of the nucleic acids bind or it may be complete when total complementarity exists between the single stranded molecules. The degree of complementarity between nucleic acid strands has significant effects on the efficiency and strength of hybridization between nucleic acid strands.

The term homology as used herein refers to a degree of complementarity. There may be partial homology or complete homology i.e. identity . A partially complementary sequence that at least partially inhibits an identical sequence from hybridizing to a target nucleic acid is referred to using the functional term substantially homologous. The inhibition of hybridization of the completely complementary sequence to the target sequence may be examined using a hybridization assay Southern or northern blot solution hybridization and the like under conditions of low stringency. A substantially homologous sequence or hybridization probe will compete for and inhibit the binding of a completely homologous sequence to the target sequence under conditions of low stringency.

The term hybridization as used herein refers to any process by which a strand of nucleic acid binds with a complementary strand through base pairing.

The term hybridization complex as used herein refers to a complex formed between two nucleic acid sequences by virtue of the formation of hydrogen bonds between complementary G and C bases and between complementary A and T bases these hydrogen bonds may be further stabilized by base stacking interactions. The two complementary nucleic acid sequences hydrogen bond in an antiparallel configuration. A hybridization complex may be formed in solution or between one nucleic acid sequence present in solution and another nucleic acid sequence immobilized on a solid support e.g. paper membranes filters chips pins or glass slides or any other appropriate substrate to which cells or their nucleic acids have been fixed .

 Nucleic acid sequence as used herein refers to an oligonucleotide nucleotide or polynucleotide and to DNA or RNA of genomic or synthetic origin that may be single or double stranded and represent the sense or antisense strand.

The term stringent conditions as used herein refers to conditions that permit hybridization between polynucleotide sequences and the claimed polynucleotide sequences. Suitably stringent conditions can be defined by for example the concentrations of salt or formamide in the prehybridization and hybridization solutions or by the hybridization temperature and are well known in the art. In particular stringency can be increased by reducing the concentration of salt increasing the concentration of formamide or raising the hybridization temperature.

The term purified as used herein refers to nucleic or amino acid sequences that are removed from their natural environment isolated or separated and are at least 60 free preferably 75 free and most preferably 90 free from other components with which they are naturally associated.

 Transformation as defined herein describes a process by which exogenous DNA enters and changes a recipient cell. It may occur under natural or artificial conditions using various methods well known in the art. Transformation may rely on any known method for the insertion of foreign nucleic acid sequences into a prokaryotic or eukaryotic host cell. The method is selected based on the type of host cell being transformed and may include but is not limited to viral infection electroporation heat shock lipofection and particle bombardment. Such transformed cells include stably transformed cells in which the inserted DNA is capable of replication either as an autonomously replicating plasmid or as part of the host chromosome. They also include cells that transiently express the inserted DNA or RNA for limited periods of time.

A variant of a polypeptide as used herein refers to an amino acid sequence that is altered by one or more amino acids. The variant may have conservative changes wherein a substituted amino acid has similar structural or chemical properties e.g. replacement of leucine with isoleucine. More rarely a variant may have nonconservative changes e.g. replacement of a glycine with a tryptophan. Analogous minor variations may also include amino acid deletions or insertions or both. Guidance in determining which amino acid residues may be substituted inserted or deleted without abolishing biological or immunological activity may be found using computer programs well known in the art for example DNASTAR software.

A homolog as used herein refers to a gene or peptide that has essentially the same nucleotide sequence or amino acid residues respectively and functions as that of the referenced gene or peptide.

In one aspect the present invention provides for an isolated and purified polynucleotide sequence comprising at least one ATG gene and preferably Atg 7 Atg6 or mammalian homologue such as ATG7 HsGSA7 mAPG7 or Beclin 1.

As used herein the term polynucleotide means a sequence of nucleotides connected by phosphodiester linkages. Polynucleotides are presented herein in the direction from the 5 to the 3 direction. A polynucleotide of the present invention can be a deoxyribonucleic acid DNA molecule or ribonucleic acid RNA molecule. Where a polynucleotide is a DNA molecule that molecule can be a gene or a cDNA molecule. Nucleotide bases are indicated herein by a single letter code adenine A guanine G thymine T cytosine C inosine I and uracil U .

The invention comprises a polynucleotide sequence complementary sequence or variant thereof for ATG genes preferably ATG7 and Beclin 1 selected from SEQ ID NO 1 mouse ATG7 SEQ ID NO 3 mouse Beclin SEQ ID NO 18 human ATG7 or SEQ ID NO 20 human Beclin encoding a polypeptide or variant thereof that resembles E ubiquitin activating enzyme used in both of the ubiquitin like pathways required for autophagic vacuoles in yeast or a Bcl 2 interacting protein including SEQ ID NO 2 mouse ATG7 or SEQ ID NO 4 mouse Beclin SEQ ID NO 19 human ATG7 or SEQ ID NO 21 human beclin 1 . In particular a variant polynucleotide sequence will have at least about 80 more preferably at least about 90 and most preferably at least about 95 identity to polynucleotide sequence. The polynucleotide is preparable by a process comprising the steps of constructing a library of cDNA clones from a cell that expresses the polypeptide screening the library with a labeled cDNA probe prepared from RNA that encodes the polypeptide and selecting a clone that hybridizes to the probe.

In another aspect DNA sequence information provided by the present invention allows for the preparation of relatively short DNA or RNA sequence having the ability to specifically hybridize to gene sequences of the selected polynucleotide disclosed herein. In these aspects nucleic acid probes of an appropriate length are prepared based on a consideration of a selected nucleotide sequence. Most importantly the primers can be used as short interfering RNAs for gene silencing.

Accordingly a polynucleotide probe or primer molecule of the invention can be used for its ability to selectively form duplex molecules with a gene or complementary stretches of the gene. Depending on the application envisioned one will desire to employ varying conditions of hybridization to achieve varying degree of selectivity of the probe toward the target sequence. For applications requiring a high degree of selectivity one will typically desire to employ relatively stringent conditions to form the hybrids. For example one will select relatively low salt and or high temperature conditions such as provided by 0.02M 0.5M NaCl at temperatures of 50 C. to 70 C. Those conditions are particularly selective and tolerate little if any mismatch between the probe and the template or target strand.

In certain embodiments it is advantageous to employ a polynucleotide of the present invention in combination with an appropriate label for detecting hybrid formation. A wide variety of appropriate labels are known in the art including radioactive enzymatic or other ligands such as avidin biotin which are capable of giving a detectable signal.

In one embodiment the present invention contemplates an isolated and purified peptide that modulates programmed cell death. Preferably the peptide that modulates programmed cell death has at least 60 homology to a peptide comprising an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 19 and or SEQ ID NO 21.

The invention also encompasses peptide variants. A preferred variant is one which has at least about 80 more preferably at least about 90 and most preferably at least about 95 amino acid sequence identity to the amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NO 2 SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 19 and or SEQ ID NO 21 and which modulates programmed cell death.

Polypeptides are disclosed herein as amino acid residue sequences. Those sequences are written left to right in the direction from the amino to the carboxyl terminus. In accordance with standard nomenclature amino acid residue sequences are denominated by either a single letter or a three letter code as indicated below.

Modifications and changes can be made in the structure of a polypeptide of the present invention and still obtain a molecule having like peptide characteristics that modulate programmed cell death. For example certain amino acids can be substituted for other amino acids in a sequence without appreciable loss of peptide activity. Because it is the interactive capacity and nature of a polypeptide that defines that polypeptide s biological functional activity certain amino acid sequence substitutions can be made in a polypeptide sequence or of course its underlying DNA coding sequence and nevertheless obtain a polypeptide with like properties.

As outlined above amino acid substitutions are generally therefore based on the relative similarity of the amino acid side chain substituents for example their hydrophobicity hydrophilicity charge size and the like. Exemplary substitutions which take in consideration various of the foregoing characteristics are well known to those of skill in the art and include arginine and lysine glutamate and aspartate serine and threonine glutamine and asparagine and valine leucine and isoleucine as shown below. The present invention thus contemplates functional or biological equivalents of a peptide as set forth above.

A polypeptide of the present invention is prepared by standard techniques well known to those skilled in the art. Such techniques include but are not limited to isolation and purification from tissues known to contain that polypeptide and expression from cloned DNA that encodes such a polypeptide using transformed cells.

In another embodiment the present invention provides expression vectors comprising polynucleotides sequences that encode for modulating peptides of autophagic cell death. Preferably expression vectors of the present invention comprise polynucleotides that encode for peptides resembling E ubiquitin activating enzyme that are used in both of the ubiquitin like pathways required for autophagic vacuoles in yeast and or a Bcl 2 interacting protein such as SEQ ID NO 2 mouse Atg7 SEQ ID NO 4 Beclin mouse SEQ ID NO 19 human and or SEQ ID NO 21. Alternatively such vectors or fragments can code larger polypeptides or peptides which nevertheless include the basic coding region. In any event it should be appreciated that due to codon redundancy as well as biological functional equivalence this aspect of the invention is not limited to the particular DNA molecules corresponding to the polypeptide sequences noted above.

The expression vectors of the present invention preferably comprise polynucleotides operatively linked to an enhancer promoter. More preferably still expression vectors of the invention comprise a polynucleotide operatively linked to a prokaryotic or eukaryotic promoter.

A promoter is a region of a DNA molecule typically within about 100 nucleotide pairs in front of upstream of the point at which transcription begins i.e. a transcription start site . That region typically contains several types of DNA sequence elements that are located in similar relative positions in different genes. As used herein the term promoter includes what is referred to in the art as an upstream promoter region a promoter region or a promoter of a generalized eukaryotic RNA Polymerase II transcription unit.

Another type of discrete transcription regulatory sequence element is an enhancer. An enhancer provides specificity of time location and expression level for a particular encoding region e.g. gene . A major function of an enhancer is to increase the level of transcription of a coding sequence in a cell that contains one or more transcription factors that bind to that enhancer. Unlike a promoter an enhancer can function when located at variable distances from transcription start sites so long as a promoter is present.

As used herein the phrase enhancer promote means a composite unit that contains both enhancer and promoter elements. An enhancer promoter is operatively linked to a coding sequence that encodes at least one gene product. As used herein the phrase operatively linked means that an enhancer promoter is connected to a coding sequence in such a way that the transcription of that coding sequence is controlled and regulated by that enhancer promoter. Means for operatively linking an enhancer promoter to a coding sequence are well known in the art. As is also well known in the art the precise orientation and location relative to a coding sequence whose transcription is controlled is dependent inter alia upon the specific nature of the enhancer promoter. Thus a TATA box minimal promoter is typically located from about 25 to about 30 base pairs upstream of a transcription initiation site and an upstream promoter element is typically located from about 100 to about 200 base pairs upstream of a transcription initiation site. In contrast an enhancer can be located downstream from the initiation site and can be at a considerable distance from that site.

An enhancer promoter used in a vector construct of the present invention can be any enhancer promoter that drives expression in a cell to be transfected. By employing an enhancer promoter with well known properties the level and pattern of gene product expression can be optimized. A coding sequence of an expression vector is operatively linked to a transcription terminating region. RNA polymerase transcribes an encoding DNA sequence through a site where polyadenylation occurs. Typically DNA sequences located a few hundred base pairs downstream of the polyadenylation site serve to terminate transcription. Those DNA sequences are referred to herein as transcription termination regions. Those regions are required for efficient polyadenylation of transcribed messenger RNA mRNA . Transcription terminating regions are well known in the art. A preferred transcription terminating region is derived from a bovine growth hormone gene.

Exemplary vectors include the mammalian expression vectors of the pCMV family including pCMV6b and pCMV6c Chiron Corp. Emeryville Calif. and pRc CMV Invitrogen San Diego Calif. . In certain cases and specifically in the case of these individual mammalian expression vectors the resulting constructs can require co transfection with a vector containing a selectable marker such as pSV2neo.

Where expression of recombinant polypeptide of the present invention is desired and a eukaryotic host is contemplated it is most desirable to employ a vector such as a plasmid that incorporates a eukaryotic origin of replication. Additionally for the purposes of expression in eukaryotic systems one desires to position the desired peptide encoding sequence adjacent to and under the control of an effective eukaryotic promoter such as promoters used in combination with Chinese hamster ovary cells. To bring a coding sequence under control of a promoter whether it is eukaryotic or prokaryotic what is generally needed is to position the 5 end of the translation initiation side of the proper translational reading frame of the polypeptide between about 1 and about 50 nucleotides 3 of or downstream with respect to the promoter chosen. Furthermore where eukaryotic expression is anticipated one would typically desire to incorporate into the transcriptional unit an appropriate polyadenylation site.

The pRc CMV vector available from Invitrogen is an exemplary vector for expressing a polypeptide in mammalian cells particularly COS CHO human MCF F human 293T and BHK bovine cells. A polypeptide of the present invention under the control of a CMV promoter can be efficiently expressed in mammalian cells. The pCMV plasmids are a series of mammalian expression vectors of particular utility in the present invention. The vectors are designed for use in essentially all cultured cells and have been successfully expressed in simian COS cells mouse L cells CHO cells and HeLa cells.

In yet another embodiment the present invention provides recombinant host cells transformed or transfected with a polynucleotide including the ATG genes discussed herein. Means of transforming or transfecting cells with exogenous polynucleotide such as DNA molecules are well known in the art and include techniques such as calcium phosphate or DEAE dextran mediated transfection protoplast fusion electroporation liposome mediated transfection direct microinjection and adenovirus infection.

The most widely used method is transfection mediated by either calcium phosphate or DEAE dextran. Although the mechanism remains obscure it is believed that the transfected DNA enters the cytoplasm of the cell by endocytosis and is transported to the nucleus. Depending on the cell type up to 90 of a population of cultured cells can be transfected at any one time. Because of its high efficiency transfection mediated by calcium phosphate or DEAE dextran is the method of choice for experiments that require transient expression of the foreign DNA in large numbers of cells. Calcium phosphate mediated transfection is also used to establish cell lines that integrate copies of the foreign DNA which are usually arranged in head to tail tandem arrays into the host cell genome.

In the protoplast fusion method protoplasts derived from bacteria carrying high numbers of copies of a plasmid of interest are mixed directly with cultured mammalian cells. After fusion of the cell membranes usually with polyethylene glycol the contents of the bacteria are delivered into the cytoplasm of the mammalian cells and the plasmid DNA is transported to the nucleus. Protoplast fusion is not as efficient as transfection for many of the cell lines that are commonly used for transient expression assays but it is useful for cell lines in which endocytosis of DNA occurs inefficiently. Protoplast fusion frequently yields multiple copies of the plasmid DNA tandemly integrated into the host chromosome.

The application of brief high voltage electric pulses to a variety of mammalian and plant cells leads to the formation of nanometer sized pores in the plasma membrane. DNA is taken directly into the cell cytoplasm either through these pores or as a consequence of the redistribution of membrane components that accompanies closure of the pores. Electroporation can be extremely efficient and can be used both for transient expression of cloned genes and for establishment of cell lines that carry integrated copies of the gene of interest. Electroporation in contrast to calcium phosphate mediated transfection and protoplast fusion frequently gives rise to cell lines that carry one or at most a few integrated copies of the foreign DNA.

Liposome transfection involves encapsulation of DNA or RNA within liposomes followed by fusion of the liposomes with the cell membrane. The mechanism of how nucleotides are delivered into the cell is unclear but transfection efficiencies can be as high as 90 .

For use in mammalian cells the control functions on the expression vectors are often derived from viral material. For example commonly used promoters are derived from polyoma Adenovirus 2 Cytomegalovirus and most frequently Simian Virus 40 SV40 . The early and late promoters of SV40 virus are particularly useful because both are obtained easily from the virus as a fragment which also contains the SV40 viral origin of replication. Smaller or larger SV40 fragments can also be used provided there is included the approximately 250 bp sequence extending from the HindIII site toward the BglI site located in the viral origin of replication. Further it is also possible and often desirable to utilize promoter or control sequences normally associated with the desired gene sequence provided such control sequences are compatible with the host cell systems.

In yet another embodiment the present invention contemplates a process of preparing peptides comprising transfecting cells with a polynucleotide that encodes a desired polypeptides of the present invention to produce transformed host cells and maintaining the transformed host cells under biological conditions sufficient for expression of the polypeptide. Preferably the transformed host cells are eukaryotic cells.

A host cell used in the process is capable of expressing a functional recombinant peptide of the present invention. A variety of cells are amenable to a process of the invention for instance yeasts cells human cell lines and other eukaryotic cell lines well known to those of the art.

Following transfection the cell is maintained under culture conditions for a period of time sufficient for expression of a peptide. Culture conditions are well known in the art and include ionic composition and concentration temperature pH and the like. Suitable medium for various cell types are well known in the art. In a preferred embodiment temperature is from about 20 C. to about 50 C. pH is preferably from about a value of 6.0 to a value of about 8.0. Other biological conditions needed for transfection and expression of an encoded protein are well known in the art.

Transfected cells are maintained for a period of time sufficient for expression of the desired peptide. A suitable time depends inter alia upon the cell type used and is readily determinable by a skilled artisan. Typically maintenance time is from about 2 to about 14 days.

A recombinant peptide having the ability to modulate programmed cell death is recovered or collected either from the transfected cells or the medium in which the cells are cultured. Recovery comprises isolating and purifying the recombinant polypeptide. Isolation and purification techniques for polypeptides are well known in the art and include such procedures as precipitation filtration chromatography electrophoresis and the like.

In a preferred embodiment the present invention provides pharmaceutical compositions comprising cell death modulating peptides and a physiologically acceptable carrier. More preferably a pharmaceutical composition comprises a polypeptide expressed by at least one mammalian Atg gene that is required for autophagic cell death including ATG7 HsGSA7 mAPG7 or Beclin 1. A composition of the present invention is typically administered parenterally in dosage unit formulations containing standard well known nontoxic physiologically acceptable carriers adjuvants and vehicles as desired. The term parenteral as used herein includes intravenous intramuscular intraarterial injection or infusion techniques.

Injectable preparations for example sterile injectable aqueous or oleaginous suspensions are formulated according to the known art using suitable dispersing or wetting agents and suspending agents. The sterile injectable preparation can also be a sterile injectable solution or suspension in a nontoxic parenterally acceptable diluent or solvent for example as a solution in 1 3 butanediol.

Among the acceptable vehicles and solvents that may be employed are water Ringer s solution and isotonic sodium chloride solution. In addition sterile fixed oils are conventionally employed as a solvent or suspending medium. For this purpose any bland fixed oil can be employed including synthetic mono or di glycerides. In addition fatty acids such as oleic acid find use in the preparation of injectables.

Preferred carriers include neutral saline solutions buffered with phosphate lactate Tris and the like. Of course one purifies the vector sufficiently to render it essentially free of undesirable contaminants such as defective interfering adenovirus particles or endotoxins and other pyrogens such that it does not cause any untoward reactions in the individual receiving the vector construct. A preferred means of purifying the vector involves the use of buoyant density gradients such as cesium chloride gradient centrifugation.

A transfected cell can also serve as a carrier. By way of example a liver cell can be removed from an organism transfected with a polynucleotide of the present invention using methods set forth above and then the transfected cell returned to the organism e.g. injected intravascularly .

In cancers where there is an increase in cell proliferation it may be is desirable to increase the expression of a polypeptide expressed by at least one mammalian Atg gene required for autophagic cell death including ATG7 HsGSA7 mAPG7 or Beclin to limit cell proliferation. Preferably the composition comprises a caspase 8 inhibitor. Therefore in one embodiment at least one autophagy inducing peptide may be administered to a subject to prevent or treat cancer including but not limited to adenocarcinoma leukemia lymphoma melanoma myeloma sarcoma and teratocarcinoma and in particular cancers of the adrenal gland bladder bone bone marrow brain breast cervix gall bladder ganglia gastrointestinal tract heart kidney liver lung muscle ovary pancreas parathyroid penis prostate salivary glands skin spleen testis thymus thyroid and uterus.

It is understood that modification that do not substantially affect the activity of the various embodiments of this invention are also included within the definition of the invention provided herein. Accordingly the following examples are intended to illustrate but not limit the present invention.

Wortmannin JNK inhibitor II Anthra 1 9 cd pyrazol 6 2H one 1 9 pyrazoloanthrone SB 203580 and PD 98059 were purchased from Calbiochem San Diego Calif. . Benzyloxycarbonyl Valyl Alanyl Aspartyl O methyl fluoromethylketone zVAD benzyloxycarbonyl Phenyl Alanyl fluoromethylketone zFA benzyloxycarbonyl Leucyl Glutamyl Histidyl Aspartyl fluoromethylketone LEHD benzyloxycarbonyl Aspartyl O methyl Glutamyl O methyl Valyl Aspartyl O methyl fluoromethylketone DEVD and benzyloxycarbonyl Alanyl Alanyl Aspartyl O methyl chloromethylketone zAAD were purchased from Enzyme Systems Products Livermore Calif. . Cycloheximide 3 methyladenine and Phorbol myristate acetate were from Sigma St Louis . Antibodies to mouse caspase 8 RIP and Beclin 1 were purchased from Pharmingen San Diego Calif. . Antibodies to phospho JNK MKK7 and c Jun were from Cell Signaling Technology Beverly Mass. . The Atg7 antibody was a gift from Dr. William Dunn.

Non specific RNAi oligoribonucleotides and RNAi oligoribonucleotides corresponding to the following cDNA sequences were purchased from Dharmacon Boulder Colo. 

0.5 nmol RNAi were transfected by Amaxa nucleofection using V solution program T 20 Gaithersburg Md. . Cells were then cultured in growth medium for 96 hrs before further analysis.

The mouse L929 cell line and human cell line U937 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection Rockville Md. . Mouse RAW264.7 cells were a gift from Dr. Richard Siegel. L929 cells were cultured in Dulbecco s modified Eagle s medium with 4.5 g L glucose. U937 RAW264.7 macrophage cells and mouse peritoneal macrophages prepared by thioglycollate injection were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium. Media were supplemented with 2 mM L glutamine 1 penicillin streptomycin solution and 10 fetal bovine serum FBS .

Cell viability was determined after treatments by staining with propidium iodide 2 g mL and flow cytometric analysis on a FACScan. Percent cell death was quantitated as previously described 26 .

L929 cells were treated with DMSO or zVAD for 24 hrs in the presence of 2 FBS. The cell lysate was spun for 10 minutes at 13000 rpm. 20 ul of the c Jun beads SAPK JNK assay kit from Cell Signaling were added to the supernatant and incubated overnight at 4 C. Beads were washed 4 times with lysis buffer and resuspended in 50 ul of 1 sample buffer. Samples were boiled for 5 minutes and analyzed by SDS PAGE and Western blot for phosphorylated SAP JNK by probing with phospho JNK antibody.

Cells were fixed in 3 glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M MOPS buffer pH 7.0 for 8 hrs at room temperature 3 glutaraldehyde 1 paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M MOPS buffer pH 7.0 for 16 hours at 4 C. post fixed in 1 osmium tetroxide for 1 hour embedded in Spurr s resin sectioned double stained with Uranyl acetate and Lead citrate and analyzed using a Zeiss EM 10 transmission electron microscope. For each treatment or control group at least 100 cells from randomly chosen transmission electron microscopy fields were analyzed for quantification of morphological features. Cells with 10 vacuoles were scored as autophagy positive. Cells were stratified as follows 0 9 vacuoles cell 1 10 19 vacuoles cell 2 20 29 vacuoles cell 3 30 vacuoles cell . Scores were ranked and comparisons of treatment to control groups were made using the Mann Whitney U test using the Statview 5.0.1 program. Statistical analysis of the differences in panels D E F and G and B D were significant p

In mouse L929 fibroblastic cells tumor necrosis factor TNF oxidants ceramide and radiation can induce caspase independent death 11 . However benzyloxycarbonyl Valyl Alanyl Aspartic acid O methyl fluoromethylketone zVAD a caspase inhibitor with broad specificity also directly induced the death of L929 cells. L929 cells were treated with 1 ul of dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO a and c or 20 uM zVAD b and d for 24 hours and examined by phase contrast microscopy a and b or 4 6 diamidino 2 phenylindole staining and fluorescent microscopy c and d . Magnification 200 . Death began at 12 hours after zVAD treatment and was complete after 40 hrs as shown in . Transmission electron microscopy TEM revealed intact mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum condensed osmophilic cytoplasm and numerous large cytoplasmic inclusions that were membrane bound vacuoles characteristic of autophagy as shown in where a shows cell treated with DMSO and b to d treated with zVAD. The dead cells appeared to be round detached and had a convoluted plasma membrane permeable to vital dyes this differed from apoptosis in which nuclei are condensed and membrane integrity is preserved. A time course for zVAD induced autophagy revealed that vacuolated cells accumulated prior to cell death as shown in . The percentage of vaculated cells is the fraction of cells that have 10 or more autophagic vacuoles by TEM. Statistical analysis is shown in and morphometric analysis of zVAD induced autophagy in L929 cells is quantitated in Table 1 setforth below.

Similar results were shown when using U937 monocytoid cells with the results shown in wherein TEM of U937 cells treated for 24 hours with DMSO a or zVAD b . Scale bar in a b 1 um c wherein the fractions of cells with autophagic features based on TEM were quantitated as described above.

The association of autophagic vacuoles with cell death has been observed in developing animals but it has not been clear if it was a process to rescue or condemn the cell 12 . cells manifesting autophagy and death have increased ATG gene transcripts 13 14 but heretofore there was no known requirement for ATG genes in cell death. As such evidence was sought to show that autophagy was required for cell death by treating cells with two inhibitors of autophagy 3 methyladenine 3 MA and Wortmannin 9 15 . shows that the reduction in cell loss mean value SD for L929 cells treated with the PI 3 kinase inhibitors Wortmannin WM 0.1 ug ml or 3 MA 10 mM0 for 1 hour and then with 20 uM zVAD for 36 hours. Clearly by treating the cells with an autophagic inhibitor there was reduced less cell death relative to the cells treated with zVAD dissolved in DMSO.

Further zVAD also induced cell death by the autophagic pathway in mouse RAW 264.7 macrophage cells and primary mouse peritoneal macrophages as shown in . Both inhibitors WM and 3 MA arrested zVAD induced cell death in these cell lines and in primary macrophages as shown in . Specifically shows that zVAD induces cell death in RAW264.7 which can be blocked by autophagy inhibitors. The RAW264.7 cells were treated with 0.1 ug ml Wortmannin WM or 10 mM 3 methyladenine 3 MA for 1 hr and the with 100 uM zVAD for 48 hrs after which cell loss was quantitated by flow cytometry. The first bar shows the results of cells treated with zVAD dissolved in DMSO. Further shows that zVAD induces cell death in mouse peritoneal macrophages which can be blocked by autophagy inhibitors. Mouse peritoneal macrophages cells were treated with 0.1 ug ml Wortmannin WM or 10 mM 3 methyladenine 3 MA for 1 hr and with 100 uM zVAD for 24 hrs after which cell loss were quantitated by flow cytometry. Again it is evident that the autophagic inhibitors reduced cell death by the autophagic pathway while the autophagic pathway was in full force in the cells treated with zVAD dissolved in DMSO.

However these inhibitors are general phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase PI 3 kinase inhibitors and could independently affect autophagy and non apoptotic cell death. Therefore tests were conducted to determine whether ATG genes were required for cell death. L929 cells were treated for 36 hours with zVAD or DMSO after transfection with beclin 1 ATG7 mAPG RNAi or nonspecific NS oligoribonucleotides and reduction in cell number solid bar and vaculated cell open bars were quantified. As shown in expression of ATG7 was reduced by RNAi and it can be seen that zVAD induced cell death was almost completely inhibited. Further reduction of the expression of Beclin 1 protein by RNAi also decreased zVAD induced death. Reduction in the corresponding protein can be seen in the Western blot inset .

Reduction of the expression of ATG7 and beclin 1 also inhibited zVAD induced death in human U937 cells as shown in . U937 cells were activated by 10 ng ml phorbol myristat acetate for 24 hours after transfection with beclin 1 ATG7 hGSa7 RNAi or nonspecific NS oligoribonucleotides and then reduction in cell numbers was measured after zVAD treatment for 36 hours.

TEM analyses of cells with reduced Atg7 or Beclin 1 protein levels showed a parallel inhibition of autophagic vacuole formation associated with reduced cell death as shown in . provides representative TEM photomicrographs of the L929 cells treated with zVAD 24 hours and with the indicated RNAi preparations. The fractions of cells with autophagic features based on TEM were quantitated and the data set forth in Table 2.

Thus thus expression of the Atg7 and Beclin 1 genes is required for nonapoptotic cell death triggered by zVAD.

Death receptors can elicit nonapoptotic death through the receptor interacting protein RIP a death domain containing serine threonine kinase 6 7 . RIP expression was reduced by RNAi and decreased autophagy and cell death was observed. For example cells were treated with zVAD after transfection with RIP RNAi or nonspecific NS oligonucleotides. Reduction in cell number solid bars and the fractions of cells with autophagic features based on TEM open bars are shown in . is a western blot for phospho JNK left lane or total JNK protein right lane after zVAD treatment. zVAD activated c Jun N terminal kinase JNK that is also activated by RIP in response to cytokines.

L929 cells were pretreated with 1 ug ml JNK inhibitor II 1 ug ml p38 inhibitor SB 203580 or 1 ug ml Erk inhibitor PD 98059 for 1 hour and were then treated with 20 uM zVAD for 40 hours with zVAD dissolved in DMSO as a control. cell loss was quantified by flow cytometry By viewing it can be seen that the JNK inhibitor but not inhibitors against p38 or Erk blocked zVAD induced cell death further indicating a specific role for JNK. Further the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide CHX blocked cell death indicating that protein synthesis was required as shown in .

Reduction in cell number was quantified and shown in following zVAD treatment for 36 hours after transfection with MKK7 RNAi c jun RNAi or nonspecific oligoribonucleotides solid bars and the fractions of cells with autophagic features by TEM open bars . RNAi silencing of the JNK activating kinase MKK7 MAP kinase 7 also completely prevented cell death and formation of autophagic vacuoles as shown in . The steady state amounts of the corresponding proteins are shown by Western blot inset . RNAi suppression of the transcription factor c Jun reduced but did not eliminate the c Jun protein and inhibited autophagy and cell death by 45 to 50 . Thus a signal pathway involving RIP MKK7 JNK and c Jun appears to activate autophagy and cell death. The involvement of c Jun and new protein synthesis implies transcription of target genes may also be required.

Finally the mechanism as to how zVAD induced autophagic cell death was investigated. RNAi was used to progressively reduce caspase 8 expression over time. shows the time course of viability of L929 cells transfected with either nonspecific NS open bars or caspase 8 specific solid bars RNAi at 24 96 and 110 hours after transfection. It was found that cell death was correspondingly increased by inhibiting the expression of caspase 8 and thereby inducing the autophagic pathway. Inset panels show the abundance of caspase 8 protein by Western blot.

Representative TEM pictures and quantification of the cells treated with either nonspecific or caspase 8 specific RNAi showed features of autophagy. Cells were harvested at 96 hours after RNAi transfection a NS control cell b to d Caspase 8 RNAi at different magnifications. The arrows in c and d show double membrane autophagic vacuoles. FIG. B e shows the fraction of cells with autophagic features based on TEM. The NS control cell open bar and the caspase 8 RNAi solid bar .

Other peptide caspase inhibitors such as zFA LEHD DEVD or ZAAD had no ability to induce cell death as shown in . L929 cells were treated with 1 ul ml DMSO 20 uM zVAD 20 uM zFA 20 uM LEHD 20 uM DEVD or 20 uM zAAD for 40 hours and cell loss was quantified by flow cytometry. Clearly none of the other inhibitors or DMSO induced cell death except the caspase 8 inhibitor. Further RNAi suppression of caspases 1 2 3 9 and 12 had no ability to induce death as shown in . Because zVAD is a potent inhibitor of caspase 8 it likely exerted its death effect through inhibition of caspase 8.

It was observed that the signaling through the serine threonine kinase RIP is essential for autophagic cell death. When RIP is cleaved and inactivated by caspase 8 then a mechanism is provided for the prevention of autophagic cell death. However inhibition of caspase 8 allows RIP to transmit the signal needed to kill the cell through the autophagic pathway. shows that RIP was partially cleaved into fragments which is characteristic of caspase 8 activity in the cells however no cleaved fragments were found in cells that were treated with the caspase 8 inhibitor zVAD. Clearly zVAD treatment prevents RIP from constitutive caspase 8 cleavage. The indicated band is the 42 kD proteolytic product that is characteristic of caspase 8 cleavage 1 .

The results shown herein indicate that two key autophagy genes ATG7 and beclin 1 are necessary for a non apoptotic death pathway in mammalian cells. The conservation of autophagy genes throughout phylogeny suggests that this form of death has a role in many eukaryotes. The suppression of autophagic death by caspase 8 in mammalian cells indicates caspases can regulate both apoptotic and non apoptotic cell death. Because viral pathogens and cancer tumor cells have caspase inhibitors the autophagic pathway is likely poised to counter infection or cancer as a fail safe mechanism of non apoptotic cell death.

The contents of the references discussed herein are hereby incorporated by reference herein for all purposes.

