---

title: Process for treating waste from the production of energetics
abstract: A waste stream is treated in a pre-filter having media, preferably sand, connected below a zero-valent metal column reactor incorporating a metal with reducing potential, preferably elemental iron (Fe); the combination preferably configured as a single unit. The waste stream is pumped through the pre-filter to trap solids and deoxygenate it, then enters the reactor and is subjected to a reducing process. Most of the Feis transformed to the ferrous ion (Fe), mixed with the reduced product, and fed to a continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) in which Fenton oxidation occurs. The output is then sent to a sedimentation tank and pH-neutralized using a strong base such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH). The aqueous portion is drawn off and the sludge pumped from the sedimentation tank. The system is monitored and controlled to optimize required additives, while monitoring of pressure drop across the pre-filter and column reactor establishes replacement requirements.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07445717&OS=07445717&RS=07445717
owner: United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07445717
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050908
---
Under paragraph 1 a of Executive Order 10096 the conditions under which this invention was made entitle the Government of the United States as represented by the Secretary of the Army to an undivided interest therein on any patent granted thereon by the United States. This patent has multiple assignees. This and related patents are available for licensing to qualified licensees. Please contact Bea Shahin at 217 373 7234.

Under 35 U.S.C 121 this application claims the benefit of prior U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 097 089 A Process and System for Treating Waste from the Production of Energetics by Cha et al. filed Mar. 14 2002 now abandoned incorporated herein by reference.

Carbon sorption is the conventional method for treating munitions manufacturing waste containing explosive compounds such as 2 4 6 trinitrotoluene TNT trimethylenetrinitronitramine RDX and tetramethylenetetranitramine HMX . The liquid form of this waste is termed pinkwater. Typically using granulated activated carbon GAC filters the waste is passed through the GAC with the explosive constituents removed by sorbing onto the carbon. This method is non destructive i.e. the sorbed molecules of contaminant remain intact chemically. Thus the process generates spent contaminant laden GAC filters that require further treatment to include regeneration of the carbon filter for re use or safe disposal at the end of the filter s useful life. The U.S. military and its contractors generate substantial amounts of spent GAC from pinkwater treatment and would save considerable resources by replacing the GAC filtration process with a process that actually destroys or neutralizes energetic contaminants.

Thus it is a given that conventional sorbing processes have several disadvantages that are immutable. Further direct oxidation by chemical or biological processes is not as efficient as sequential reduction oxidation processes due to the relatively oxidized nature of energetics.

It is known to use the Fenton reaction for oxidizing hydrocarbons to their constituents. Typically the oxidizing agent used in the reaction is hydrogen peroxide HO. Mixed with a metallic salt HOproduces a free radical that breaks the bonds of a hydrocarbon molecule in an exothermic reaction. This results in a low free energy state generally associated with the production of carbon dioxide CO and water.

Elemental iron Fe oxidizes to Fein the presence of oxygen. This removes most of the oxygen from the solution and contributes to the solution attaining an anaerobic state.

Zero valent iron has been used in permeable reactive barriers PRBs an emerging technology that has been applied in recent years to remediate groundwater contaminated with a wide range of pollutants. EPA 600 R 98 125 U.S. EPA September 1998 Field Applications of In Situ Remediation Technologies Permeable Reactive Barriers EPA 542 R 99 002 U.S. EPA June 1999. Iron is a strong reducing agent E 0.44V and can reduce relatively oxidized pollutants including chlorinated solvents metals nitrates and radionuclides. U.S. EPA September 1998 .

Researchers have shown that iron can reduce TNT RDX and HMX at high rates. Hundal L. S. et al. 97 55 64 1997. Further the Fenton reaction is an established process applied to treat a wide variety of pollutants in hazardous wastes wastewater and groundwater. Eckenfelder W. W. Technomic Publishing Co. Inc. Lancaster Pa. pp. 1 10 1992 Huang C. P. et al. 16 361 377 1993.

The well known Fenton reaction has been used in a number of recent patents dealing with environmental remediation. For example for in situ subterranean treatment of contaminated ground water or soil the following employ the Fenton reaction as at least a part of their process U.S. Pat. No. 6 206 098 In situ Water and Soil Remediation Method and System to Cooper et al. Mar. 27 2001 using a catalyst prior to injection of an oxidizer to initiate the Fenton reaction U.S. Pat. No. 5 967 230 In situ Water and Soil Remediation Method and System to Cooper et al. Oct. 19 1999 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 611 642 Remediation Apparatus and Method for Organic Contamination in Soil and Groundwater to Wilson Mar. 18 1997 describing a subterranean system for implementing the Fenton reaction.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 789 649 Method for Remediating Contaminated Soils to Batchelor et al. Aug. 4 1998 describes the use of zero valent iron and a catalytic metal to degrade chlorinated compound contaminated soil. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 611 936 5 616 253 Apr. 1 1997 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 759 389 Jun. 2 1998 all entitled Dechlorination of TCE with Palladized Iron all to Fernando et al. describe a method to de chlorinate TCE with elemental iron having a palladium coating.

Zero valent iron is used for at least part of the remediation process in establishing subterranean permeable reactive barriers as described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 733 067 Method and System for Bioremediation of Contaminated Soil Using Inoculated Support Spheres to Hunt et al. Mar. 31 1998 U.S. Pat. No. 5 833 388 Nov. 10 1998 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 975 800 Nov. 2 1999 both entitled Method for Directing Groundwater Flow and Treating Groundwater In Situ both to Edwards and Dick U.S. Pat. No. 5 857 810 In Situ Chemical Barrier and Method of Making to Cantrell and Kaplan Jan. 12 1999 and U.S. Pat. No. 6 207 114 Reactive Material Placement Technique for Groundwater Treatment to Quinn et al. Mar. 27 2001.

Zero valent iron powder has been used for in situ decontamination of halocarbons and metals more noble than iron as described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 975 798 In Situ Decontamination of Subsurface Waste Using Distributed Iron Powder to Liskowitz et al. Nov. 2 1999. U.S. Pat. No. 6 132 623 Immobilization of Inorganic Arsenic Species Using Iron to Nikolaidis et al. Oct. 17 2000 describes the use of zero valent iron to immobilize inorganic arsenic species. U.S. Pat. No. 5 783 088 Method of Removing Oxidized Contaminants from Water to Amonette et al. Jul. 21 1998 describes treatment of oxidized contaminants using a layered aluminosilicate incorporating Fe II . U.S. Pat. No. 5 538 636 Process for Chemically Oxidizing Highly Concentrated Waste Waters to Gnann et al. Jul. 23 1996 uses the Fenton reaction together with electrolysis and multiple steps of neutralization to purify wastewater and address problems associated with the sludge resulting therefrom.

The process provided by a preferred embodiment of the present invention transforms the energetic compounds in waste associated with munitions production and de commissioning. It eliminates the need for subsequent treatment or re generation with attendant concerns of possible secondary contamination. The process involves at least one pre filtration and two sequential reduction and oxidation reactions and a post reaction neutralization process to break down energetics to innocuous end products such as carbon dioxide water and environmentally benign products precipitated in a sludge.

The two step treatment process combines two known treatment technologies zero valent metal reduction and Fenton oxidation. It also provides a final polishing step in which the acid pH of the mixture resulting from the Fenton reaction is neutralized and sediment settled out of the aqueous mixture.

It capitalizes on the advantages of each of the individual reduction and oxidation reactions and the resulting synergism of their serial combination. The neutralization post treatment step enables re use of the water by product and stabilizes any resulting precipitated sludge.

The system uses a pre filter containing filter media and a zero valent metal a first vessel for conducting the Fenton oxidation and a second vessel for pH neutralizing the treated waste and allowing it to settle prior to drawing off water for re use and pumping any resultant sludge for further disposition. The system is designed to handle those highly oxidized waste streams that would not ordinarily lend themselves to Fenton oxidation such as those containing energetics in particular TNT RDX HMX and combinations thereof.

The pre filter system may use natural material as filter media such as sand or diatomaceous earth or manmade material such as polystyrene particles. Although elemental iron Fe is the most cost effective and efficient to use metals such as tin aluminum zinc magnesium nickel palladium platinum and combinations thereof may be used with the filter media. Upon reaction of the elemental iron with the waste stream at least part of it is converted to the ferrous ion Fe and combined with the filtered and now initially treated waste stream. The iron and sand may be incorporated in a replaceable vented cartridge the venting providing for safely dumping accumulating gases such as hydrogen.

The system may also use a mix control module to facilitate automated control of the mix within the Fenton oxidation reactor and the settling tank. The mix control module monitors and controls the pH of each of the reactor and the settling tank as well as the amount of the oxidizer typically hydrogen peroxide HO and metal ion typically the ferrous ion Fe in the Fenton reactor. A preferred reactor would be of the continuous stirred tank reactor CSTR type. Alternatively the Fenton reactor could be a tank provided with an impeller mixer.

For the settlement tank pH is neutralized to within the range of 6.0 8.0 by adding a base such as NaOH and suspended solids are permitted to settle forming sludge. A sludge pump is provided for emptying the settling tank periodically as needed.

In a preferred embodiment the Fenton reactor is positioned lower than the zero valent reactor thus enabling gravity feed of the filtered and reduced waste stream from the zero valent reactor to the Fenton reactor. Likewise the settling tank is positioned lower than the Fenton reactor thus enabling gravity feeding of the contents of the Fenton reactor to the settling tank. The integrated use of a preferred embodiment of the present invention in the processing line of a manufacturing plant is envisioned.

A method for filtering and deoxygenating a waste stream containing suspended and colloidal highly oxidized solids comprises 

The process permits reclaiming most of the aqueous portion of a waste stream s constituents and renders any sludge benign and suitable for possible re use or safe disposal. The process further provides for automated monitoring and control of both the Fenton reactor and the settling tank.

Compared to presently used methods a preferred embodiment of the present invention replaces traditional GAC filtration while reducing the need for subsequent processing and regeneration of the GAC.

Select embodiments of the present invention incorporate pre filtration and a reduction and an oxidation reaction process seriatim. Pre filtration employs filter media such as fine sand to filter solids. A zero valent metal column reactor de oxygenates the waste stream in a first process. The first process involves the use of a metal having an inherent reducing potential typically elemental iron Fe available as scrap iron while the second process facilitates the well known Fenton reaction. The pre filtration and first process may be accomplished in the same vessel. To enable re use of any aqueous portion of the waste stream a final polishing step may be employed to neutralize the effluent resultant from the second process Fenton reaction .

A schematic diagram of a preferred embodiment of the present invention is illustrated in . A waste stream containing energetics is provided via a pump . The first treatment uses a pre filter A and a zero valent metal column reactor B. A pre filter A containing sand and zero valent metal filters solids such as particles of TNT RDX HMX nitroglycerin NG and de oxygenates the aqueous portion of the waste stream through a chemical reducing reaction facilitated by the zero valent metal in the pre filter A and the zero valent column reactor B. The ratio of sand to metal is maintained at a level sufficient to treat the expected waste stream with a typical value of 85 sand to 15 elemental iron. Next the product from the pre filter A i.e. filtered water containing energetic compounds is reduced in the zero valent column reactor B. Both the pre filter A and the zero valent metal column reactor B are vented to prevent accumulation of hydrogen gas by providing a breather at the top of the zero valent column reactor B.

The Fenton reaction reactor uses iron released from a zero valent column reactor B as Fe together with injected hydrogen peroxide HO to complete the remediation of the pinkwater and associated solid wastes. To optimize the reaction provision is made for injection of an acid typically sulfuric acid to maintain a sufficiently low pH of 2.0 3.0. Normally the amount of Fegenerated in the zero valent column reactor B will be sufficient to carry the Fenton reaction. Should this not be the case the same injection system used to provide the acid may be used to supplement the Fenton reaction with additional metal. An impeller mixer is provided in the Fenton reaction tank to insure complete mixing and subsequent transformation of the energetic intermediates.

A settling tank into which a strong base such as sodium hydroxide NaOH is mixed is provided to both neutralize the resultant product and to separate the aqueous part from the solids. This tank is also monitored via a controller to maintain optimum pH. The solids are removed as a benign sludge by a sludge pump while the aqueous portion is re cycled as needed.

Scrap iron is an industrial waste material that is readily available and relatively inexpensive. A sand and iron pre filter A with an inherently long service life facilitates a passive process that requires little maintenance or regeneration requiring only a pump to draw the waste stream into it. Degradation of zero valent iron does not generate toxic by products. The reduction products of the energetics may be of concern however. The subsequent Fenton oxidation process fully oxidizing the reduction products to benign constituents such as CO2 water and benign inorganic compounds breaks down these products.

It may be difficult for Fenton s reagent alone to oxidize energetics due to their highly oxidized nature. This is addressed uniquely in select embodiments of the present invention by using a combination of a pre filter A and a zero valent metal column reactor B to reduce the explosives to products that are much more amenable to processing using the Fenton reaction. Yet another advantage of a preferred embodiment of the present invention is the use of the Fe a degradation by product of the pre treatment process in the subsequent Fenton reactor thereby reducing the need for supplying commercial ferrous additives.

Selective embodiments of a process using this innovative treatment system specifically remove and mineralize TNT and heterocyclic nitramines RDX and HMX from pinkwater.

The U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center ERDC in cooperation with the University of Delaware conducted bench scale tests on the processes of the instant invention. Refer to for results of TNT RDX and HMX reduction experiments conducted on bench scale reactors using these commonly available materials sand and scrap iron in a pre filter A scrap iron in a zero valent column reactor B hydrogen peroxide and sulfuric acid added to a first vessel comprising the Fenton reactor and sodium hydroxide to base neutralize the resultant acidic waste stream in a second vessel. The majority of TNT in solution was removed within 30 minutes. Similarly RDX and HMX in solution were completely removed within 30 minutes.

Refer to . Preliminary experiments using a glass column of 2.5 cm diameter filled with scrap iron rapidly reduced TNT and RDX . Results from the column study show that the concentrations of TNT and RDX in column effluent can be predicted using the advection dispersion reaction equation 

To evaluate whether the metal pre treatment in the pre filter A and zero valent metal column reactor B will enhance the subsequent Fenton oxidation process experiments were carried out to study mineralization of the reduction products of the explosive compounds by Fenton s reagent HOand Fe . A five fold increase was observed in mineralization of TNT due to Fe 0 pre treatment. In another study HO 40 mM was added to effluent from a zero valent column reactor B which received a wastewater containing TNT and RDX. No TNT or RDX was detected in the effluent indicating that TNT and RDX were completely reduced to TAT and the ring cleavage products of RDX respectively. Subsequent HOaddition mineralized 50 of TAT and greater than 95 of RDX reduction products within 100 minutes.

Refer to . A pump provides the waste to a system for accomplishing a process representing a preferred embodiment of the present invention. The system uses a unit that incorporates a pre filter A containing filter media and zero valent metal for filtration of solids and de oxygenation of the wastewater stream and a zero valent metal column reactor B to reduce the highly oxidized state of the energetics in the waste stream a Fenton reaction vessel to which a strong oxidizer typically hydrogen peroxide is added to mineralize the metal treated energetics in the waste stream a mix control system a supply of oxidizer a neutralization and sedimentation tank and a source of a strong base. The waste stream may be fed to the Fenton reaction vessel via gravity feed. Likewise the clean water from the neutralization and sedimentation tank may be gravity fed to a holding tank or the like. A sludge pump is an option for removing sediment from the neutralization and sedimentation tank for further disposal.

A pump supplies a waste stream e.g. pinkwater to the bottom of a pre filter A containing a mixture of sand and zero valent iron in a ratio of 15 85. The iron de oxygenates the pinkwater as the iron transforms from Feto Fe and the sand filters colloidal and suspended particles from the pinkwater. The pre filter A may be provided in the form of a disposable cartridge or be an adapted sand filter available from swimming pool supply companies.

As the pinkwater flows upwards through the zero valent metal column reactor B the energetics contained therein are reduced quickly by the zero valent iron. For example TNT is reduced to triaminotoluene TAT and RDX and HMX are reduced to ring cleavage products. The effluent which carries the reduction products and corrosion by products such as the ferrous ion Fe then exits from the top of the column B and flows to the Fenton reaction vessel by gravity. A gas vent is located at the top of the column B to release any hydrogen gas generated from the anaerobic reduction process.

The Fenton oxidation process takes place in a Fenton reaction vessel that in one configuration is a continuously stirred tank reactor CSTR that uses an externally powered mixing paddle . To the CSTR a hydrogen peroxide solution is added continually to produce Fenton s reagent i.e. hydrogen peroxide HO plus Fe . In the presence of Fe hydrogen peroxide decomposes to form the hydroxyl radical OH a very strong oxidizing agent with E 2.33V that quickly oxidizes the reduction products of the energetics to stable end products such as carbon dioxide water and a nitrate. For the Fenton reaction to occur optimally the pH in the CSTR is maintained within a range of 2.0 3.0 using a mix control system e.g. pH meter recorder and automated controller to add the necessary pH reducer such as a sulfuric acid solution HSO from an acid source . The contents of the CSTR are continuously stirred with one or more mixing paddles such as those used with impeller mixers. Under normal operation addition of iron to the CSTR is not required. However should the need arise iron as a ferrous ion Fe may be injected in the same manner as the acid.

The treated effluent from the CSTR flows into a neutralization and sedimentation tank by gravity where it is pH neutralized by adding a base such as sodium hydroxide NaOH from a supply tank or other source. By bringing the pH to a neutral value in the range of 6.0 8.0 a sludge containing a ferric hydroxide is formed from precipitation of the ferric ion. The sludge is collected and removed at the bottom of the neutralization and sedimentation tank via a sludge pump . The treated water exits the top of the neutralization and sedimentation tank and may be re used.

Although a preferred embodiment of the present invention focuses on pinkwater treatment any waste containing energetic compounds explosives propellants and other pyrotechnic compounds may be treated efficiently by this method. For example waste generated from demilitarization activities air scrubber fluids or solutions containing energetic compounds clean up site lagoon water containing energetic compounds and ground water contaminated with energetics that is pumped to the surface for treatment.

Although specific functions for this system and method have been described other functions using the described apparatus and method are not excluded from falling within the ambit of the claims herein.

The abstract is provided to comply with the rules requiring an abstract which will allow a searcher to quickly ascertain the subject matter of the technical disclosure of any patent issued from this disclosure. 37 CFR 1.72 b . Any advantages and benefits described may not apply to all embodiments of the invention.

