---

title: Apparatus and methods for product acceptance testing on a wireless device
abstract: Apparatus, methods, and programs for testing the communications processing ability, and determining product acceptance, of a wireless device. Embodiments include a product acceptance test application disposed on the wireless device and including simulated communications representative of actual communications with a wireless network. A communications processing engine disposed on the wireless device is operable to process the simulated communications, and thereby generates product acceptance data associated with a product acceptance decision.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08019333&OS=08019333&RS=08019333
owner: Qualcomm Incorporated
number: 08019333
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050314
---
The described embodiments generally relate to wireless communications devices and computer networks. More particularly the described embodiments relate to apparatus and methods of product acceptance testing on a wireless device and the collection and analysis of product acceptance data from the wireless device.

Wireless networking connects one or more wireless devices to other computer devices without a direct electrical connection such as a copper wire or optical cable. Wireless devices communicate data typically in the form of packets across a wireless or partially wireless computer network and open a data or communication channel on the network such that the device can send and receive data packets. The wireless devices often have wireless device resources such as programs and hardware components which individually use open communication connections to transmit and receive data on the network. In order for the wireless devices to operate on the wireless networks the devices need to be set up or configured and then tested i.e. product acceptance testing. Such set up or configuration typically includes installing or adjusting various hardware software and or firmware and other associated parameters on the wireless device. Further the set up or configuration is typically analyzed by running the product acceptance tests on the wireless device to measure the performance and or operability of the wireless device on the wireless network. Each type of wireless device may have its own device specific set up and each wireless network and or carrier may also have their network specific and or carrier specific set ups. Thus the initial set up and configuration of a wireless device for operation on a given wireless network is typically very complicated and time consuming.

Another complicating factor in the initial set up and testing of a wireless device is that typically external testing devices are required. For example in a wireless device such as a cellular phone various analyzers are serially connected to the phone and input and or measure various test parameters. In order to maximize throughput such testing is typically performed in a batch mode on a plurality of wireless devices resulting in a confusing mass of external testing devices cables and wireless devices. Further typically such tests involve mobile tests such as driving the cellular phone around a predetermined area to test its receive and transmit capabilities in varying environmental conditions. For example with a cellular phone these tests involve an exchange of messaging communications between a base station and the cellular phone. These mobile tests can be very inefficient as the environmental conditions may not be consistent as in the case of a change in the weather and as driving around with the wireless device can be very time consuming. Further such mobile testing and the moving around connecting and disconnecting of the wireless device tend to increase the potential for damaging the wireless device.

Accordingly it would be advantageous to provide an apparatus and method that allows for less complicated safer and more consistent product acceptance testing.

The described embodiments comprise apparatus methods and programs for self contained product acceptance testing on a wireless device.

In one embodiment for example an apparatus for product acceptance testing on a wireless device comprises a product acceptance test application disposed on the wireless device and including simulated communications representative of actual communications with a wireless network. The apparatus also comprises a communications processing engine disposed on the wireless device for processing the simulated communications and thereby generating product acceptance data associated with a product acceptance decision.

In another embodiment a wireless communications device comprises a computer platform having a simulation module operable to simulate network communications of the wireless communications device on a wireless network wherein the simulated network communications are associated with a predetermined network communications test scenario. The device also comprises a communications processing engine disposed on the wireless communications device for processing the simulated network communications and generating corresponding product acceptance data for determining compliance of the wireless communications device with a predetermined communications processing standard.

In yet another embodiment an apparatus for analyzing data from a wireless communications device comprises a module for receiving product acceptance data corresponding to a processing of a simulated communications message on the wireless communications device. The product acceptance data is associated with a predetermined network communications test scenario and the simulated communications message is associated with a communication on a wireless network. The apparatus also comprises a product acceptance test application executable by the module and including an analysis engine operable to analyze the product acceptance data and generate a product acceptance decision.

In a further embodiment a method of performing product acceptance testing of a wireless device comprises simulating communications between the wireless device and another device associated with a wireless communications network and collecting product acceptance data associated with processing of the simulated communications by the wireless device. The method further comprises forwarding the collected product acceptance data for analysis to determine a product acceptance decision. In an alternate embodiment a computer program is resident in a computer readable medium that when executed directs a wireless device to perform the above described method.

In still another embodiment a method of performing product acceptance testing comprises transmitting at least a portion of a product acceptance test application across a wireless network to a wireless communications device having a communications processing engine. The product acceptance test application includes a simulation module for simulating network communications with the communications processing engine. The simulated network communications correspond to a predetermined network communications test scenario. The method further comprises receiving product acceptance data from the wireless communication device where the product acceptance data comprises test result data corresponding to the processing of the simulated network communications by the communications processing engine. And the method comprises determining a product acceptance decision based on the product acceptance data. In an alternate embodiment a computer program is resident in a computer readable medium that when executed directs a wireless device to perform the above described method.

In a further embodiment a wireless communications device comprises a first means for simulating network communications of the wireless communications device on a wireless network wherein the simulated network communications are associated with a predetermined network communications test scenario. The device further comprises a second means for processing the simulated network communications and generating corresponding product acceptance data for determining compliance of the wireless communications device with a predetermined communications processing standard.

In another embodiment an apparatus for performing product acceptance testing comprises a first means for transmitting at least a portion of a product acceptance test application across a wireless network to a wireless communications device having a communications processing engine. The product acceptance test application includes a simulation module for simulating network communications with the communications processing engine. The simulated network communications correspond to a predetermined network communications test scenario. The apparatus further comprises a second means for receiving product acceptance data from the wireless communication device where the product acceptance data comprises test result data corresponding to the processing of the simulated network communications by the communications processing engine. And the apparatus comprises a third means for determining a product acceptance decision based on the product acceptance data.

Additional aspects and advantages of the disclosed embodiments are set forth in part in the description which follows and in part are obvious from the description or may be learned by practice of the disclosed embodiments. The aspects and advantages of the disclosed embodiments may also be realized and attained by the means of the instrumentalities and combinations particularly pointed out in the appended claims.

Referring to one embodiment of a product acceptance testing apparatus includes a plurality of wireless devices that each include a product acceptance testing application operable to simulate predetermined network communications test scenarios on the respective device and to determine if the device is configured and operable according to predetermined communications processing standards . For example such predetermined network communications test scenarios and predetermined communications processing standards include protocols relating to the initiation maintenance and termination of data communications on the wireless device thereby establishing operability and performance levels of the device on a network. In one embodiment wireless devices are positioned within a wireless network area and communicate across a wireless network with each other and or with a product acceptance data gathering and or user manager server . User manager may communicate with wireless devices through a direct wired connection or through a wireless connection such as through a network interface in communication with wireless network . The communications between user manager and wireless devices may include downloads of all or selected portions such as particular test suites of product acceptance testing application . Other such communications include uploads from each wireless device that supply product acceptance data i.e. the test results back to the user manager . Additionally user manager may include an analysis engine for comparing the received product acceptance data with predetermined communication performance standards to generate a product acceptance decision . Alternatively analysis engine may be associated with product acceptance testing application and may be executable on the respective wireless device . It should be noted however that due to the simulation capabilities of product acceptance testing application wireless devices advantageously do not need to be in communication with wireless network in order to execute this application and test communications processing ability of the device.

Product acceptance testing application may be initiated at any time and product acceptance data may be stored on and obtained from the respective wireless device at any time via a wired or wireless connection to the respective wireless device. Product acceptance testing application simulates at least one of a wireless network a wireless network component or another device on wireless network and the associated communications messaging such as by generating simulated wireless signaling messages. Further product acceptance test application logs the associated communications processing data i.e. product acceptance data relevant to determine compliance with predetermined communications processing standards . Such product acceptance data is indicative of the wireless device set up performance and implementation of the device on the network. As mentioned above the logged product acceptance data may be stored within the respective wireless device and later uploaded via a wired or wireless connection to user manager for analysis. By eliminating the need during testing for interaction with a wireless network and by eliminating the need for complicated external cabling and expensive external devices this solution advantageously reduces the amount of time and resources necessary to run any predetermined network communications test scenario and provide proof of compliance with any predetermined communications processing standard . Thus in one embodiment product acceptance testing application provides each wireless device with a resident or self contained capability for simulating communications representative of actual communications with a wireless network and automatically performing product acceptance testing while user manager analyzes the test results and validates the configuration and operation of the device.

The wireless devices can include any type of computerized wireless devices such as cellular telephone personal digital assistant two way text pager and even a separate computer platform that has a wireless communication portal and which also may have a wired connection to a network or the Internet. The wireless device can be a remote slave or other device that does not have an end user thereof but simply communicates data across the wireless network such as remote sensors diagnostic tools data relays and the like. The apparatus and method of self contained product acceptance testing on the wireless device can accordingly be performed on any form of wireless device or computer module including a wired or wireless communication portal including without limitation wireless modems PCMCIA cards access terminals personal computers telephones or any combination or sub combination thereof.

Referring to each wireless device such as cellular telephone in this case has a computer platform that can transmit data across wireless network and that can receive and execute software applications and display data transmitted from user manager or another computer device connected to wireless network . Computer platform also includes an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other chipset processor logic circuit or other data processing device. ASIC or other processor may execute an application programming interface API layer that interfaces with any resident programs such as product acceptance testing application in a memory of the wireless device. API is a runtime environment executing on the respective wireless device . One such runtime environment is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW software developed by Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. Other runtime environments may be utilized that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless computing devices. Memory may include read only and or random access memory RAM and ROM EPROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. Computer platform also includes a local database that can hold the software applications files or data not actively used in memory such as the software applications or data downloaded from user manager . Local database typically includes one or more flash memory cells but can be any secondary or tertiary storage device such as magnetic media EPROM EEPROM optical media tape or soft or hard disk. Additionally local database can ultimately hold a resident copy of product acceptance application or agent as is further described herein.

Referring to in one embodiment computer platform includes product acceptance test application that interfaces with API and is executable by a communications processing engine . Communications processing engine includes various processing subsystems embodied in hardware firmware software and combinations thereof that enable the functionality of the respective wireless device and the operability of the respective device on wireless network such as for exchanging data communications with other devices. For example communications processing engine may include one or a combination of processing subsystems such as sound non volatile memory file system transmit receive searcher physical layer link layer call processing layer main control remote procedure handset power management diagnostic digital signal processor vocoder messaging call manager Bluetooth Bluetooth LPOS position determination position engine user interface sleep data services security authentication USIM SIM voice services graphics USB camera camcorder interface and associated display drivers multimedia such as MPEG GPRS etc. In one embodiment API includes a class of software extensions that allow product acceptance test application to access communications processing engine . These software extensions can communicate with processing subsystems on the wireless device which allows both data reads and commands. For example this software extension can send commands including register for log messages on behalf of the applications that invoke it. The module can then forward the responses of the subsystems to product acceptance test application or ultimately across wireless network to user manager . Each resident application on wireless device can create an instance of this new software extension to communicate with the subsystems independently.

In one embodiment such as a cellular telephone processing subsystems include at least a receive Rx component for receiving communications sent to the processor of the wireless device at least one call processing CP component and or system determination SD component for handling the initiation authentication handoffs data exchanges messaging protocols internal processing and decision making etc. associated with processing a message and a transmit Tx component for sending communications from the processor of the wireless device such as to handset components wireless network wireless network components and other devices connected to the wireless network. In this embodiment CP component may handle the majority of the call processing tasks while SD component may handle tasks relating to selecting an appropriate system from a plurality of systems with which to communicate as well as higher level decision making tasks referenced by CP component .

In one embodiment product acceptance test application further includes a network simulation module and a wireless device handset simulation module and one or both of these modules may receive the communications transmitted from Tx component and simulate an appropriate response. During the testing of simulated communication scenarios product acceptance test application and API provide calls to communications processing engine that prevent Tx component from transmitting over the air and instead direct the transmission to product acceptance test application . Network simulation module includes but is not limited to a plurality of messages message protocols and parameters network characteristics etc. such as may be associated with predetermined test scenarios and predetermined device network standards in order to simulate a communication of a wireless network a network component such as a mobile phone base station or other devices such as a content provider server or a wired network connected to a wireless network with the respective wireless device and communications processing engine . Similarly wireless device handset simulation module replicates the message protocols and user interactions of a handset such as sending an SMS message taking a picture and or running an application. Wireless handset simulation module includes a plurality of messages message protocols handset feature characteristics etc. such as may be associated with predetermined test scenarios and predetermined device network standards in order to simulate a user interaction and or a communication of a handset feature and or component with communications processing engine and or some other component of the respective wireless device. As such network simulation module and wireless device handset simulation module may each send communications messages to Rx component and or may each receive communications messages from Tx component to simulate at least some portion of a predetermined network communications test scenario . Additionally the resident product acceptance test application monitors communications processing engine and the various processing subsystems during execution of test scenarios and logs the various parameters messages messaging protocols etc. which define product acceptance data . Product acceptance data may then be analyzed such as by a comparison with predetermined communications standards to determine whether or not the wireless device is properly configured and suitably operable.

Predetermined test scenarios which may include a wide range of operational tests simulated by product acceptance test application may be defined by predetermined communications processing standards which may include industry wide and or carrier specific acceptance tests parameters messaging protocols operational criteria and or associated parameter values indicative of an acceptable or compliant product. For example in a cellular telephone embodiment predetermined communications processing standards may include parameters messaging protocols and other characteristics associated with processing communications on the wireless device. Suitable examples of predetermined communications processing standards include at least one of CDMA Development Group CDG Stage 2 Interoperability Testing for CDMA2000 Mobiles CDG Stage 3 Interoperability Testing for CDMA2000 Mobiles GSM Certification Forum GCF standards Telecommunication Industry Association TIA standards 3rd Generation Partnership Project 3GPP standards 3GPP2 standards etc each of which is hereby incorporated by reference. Suitable examples of predetermined test scenarios include at least one of air interface tests plain old telephone service POTS tests handoff tests power control tests registration tests authentication tests service redirection tests short messaging service SMS tests subscriber calling features tests asynchronous data and fax services tests low medium and high speed packet data services tests voice quality tests over the air services tests system selection for preferred roaming tests message driven indicator tests forward compatibility tests minimum performance testing signaling conformance testing application interface testing field testing and data performance testing etc.

Further for example these test scenarios may test the operational performance of various functions parameters characteristics messaging protocols etc. such as terminations originations and maintenance in strong signal weak signal and mixed signal environments radio frequency RF performance parameters such as receive Rx parameters including sensitivity isolated magnetic dipole IMD and self jamming transmit Tx parameters such as waveform quality Rho power control and maximum power and broadband BB and digital signal processing DSP parameters such as signal acquisition soft handoff SHO searcher and finger assignment interoperability performance parameters such as channel parameters including access channel ACH dedicated paging channel DPCH forward traffic channel FTCH and reverse traffic channel RTCH messaging parameters dealing with layer 1 and layer 2 and handoff parameters including SHO interband hard handoff HHO and interfrequency HHO. Further for example these test scenarios may test wireless device feature parameters such as system acquisition high speed packet data HSPD location determination call types POTS 3 way call waiting voice mail authentication etc. provisioning over the air service provisioning OTASP over the air parameter administration OTAPA IP over the air IOTA etc. and other parameters dealing with features such as short message service SMS multimedia service MMS browser Java software and BREW software.

Referring back to wireless network may include at least one or any combination of a cellular telephone network a terrestrial telephone network a satellite telephone network an infrared network such as an Infrared Data Association IrDA based network a short range wireless network a Bluetooth technology network a home radio frequency HomeRF network a shared wireless access protocol SWAP network a wideband network such as a wireless Ethernet compatibility alliance WECA network a wireless fidelity alliance Wi Fi Alliance network and a 802.11 network a public switched telephone network a public heterogeneous communications network such as the Internet a private communications network and land mobile radio network. Suitable examples of telephone networks include at least one or any combination of analog and digital networks technologies such as Personal Communications Services code division multiple access wideband code division multiple access universal mobile telecommunications system advanced mobile phone service time division multiple access frequency division multiple access global system for mobile communication analog and digital satellite systems and any other technologies protocols that may be used in at least one of a wireless communications network and a data communications network.

Network interface may be any mechanism that allows user manager to communicate across wireless network . For example network interface may include a local area network that connects user manager through an Internet Service Provider to the Internet which in turn may be connected to a respective wireless device through a carrier network and a base station.

In one embodiment apparatus can push at least one product acceptance test application to be resident at least temporarily on the computer platform of each wireless device . For example user manager may push product acceptance test application across wireless network to the respective device. Alternately product acceptance test application can be placed on the platform at the time of manufacture or initial programming or the wireless device can pull the application from another computer device on the network such as user manager either with a request from the end user or automatically. Product acceptance data can include but is not limited to messages messaging protocols and parameters generated from communications processing engine during the simulated operation of wireless device. Product acceptance data can allow for specific troubleshooting of a device within the wireless network based upon the gathered product acceptance data. As mentioned above product acceptance application or agent can be permanently stored in the local database of the wireless device computer platform or can only be temporarily held in memory thereof for a one time or n time execution to transmit product acceptance data .

Product acceptance test application may cause the respective wireless device to selectively transmit product acceptance data for that wireless device to another computer device such as user manager on the wireless network. In one embodiment product acceptance test application transmits product acceptance data from that wireless device to user manager across the wireless network when requested. Alternately product acceptance test data is transmitted over an open communication connection from the wireless device to the wireless network and thus piggybacked across an open connection such as a voice or data call at the cellular telephone . In a cellular network configuration product acceptance data can be transmitted to user manager through short message service. In another embodiment a remote user manager reads product acceptance data from the respective device through the resident product acceptance application and in some instances writes commands to computer platform and alters the operation of the wireless device . Accordingly the access to product acceptance testing application allows user manager to remotely control product acceptance testing and set up perform customer interactions remotely monitor the wireless device and remotely gather specific product acceptance information.

Referring back to user manager may be at least one of any type of server personal computer mini mainframes and the like. User manager and its corresponding components can give a ready view of product acceptance data collected from the wireless devices in any form such as tables maps graphics views plain text interactive programs or web pages or any other display or presentation of the data. User manager or plurality of servers can send software agents or applications such as product acceptance test application to wireless devices in the wireless network area such that the wireless devices return data from their resident applications. Wireless devices may transmit data such as product acceptance data to user manager or some other computer device on the network. User manager utilizes product acceptance data for purposes such as product acceptance testing product set up device diagnosis and or data mining. Also user manager may change an operational parameter and or configuration of a respective wireless device and or of a network component based on the product acceptance test data and or based on the analysis and product acceptance test decision generated by analysis engine . Further there can be a separate servers or computer devices associated with user manager that work in concert to provide data in usable formats to parties and or a separate layer of control in the data flow between the wireless devices and user manager .

Additionally apparatus includes analysis engine that analyzes product acceptance data and generates product acceptance decision as to whether or not the respective wireless device achieves predetermined communications processing standards associated with predetermined network communications scenarios . For example the analysis performed by analysis engine may compare select portions of product acceptance data with select portions of predetermined communications processing standards to see whether or not the data falls within the standards. The selected predetermined communications processing standards may be a minimum value a maximum value a range of values a predetermined value and combinations thereof. Further after performing an initial analysis on an initial set of product acceptance test data analysis engine may initiate further communications with one or more wireless devices to retrieve additional data related to product acceptance test data or to initiate simulation of additional test scenarios and generation of new product acceptance test data. Analysis engine may repeat such a feedback loop until a predetermined solution is achieved i.e. until a set number of tests are run and the results confirmed. Analysis engine may include hardware software firmware and combinations thereof for analyzing and processing product acceptance data . Additionally analysis engine may further include algorithms decision making routines statistical programs etc. for analyzing and interpreting product acceptance data . Analysis engine may be located anywhere in communication with apparatus such as on user manager or on a respective wireless device .

In another embodiment referring to for example apparatus may include wireless network connected to a wired network via a carrier network . The use of cellular telecommunication pathways has been increasing because wireless devices such as cellular telephone are being manufactured with increased computing capabilities and are becoming tantamount to personal computers and hand held personal digital assistants PDAs communicating packets including voice and data over the wireless network. These smart cellular telephones have installed application programming interfaces APIs onto their local computer platform that allow software developers to create software applications that operate on the cellular telephone and control certain functionality on the device. is a representative diagram that more fully illustrates the components of a cellular wireless network and interrelation of the elements of one embodiment of the present apparatus. The cellular wireless network is merely exemplary and can include any system whereby remote modules such as wireless devices communicate over the air between and among each other and or between and among components of a wireless network including without limitation wireless network carriers and or servers. On a LAN network user manager can be in communication with a separate data repository for storing the data gathered from the remote wireless devices such as device product acceptance data . Further a data management server may be in communication with user manager to provide post processing capabilities data flow control etc. Product acceptance data gathering user manager and in this embodiment product acceptance database and data management server may be present on the cellular data network with any other components that are needed to provide cellular telecommunication services. User manager and or data management server communicate with carrier network through a data link such as the Internet a secure LAN WAN or other network. Carrier network controls messages generally being data packets sent to a mobile switching center MSC . Further carrier network communicates with MSC by a network such as the Internet and or POTS. Typically in network a network or Internet portion transfers data and the POTS portion transfers voice information. MSC may be connected to multiple base stations BTS by another network such as a network and or Internet portion for data transfer and a POTS portion for voice information. BTS ultimately broadcasts messages wirelessly to the wireless devices such as cellular telephone by short messaging service SMS or other over the air methods.

In operation referring to one embodiment of a method for product acceptance testing on a wireless device includes loading at least a portion of a product acceptance test application onto a computer platform of the wireless device Block . For example the product acceptance test application may be embodied within the hardware and or firmware of the wireless device during the manufacture of the device. Alternatively the product acceptance test application may be pushed by a user manager to the wireless device or pulled from a user manager by the wireless device across a wireless network. In another alternative the loading of the product acceptance test application may be configurable in any manner for example being initiated by a predetermined event such as failing an associated test.

Further this embodiment of the method includes simulating communications between the wireless device and another device associated with a wireless communications network Block . For example the product acceptance test application may include one or more simulation modules such as a network simulator module and a handset simulator module. Each of these simulator modules may simulate network specific or external communications and handset specific or internal device communications respectively that are received by a communications processing engine of the wireless device. Further these simulated communications may be associated with a predetermined network communications test scenario which may correspond to a predetermined communications processing standard.

This embodiment of the method also includes collecting product acceptance data associated with processing of the simulated communications by the wireless device Block . For example the product acceptance data is data generated by the communications processing engine of the wireless device during the processing of the simulated communications. The product acceptance test application may execute to cause the product acceptance data to be collected on a memory of the wireless device.

Additionally the method includes forwarding the collected product acceptance data for analysis to determine a product acceptance decision Block . For example the collected product acceptance data may be obtained from the communications processing engine and stored in a memory of the wireless device for analysis on the computer platform of the device or for forwarding across the wireless network for analysis by another computer device such as a user manger. Further in one embodiment the collected product acceptance data is uploaded from the wireless device through a standard HTTP an FTP or some other data transfer protocol.

Further this embodiment of the method includes determining the product acceptance decision Block . For example the product acceptance data may be analyzed by an analysis engine associated with a user manager located across the wireless network from the wireless device. Alternatively the analysis engine may reside on the wireless device. In one embodiment the analysis engine may compare selected portions of the product acceptance data with selected portions the predetermined communications processing standards to decide whether or not the data achieves the standard. If the data does achieve the standard then the product acceptance decision indicates a positive result i.e. that the wireless device passes the corresponding test or standard. If the data does not achieve the standard then the product acceptance decision indicates a negative result i.e. that the wireless device fails the corresponding test or standard. Additionally the product acceptance decision may be a summary decision based on more than one set of product test data i.e. if there are a number of test scenarios that need to be run for a given standard. As such the product acceptance decision may be based on an analysis of a plurality of test results and a positive result may occur when each of the plurality of tests and or standards are achieved.

Additionally it should be noted that the method may include granting access to the product acceptance data to other business or commercial systems. To ensure the security and or integrity of the collected product acceptance data such access may be granted in a monitored fashion such as through a user manager. Further other computer devices including both storage and processing devices can be located across the wireless network from the wireless device and accordingly the architecture associated with the user manager is readily scalable.

In summary the apparatus can be implemented solely on the wireless device . The wireless device can have at least one application or agent resident either permanent or temporarily on the computer platform thereof which causes the gathering of product acceptance data from communications processing engine and which can effect selective transmission of the product acceptance data for that wireless device to another computer device such as user manager on the wireless network . If the wireless device is so embodied product acceptance data may be transmitted over an open communication connection from the wireless device to the wireless network such as an open voice or data call. If the wireless device is a cellular telephone and the wireless network is a cellular telecommunication network such as shown in product acceptance data can be transmitted through short message service or other wireless communication methods.

In view of the method being executable on computer platform of a wireless device the method includes a program resident in a computer readable medium where the program directs a wireless device having a device platform to perform the steps of the method. Such a program can be executed on any single computer platform or can be executed in a distributed way among several computer platforms. Furthermore the method can be implemented by a program that directs a computer device such as user manager to perform a product acceptance determination through gathering and processing product acceptance data from the wireless devices .

The computer readable medium can be the memory of the computer platform of the cellular telephone or other wireless device or can be in a local database such as local database of the device platform . Further the computer readable medium can be in a secondary storage media that is loadable onto a wireless device computer platform such as a magnetic disk or tape optical disk hard disk flash memory or other storage media as is known in the art.

Further the method may be implemented for example by operating portion s of the wireless network and or LAN such as device platform and user manager to execute a sequence of machine readable instructions. The instructions can reside in various types of signal bearing or data storage primary secondary or tertiary media. The media may comprise for example RAM not shown accessible by or residing within the components of the wireless network or LAN . Whether contained in RAM a diskette or other secondary storage media the instructions may be stored on a variety of machine readable data storage media such as DASD direct access storage device storage e.g. a conventional hard drive or a RAID redundant array of independent disks array magnetic tape electronic read only memory e.g. ROM EPROM or EEPROM flash memory cards an optical storage device e.g. CD ROM WORM write once read many DVD digital optical tape paper punch cards or other suitable data storage media including digital and analog transmission media.

While the foregoing disclosure shows illustrative embodiments it should be noted that various changes and modifications could be made herein without departing from the scope of the described embodiments as defined by the appended claims. Furthermore although elements of the described embodiments may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated.

