---

title: Child restraint system comprising weight sensor
abstract: A child restraint system for transporting a child within an automotive vehicle includes a weight sensor for determining the weight of the child and compares the child's weight to a recommended weight range. The weight sensor is disposed within a cushion that lines a shell and provides an electrical signal to a control unit. The control unit processes the electrical signal and provides an alert signal when the weight is not within the recommended range. Also, the child restraint system may include a second sensor for sensing a condition that depends upon the child's weight such as directional orientation or angular orientation of the child restraint system, or location or tension of a vehicle seat belt or tether that secures the child restraint system within the vehicle, or the location or tension of a harness for restraining the child occupant within the child restraint system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07385520&OS=07385520&RS=07385520
owner: Delphi Technologies, Inc.
number: 07385520
owner_city: Troy
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050606
---
This application claims the benefits of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 577 546 filed Jun. 7 2004 and U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 607 988 filed Sept. 8 2004 which are incorporated herein by reference.

This application is also related to the following U.S. Patent Applications filed contemporaneously herewith CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 927 CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 928 CHILD SEAT MONITORING SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR DETERMINING A TYPE OF CHILD SEAT U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 939 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 926 RESTRAINT SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 147 148 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING CONTROL UNIT FOR EVALUATING HARNESS ADJUSTMENT U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 147 149. The contents of which are each incorporated herein by reference thereto.

This invention relates to a child restraint system for safely transporting a child within an automotive vehicle. More particularly this invention relates to such child restraint system that includes a weight sensor for determining the weight of a child riding therein. In one aspect child restraint system provides an alert if the weight of the child is not within the recommended size range for the child restraint system or if the child restraint system is not properly adjusted for the size of the child.

A child restraint system also referred to as a child car seat is used for safely transporting a child within an automotive vehicle so as to minimize the risk of injury to the child in the event of an accident. The design of the child restraint system is based upon the size of the child. A typical rear facing infant seat is designed for an infant up to about 11 kilograms about 25 pounds and comprises a removable carrier in which the infant is placed and which couples to a base that is securely installed in the vehicle. As the child grows a forward facing seat is recommended and is typically designed for a child between about 9 kilograms about 20 pounds and about 20 kilograms about 45 pounds . A typical car seat for older children is a belt positioning booster seat and may be designed for a child between about 18 kilograms about 40 pounds and about 45 kilograms about 100 pounds . Even for a child within the recommended weight range for the particular design adjustments may be necessary to features of the seat or to the installation of the seat into the vehicle based upon the weight of the child in order to optimize the safety of the child. One problem is that as the child grows the parent may not be aware that the child now exceeds the recommended range for the seat or that the features or installation needs adjustment to accommodate the larger child.

Therefore a need exists for a child restraint system that includes a sensor for determining the weight of a child occupant. The information about the child weight may then be correlated with information about the design and installation to alert the parent that child is not within the recommended weight range for the design or that adjustments are recommended to the features or the installation of the child restraint system.

In accordance with this invention a child restraint system is adapted to be installed in an automotive vehicle for transporting a child occupant having a weight and for providing an alert signal when the child s weight is not within a recommended weight range for the child restraint system for example when the weight is greater than a maximum weight limit for the child restraint system. The child restraint system includes a shell defining a compartment sized and shaped for receiving the child occupant and a cushion disposed within the compartment. The cushion includes a weight sensor providing an electrical signal indicative of the weight of the child occupant. The child restraint system further comprises a control unit operably coupled to the weight sensor to receive the electrical signal. The control unit processes the electrical signal to compare the weight of the child occupant to the recommended range and provides an alert signal when the weight of the child occupant is different from the recommended weight range. The alert signal may activate an audio alert such as a buzzer or chime or a visual display such as a light or written display to notify the adult operator typically a parent that the child is not within the recommended weight range for the child restraint system. In another aspect of this invention the child restraint system may include a second sensor for sensing a condition the value of which depends upon the child s weight and alert the adult operator when adjustment is recommended. By way of examples the control module may recommend adjustments to the directional orientation or angular orientation of the child restraint system or to the location or tension of a vehicle seat belt or tether that secures the child restraint system within the vehicle or to the location or tension of a harness for restraining the child occupant within the child restraint system.

In one aspect of this invention a method is provided for transporting a child occupant in a child restraint system which comprises a control unit and is characterized by a recommended weight range. The method includes providing an electrical signal indicative of the weight of the child occupant to the control unit from a weight sensor positioned within the child restraint system. The control unit processes the electrical signal to compare the weight of the child occupant to the recommended weight range. An alert signal is provided when the weight of the child occupant is not within the recommended weight range for example because the child s weight exceeds the maximum weight limit for the range. Also the child restraint system may include a second sensor for sensing a condition of the child restraint system that depends upon the child s weight and alert the adult operator when adjustment is recommended such as to the directional orientation or angular orientation of the child restraint system or to the location or tension of a vehicle seat belt or tether that secures the child restraint system within the vehicle or to the location or tension of a harness for restraining the child occupant within the child restraint system.

In a preferred embodiment referring to a child restraint system comprises a rear facing infant seat adapted to be installed in an automotive vehicle for safely transporting a child occupant during travel of the vehicle. Seat includes a carrier and a base . Base is installed in a rear seat of the vehicle and secured by a vehicle seat belt . Alternately the seat may include one or more tethers not shown that attach to anchors in the vehicle structure. The base is intended to remain in the vehicle for an extended period typically until the child has outgrown the recommended range for seat . The child is positioned with carrier for transport both inside and outside the vehicle. Accordingly carrier securely couples to base for transporting a child within the vehicle but may be disengaged from base for carrying the child outside the vehicle. A handle is provided to facilitate transport outside the vehicle. A suitable infant seat comprising a carrier and a base is commercially available from Graco Children s Products Inc. under the trade designation Snugride. It will be understood that child restraint systems are intended to provide safe in vehicle transport of a child having a size within a recommended range. The recommended range depends upon the particular design of the child restraint system. By way of an example rear facing infant seat may be designed for a child having a weight up to about 9 kilograms about 20 pounds .

Carrier comprises a shell formed of a rigid polymeric material and defining a compartment sized and shaped for accommodating the child having a weight within the recommended range for seat . The shell includes a back portion that supports the back of child and a seat portion that supports the buttocks and legs of the child. The compartment is lined with a cushion to enhance comfort of the child within the carrier. Carrier also includes a harness not shown for restraining the child within the carrier. A suitable harness includes a belt that extends through slots in the shell and cushion and a buckle for securing the belt about the child.

In this embodiment seat is equipped with a control module that monitors conditions pertaining to the installation or features of the seat including the weight of child . In this embodiment control module is mounted in base and connected to sensors in carrier and base . A suitable connection may be made through wire harnesses using a plug and socket to connect the harness in the carrier to the harness in the base thereby allowing the carrier to be detached from the base for transport outside the vehicle. Alternately sensors in the carrier may be coupled to one or more transmitters that transmit radio frequency signals and control unit may include a receiver for receiving the signals to allow wireless communication therebetween. In an alternate embodiment the control module may be mounted in the carrier and if desired coupled to sensors in the base.

In accordance with this invention seat is provided with a weight sensor . A preferred weight sensor comprises a bladder incorporated within cushion . Referring to cushion comprises a mat formed of a polymeric foam material and a cloth covering that enhances child comfort and provides an aesthetically pleasing appearance. Bladder is received in a pocket formed in the outer surface of mat and underlying covering . Alternately the bladder may be located between the shell and the cushion or within a pocket of the cushion adjacent the surface of the shell. An outer location is preferred to provide reliable contact with the child despite irregularities in the shell and thereby increase accuracy of the weight measurement. Bladder preferably overlies both back portion and seat portion of shell . In this manner bladder bears substantially all of the weight of the child thereby providing a more accurate measurement of the child s weight.

Bladder preferably comprises flexible membrane that defines a fixed volume compartment that contains a fluid . A preferred bladder is available from Delphi Automotive Systems LLC and is of a type used in other automotive seat weight applications but is sized and shaped for the carrier. The weight of the child in contact with the bladder increases the fluid pressure. A pressure sensor is fluidly coupled to the fluid within the membrane and provides an electrical signal indicative of the fluid pressure within the membrane. A preferred electrical signal is a voltage output proportional to the weight exerted on the bladder. Thus in the absence of a child the output signal is a first relatively low value representative of the absence of weight exerted on the bladder whereas the output signal has a second higher value in response to weight exerted on the bladder by a child placed within the seat.

The pressure sensor is electrically coupled to control module which in turn comprises a display as shown in . The control module receives the output signal from the pressure sensor and includes a microprocessor for processing the signal to determine a weight of the child. Referring to there is schematically shown a flow chart for determining the size of a child occupant. At step when a child is placed into carrier and carrier is assembled into base the control module initiates an evaluation of the child size. This may be in response to a parent pressing an activation button in display . Alternately the start step may be initiated in response to a signal from an interlock switch activated when the carrier is assembled to the base.

At step the control unit receives an output signal from the pressure sensor . At step the control unit compares the output signal to a value indicative of the predetermined weight limit for seat . In a preferred embodiment the output signal of the pressure sensor is a voltage proportional to the weight of the child and is compared to the voltage value corresponding to a signal that would be produced for a child positioned in the seat and having a weight equal to the maximum weight limit for which the seat is intended. The voltage value for the maximum weight limit may be obtained either by a look up table or by an algorithm. It will be appreciated that the viscosity of fluid and the elasticity of membrane may depend upon environmental factors including ambient temperature and humidity. In one aspect of this embodiment the control module is coupled to a temperature sensor or a humidity sensor as shown in . Temperature sensor and humidity sensor may be suitably located in the carrier adjacent the child or in the base proximate to the control module and provide electrical signals indicative of temperature and humidity. Control module adjusts the value of the pressure signal from sensor to compensate for temperature or humidity factors using an algorithm or look up table thereby providing a value more accurately corresponding to the child s weight. Alternately the control module may adjust the voltage value for the maximum weight limit to compensate for ambient temperature or humidity.

In this embodiment control module is electrically coupled to a display that comprises a series of lights such as green lights that confirm proper adjustment of seat and a series of lights such as red lights that provide a warning of improper adjustment of the seat. By way of an example display includes a green light that confirms that the child weight is within a predetermined limit for seat and a red light that alerts the parent or other adult operator that the child weight is greater than the predetermined limit for the seat. Thus at step in control unit outputs an electrical signal to illuminate the green light or alert the adult operator by illuminating the red light. While in this embodiment the alert signal activates a light the alert signal may activate an audible alert such as a chime or buzzer optionally in combination with the signal light. Alternately the readable display such as a liquid crystal display may be used to provide a descriptive alert.

Thus this invention provides a child restraint system that includes a system for sensing the weight of the child occupant and for determining whether the child s weight exceeds the range recommended for the design of the seat. For this purpose the restraint system is equipped with a control module that is coupled to a weight sensor in the cushion. One advantage of the preferred bladder sensor is that it is similar to sensors developed for other automotive applications and so reliable and durable under conditions typically encountered during automotive operation. The control module provides an alert signal in a visual or audible form that may be readily understood by a parent or other operator.

In the described embodiment the child restraint system having a weight sensor in accordance with this invention is a rear facing infant seat and is used to determine whether the child s weight exceeds a recommended maximum limit. Rear facing infant seats are commonly designed to transport newborn infants and so does not need to evaluate for a minimum weight limit. This invention is also suitable for use in a forward facing seat or a booster seat. In addition to a maximum weight forward facing seats and booster seats are commonly designed for a child having a recommended minimum weight. Thus in an alternate embodiment wherein the child restraint system is designed for a child having a weight within a recommended range between a recommended minimum weight limit and a recommended maximum weight limit the control module compares the output signal of the weight sensor to values corresponding to the recommended minimum weight and the recommended maximum weight limit and provides an alert signal if the child weight is not within the recommended weight range.

In the described embodiment seat is an infant seat and vehicle seat belt secures base . In an alternate embodiment such as a booster seat the vehicle seat belt may be used to restrain the child within the seat. Tension in the vehicle seat may increase the fluid pressure within the bladder. An additional sensor may be provided to sense the tension in the vehicle seat belt and provide a tension signal to the control module. The control module may then process the output signal from pressure sensor to compensate for the additional load applied by the vehicle seat belt. Also referring to it is an advantage that mat includes sidewalls disposed outboard of bladder and having a height corresponding to the height of the bladder. Contact between the cushion and the belt occurs at the sidewalls apart from the bladder and forces exerted as a result thereof are not exerted directly on the bladder. As a result the fluid pressure within the bladder and thus the output signal of the pressure sensor more accurately indicates the weight of the child. Alternately sidewalls may be incorporated into the belt guide paths in shell .

Depending upon the type and design of child restraint system and the manufacturer s recommendations relating to installation and use this invention may also be employed to evaluate other conditions the proper adjustment of which is dependent upon the weight of the child occupant. For this purpose the child restraint system is equipped with one or more additional sensors that monitor a condition of the seat and provide an electrical signal indicative of the condition to the control module. By way of examples the following conditions may be monitored by a sensor and may require adjustment based upon the weight of a child occupant 

Directional Orientation Proper orientation of the child seat relative to the front of the vehicle may depend upon the weight of the child occupant. For example the seat may be installed so that the child faces the rear of the vehicle if the child s weight less than or equal to 20 kilograms and faces the front of the vehicle if the child s weight is greater than 20 kilograms. For this purpose the seat is equipped with a directional sensor to determine the direction of the seat relative to the front of the vehicle. A suitable direction sensor is a longitudinal accelerometer positioned within the vehicle to determine direction based upon vehicle forward acceleration.

Angular Orientation Proper installation of the child seat may depend upon the orientation of the child seat relative to predetermined axis preferably a vertical axis also referred to as a z axis. For example the child restraint system may require a first angular orientation for a child occupant having a weight within a first range and in a second angular orientation for a child occupant having a weight within a second range. For this purpose the child restraint system comprises a sensor having an output that is indicative of the angle of the seat relative to a vertical or other predetermined axis. A suitable sensor is an accelerometer sensor described in U.S. patent application U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 147 148 incorporated herein by reference.

Vehicle Belt Tension The desired tension applied by the vehicle seat belt may depend upon the weight of the child occupant. For this purpose the seat may be equipped with a belt tension sensor to detect the force applied by the vehicle seat belt and provide a signal indicative thereof to the control module. A suitable belt tension sensor is described in U.S. patent application U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 926 incorporated herein by reference.

Tether Tension In a child restraint system equipped with a tether for securing the child seat to an anchor in the vehicle proper adjust of the tether may depend upon the weight of the child occupant. For this purpose the child seat may be equipped with a sensor that senses the tension of the tether. A suitable tether and tension sensor is described in U.S. patent application U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 927 incorporated herein by reference.

Harness Adjustment In a child restraint system equipped with a harness for restraining the child within the seat proper adjustment of the harness may depend upon the weight of the child occupant. For example the harness may include belts that extend through slots in the shell and the shell may include slots at alternate locations such that the selection of the particular slots depends upon the size of the child. For this purpose the shell may include sensors located at slots to determine the presence of a belt. A suitable harness having sensors is described in U.S. patent application U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 147 149 incorporated herein by reference.

In each instance sensor is electrically coupled to the control module and provides an electrical signal indicative of the condition being sensed. The control module determines using a look up table or suitable algorithm a desired value for the sensed condition which desired value is based upon the weight of the child as determined by weight sensor . The control module provides an alert signal to indicate whether the sensed condition is properly adjusted. For the display shown in the alert signal illuminates a green light when sensed property is within a the desired range and a red light based when the sensed property is not within the desired range.

While this invention has been described in terms of the preferred embodiments thereof it is not intended to be so limited but rather only to the extent set forth in the claims that follow.

