---

title: System and method of event triggered voice call origination
abstract: A method of selective call initiation is disclosed and includes receiving data from a computer based auction site. Further, the method includes detecting a notification event by evaluating the data with respect to notification criteria associated with a user account. Also, the method includes initiating a voice based call over a voice network to a communication device identified in connection with the user account. A system is also disclosed and includes a first processing element that is coupled to a network interface to receive data from a computer based auction site. Also, the system includes a second processing element to detect a notification event by evaluating the data with respect to notification criteria associated with a user account. Moreover, the system includes a third processing element to initiate an outgoing voice based call over a voice network to a communication device identified in connection with the user account.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08260679&OS=08260679&RS=08260679
owner: Unwired Nation, Inc.
number: 08260679
owner_city: Austin
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050831
---
As of May 2005 the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association CTIA estimates that there are 182 million wireless subscribers in the United States. Further the CTIA estimates that over 2.5 billion text messages are sent every month. Text messages sent via short messaging service SMS are currently used by Internet companies to deliver notifications to mobile telephones. Unfortunately text messaging is not secure does not provide guaranteed delivery is not free and is not sent in real time.

Regarding security issues programs have been provided that can enable someone to spoof a sender s SMS address. Further since SMS messages are store and forward based systems there is no guarantee that sent SMS messages are received within any particular timeframe. As such some SMS providers present a disclaimer to their users that the provider is not responsible for messages that are lost or significantly delayed due to transmission via the Internet. Also unlike voice calling plans there currently are no nights and weekends free service plans for SMS messaging.

For certain e commerce websites e.g. on line auction sites text messaging is not a very efficient way to interact with bidders of items because the auctions are typically fast paced and require confirmed delivery of bids. Further the auction sites may utilize instant feedback for usability and understanding of the system.

Accordingly there is a need for an improved system and method of communicating with e commerce websites e.g. auction websites.

A method of selective call initiation is disclosed and includes receiving data from a computer based auction site. Further the method includes detecting a notification event by evaluating the data with respect to notification criteria associated with a user account. Also the method includes initiating a voice based call over a voice network to a communication device identified in connection with the user account.

Additionally a system is disclosed and includes a first processing element that is coupled to a network interface to receive data from a computer based auction site. Also the system includes a second processing element to detect a notification event by evaluating the data with respect to notification criteria associated with a user account. Moreover the system includes a third processing element to initiate an outgoing voice based call over a voice network to a communication device identified in connection with the user account.

Referring to a system of facilitating e commerce is shown and is designated . As shown the system includes a monitoring system that communicates with a vender server via the Internet . Further the monitoring system communicates with a voice over Internet protocol VoIP server via the network . In a particular embodiment a user telephone is coupled to the monitoring system via the Internet . Further the user telephone can be coupled to the Internet via a telephone network e.g. a public switched telephone network PSTN or a wireless telephone network such as global system for mobile communication GSM network.

In a particular embodiment the vender server can be an e commerce server that offers goods for sale with fixed pricing or escalating pricing based on an auction format. As shown the vender server can include a processor and a memory coupled to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the vender server . For example the vender server can include a vender interface module embedded within the memory . The vender interface module can provide connectivity with the vender server e.g. via the Internet . In an illustrative embodiment the vender server also includes a user history watch list module than can be used to track the shopping or bidding history of one or more users and items that one or more user are seeking to purchase.

As shown in the vender server can further include an inventory module that can be used to track the inventory provided for sale via the vender server . Further the vender server can include a cross sell up sell module that can be used to increase the sales provided by the vender server . For example when a user purchases a particular item the cross sell up sell module can recognize related items that may be useful to the user and offer those related items to the user for sale in conjunction with a purchased item. also shows that the vender server can include a transaction processing module for processing transactions with the vender server .

As depicted in the VoIP server can include a processor and a memory that is accessible to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the VoIP server . For example as shown an outbound calling capacity module can be embedded within the memory. In a particular embodiment the outbound calling capacity module can determine the number of outbound calls that the VoIP server is capable of establishing at any given time. also indicates that the VoIP server can include a direct inward dialing DID availability module that is embedded within the memory of the VoIP server . In an illustrative embodiment the DID availability module can determine whether direct inward dialing is available for a particular user and if so a DID service can be use to identify a called party e.g. by using DTMF or other signaling means before connecting a call to a called party.

In a non limiting exemplary embodiment the web server includes a processor and a computer readable medium e.g. a memory that is accessible to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the web server . For example an account registration module and an account management module can be embedded within the memory of the web server . In a particular embodiment the modules can be used to allow one or more users to establish user accounts with the monitoring system . Further the modules can be used to allow users to configure multiple user accounts on a per vender basis and configure one or more notification events or trigger events on a per vender basis.

Additionally in a particular embodiment the modules can be used to allow one or more users to update contact information or notification information previously input to the monitoring system. The contact information can include alternate numbers at which a user can be reached e.g. a home telephone number a work telephone number and a mobile telephone number. Also in a particular embodiment the modules can allow users to configure call security settings for the user accounts e.g. the modules can allow each user to establish a personal identification number PIN with the system and each user can be prompted to input a PIN when contacted by the monitoring system .

As illustrated in the call server within the monitoring system can include a processor and a computer readable medium e.g. a memory that is accessible to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the call server . For example an inbound outbound dialing event management module may be embedded within the memory . Also a DTMF event recognition module may be embedded within the memory . Further a caller authentication module may be embedded within the memory . also shows that an interactive voice response IVR module can be embedded within the memory . . In an alternative embodiment the caller authentication module may be part of a third party identification verification system.

In a particular embodiment the inbound outbound dialing event management module within the call server can operate in order to establish calls to users when notification events are detected. Further the DTMF event recognition module can be used to handle DTMF recognition of input received from a user device e.g. a telephone with touch tone capabilities. Moreover the caller authentication module can interact with other components within the monitoring system e.g. the user account database in order to provide security validation such as telephone number verification or PIN verification. Additionally the modules within the call server can operate with other components within the monitoring system in order to handle one or more user sessions at the vender websites.

As depicted in the voice mail notification server can include a processor and a computer readable medium e.g. a memory that is accessible to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the voice mail notification server . For example a voice mail notification event handling module can be embedded within the memory . Moreover a voice mail storage module can be embedded within the memory . A GSM to MPEG layer 3 MP3 conversion module can also be embedded within the memory 168.

In a particular embodiment the voice mail notification event handling module handles the distribution of non live audio notifications e.g. to voice mail systems. Further the GSM to MP3 conversion module can be used to convert GSM audio files to MP3 audio files. Additionally the voice mail storage module can be used to store various audio notifications that can be broadcast to users that are registered with the monitoring system .

In an exemplary non limiting embodiment the account server interacts with the call server and a commerce interface . In a particular embodiment the account server can act as a virtual user for the vender websites when a registered user has been authenticated by the call server . Further the account server receives DTMF inputs e.g. from a user via the call server and translates the DTMF inputs to outbound Web events on a per vendor basis. For example a user may press a 1 at a keypad of the user telephone and the account server can translate that response to an instruction to an auction website to increase a bid by one increment. Additionally the account server receives inputs from the vender websites and translates the inputs into audible phone events. Also the account server can translate the inputs into audible menus that can be broadcast to a registered user.

The commerce interface may be implemented as an application programming interface API that can interact with the account server and the vender interface module at the vender server in order to receive data representative of purchasing events and bidding events.

As illustrated in the user account database can include user registration data watch list data and site specific credentials . Also as shown in the user history database can include transaction history data historical price data and historical availability data . The caller rules database can include one or more event triggers i.e. notification events. For example the notification events can include the offer for sale of a particular item at a particular vendor website at a target price or the imminent end of an auction for a sought after item that a user has placed a bid.

In a particular embodiment the caller rules database can also include one or more contact rules and one or more caller rules . The contact rules can indicate the manner in which a registered user is to be contacted and a user defined order of calling a plurality of different contact numbers for the user. Further the caller rules can include user defined rules that will always control the action of the monitoring system when acting as a virtual user. For example when a particular item is offered for sale the user can specify for the monitoring system to automatically purchase the item at the asking price. Thereafter the monitoring system can contact the user to indicate that the item has been purchased. In an alternative embodiment the data provided by the databases can be stored in a single database that is accessible to one or more of the other components within the monitoring system .

Each of the servers described above is a processing element that can be a server as described or a process. Further any number or combination of the modules described above can be stored and executed within a single processing element or multiple processing elements in communication with each other.

Referring to a method of configuring a user account at the monitoring system is shown and commences at block . At block the monitoring system receives a set up request from a user. At block the user is prompted for a vendor website URL . Moving to block the monitoring system receives the vendor website URL from the user.

At block the monitoring system prompts the user for account information e.g. information concerning the user account with the vendor website. In a particular embodiment the user account information can include a user account name a user account number and a user password. Moving to block the system receives the user account information. Thereafter at decision step the system prompts the user to determine whether the user has an additional account with the vendor website. If so the method returns to block and continues as described.

If the user does not have an additional account with the vendor website the method proceeds to block and the user is prompted for a trigger event. In a particular embodiment the trigger event can be a particular online auction for a particular item. Further in a particular embodiment the trigger event can be the release of a particular item e.g. concert tickets at a vendor website. Further the trigger event can be a price decrease of a particular item the release of a new book the release of a new compact disk etc. At block the system receives the trigger event for the vendor.

Continuing to decision step the system prompts the user to determine whether the user wishes to set up an account with another vendor. If the user indicates that the user would like to set up an account with another vendor the method returns to block and continues as described. If the user indicates that the user does not want to set up an account with another vendor the method proceeds to block and the system prompts the user for contact information or notification information. In a particular embodiment the contact information or notification information can include a telephone number e.g. a cellular telephone number a mobile telephone number or a public switched telephone network PSTN telephone number. At block the system receives the user contact information or notification information.

Proceeding to block the system prompts the user for number validation. At block the system receives the number validation from the user. Next at block the system can prompt the user for an authentication e.g. a personal identification number PIN that can be associated with the user account at the monitoring system. At block the system receives the PIN from the user. The method then ends at state . Accordingly the method described above can be used by a user to register with the monitoring system. Further based on the information input to the monitoring system the user can be alerted when any of the trigger events input to the monitoring system occur at one or more vendor websites.

Referring to a method of monitoring a vendor website for a trigger event is shown. Beginning at block the monitoring system accesses the vendor website e.g. via the Internet. At block the monitoring system receives data from the vendor website. Next at block the monitoring system monitors the data from the vendor website. Moving to decision step the monitoring system determines whether a notification event is detected based on the data received from the vendor website. If a notification event is not detected the method returns to block and continues as described herein. In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can detect a notification event by monitoring the data received from the vender website for one or more of the triggers input by the user e.g. a imminent end of an auction and a price decrease of a product.

On the other hand if a notification event is detected the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system transmits a pre notification message to the user. Next at block the monitoring system interacts with a user via a voice channel. In a particular embodiment the pre notification message can be sent to the user a predetermined time before the interaction with the user e.g. thirty minutes prior to the interaction. Additionally the pre notification message can be sent to the user via a short messaging system SMS an email system or an alphanumeric paging system. Also in a particular embodiment the pre notification message can include the exact time that the interaction with the user is scheduled the subject of the interaction and other relevant information e.g. a bid status an auction status a time remaining for the auction etc. Further in an exemplary non limiting embodiment the interaction with the user can be facilitated using an interactive voice response IVR module at the monitoring system.

Returning to at decision step the monitoring system determines whether the transaction has been completed e.g. whether the user has purchased an item associated with the notification event or whether an auction associated with the notification event has ended. If the transaction is completed the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system provides customer account information to the vendor website. In a particular embodiment the account information can include a login identification and a password. Further in a particular embodiment the account information can include an affiliate identification which can be used to track successful bids and successful transactions. In another embodiment the account information can include billing information e.g. an account number a credit card number etc.

At block the monitoring system receives compensation from the vendor website for facilitating the transaction. The method then ends at state . In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can be compensated via an affiliate program associated with the vendor website. For example an affiliate program identification can be tracked and the monitoring system can be credited for transactions. Additionally in a particular embodiment a transaction may include a completed purchase of an item. Alternatively a transaction may include a successful bid for an item at an auction website. Returning to decision step if the transaction is not completed e.g. the user has decided not to purchase the item associated with the notification event the method ends at state .

In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can monitor the number of successful transactions and determine the rate at which successful transactions occur. As such the monitoring system can further target particular users that are prone to completing transactions and purchasing goods. Further the monitoring system can determine the percentage of total calls established that result in completed transactions that may be subject to billing to a vendor website. Alternatively the monitoring system can determine the percentage of total calls that are compensated calls where the vendor website pays compensation either directly or through an affiliated payment plan in connection with user action made during the calls. In a particular embodiment during operation the percentage of total calls billed to one or more vendor websites is above a targeted percentage e.g. ten percent twenty percent and fifty percent. The percentage of calls billed can be used to modify the monitoring system. For example if the percentage of calls billed falls below the targeted percentage the monitoring system can modify the number of users that are called. Alternatively the monitoring system can review the historical data for each user and only target those users that have a history of completing transactions via the monitoring system.

Referring to a method of contacting a registered user regarding an auction website event is shown and commences at block . At block the monitoring system attempts to contact a registered user over a voice channel such as a cellular telephone. Next at decision step the monitoring system determines whether the user is available i.e. has the user answered the telephone. If the user is not available the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether a voice mail system answers the call from the monitoring system. If not the method ends at state . Otherwise if a voice mail system answers the call from the monitoring system the method continues to block and the monitoring system transmits an audio message e.g. an MP3 message to the user voice mail. The method then ends at state .

Returning to decision step when the user is available the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system transmits an audio greeting to the user . Thereafter at step the monitoring system prompts the user for a PIN in order to verify the user s identity. Proceeding to decision step the monitoring system determines whether a PIN is received.

When a PIN is not received the monitoring system prompts the user to determine whether the user would like the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN. If the user indicates that the user does not want the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN the method ends at state . Conversely when the user indicates to the monitoring system that the user does want the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system retrieves the user PIN. Next at block the monitoring system transmits the user PIN to the user email account. At block the monitoring system indicates that the PIN has been transmitted to the user email account.

Returning to decision step when a PIN is received from the user the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether the PIN is correct. If the PIN is incorrect the method moves to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the PIN is incorrect. The method then returns to block and continues as described herein.

When a correct PIN is received at decision step the method continues to block and the monitoring system transmits an auction announcement to the user e.g. by transmitting an audio message to the user. In a particular embodiment the auction announcement can include the number of the auction the category of the auction the sub category of the auction and the name of the item. Thereafter at block the monitoring system transmits the current price of the item the current bid state and the remaining auction time to the user. In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can contact the user when the remaining auction time is less than ten minutes e.g. six minutes three minutes etc. Further in an alternative embodiment a time remaining for the auction can be transmitted to the user in response to the user inputting a request for the time remaining e.g. using a keypad at a telephone. In another alternative embodiment the time remaining can be dynamically injected into a phone session in order to give real time updates concerning the time remaining for the auction or a quantity remaining for a particular item.

Moving to decision step the monitoring website determines whether the user is the high bidder. If the user is the high bidder the method continues to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the user is the high bidder. At block the monitoring system monitors the time remaining in the auction. Next at block the monitoring system monitors the bid. Proceeding to decision step the monitoring system determines whether the bid has changed. If the bid changes the method returns to block and continues as described.

On the other hand if the bid has not changed the method moves to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether the auction has ended. If the auction has not ended the method returns to block and continues as described herein. When the auction ends the method moves to block and the monitoring system indicates that the auction has ended. The method then ends at state .

Returning to decision step if the user is not the high bidder the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates that the user is not the high bidder. Next at decision step the monitoring system prompts the user to determine whether the user would like to increase his or her bid. If the user does not want to increase the bid the method ends at state . When the user wants to increase the bid the method moves to block and the monitoring system retrieves the bid increment from the auction website. In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can increase the user s bid to the user s maximum bid.

In a particular embodiment the monitoring system determines real time state information such as high bid status through interaction with the auction website. For example the time remaining for an auction can be managed at the auction website and the monitoring system can periodically poll the auction website in order to determine the time remaining.

Proceeding to decision step the monitoring system determines whether the user s bid is greater than the current bid. If the user s bid is not greater than the current bid the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates that the user is still outbid. The method returns to decision step and continues as described. At decision step when the user s bid is greater than the current bid the method moves to block and the monitoring system prompts the user to confirm the bid. Next at block the monitoring system places the bid for the user.

Continuing to block the monitoring system parses a bid response received from the auction website. At decision step the monitoring system determines whether the user s bid is successful. If the user s bid is not successful the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates that the user s bid has failed. The method then returns to decision step and continues as described herein.

At decision step if the user s bid is successful the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether the user has been outbid. If the user is outbid the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the bid is successful but the user has been outbid. The method then returns to decision step and continues as described. Conversely if the user is not outbid the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the user s bid was successful. Then the method returns to block and continues as described.

Referring to a method of contacting a registered user about an e commerce website is shown and commences at block . At block the monitoring system attempts to contact a registered user via a telephone e.g. a cellular telephone or a landline telephone. Next at decision step the monitoring system determines whether the user is available i.e. has the user answered the call. If the user is not available the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether a voice mail system answers the call from the monitoring system. If not the method ends at state . Otherwise if a voice mail system answers the call from the monitoring system the method continues to block and the monitoring system transmits an audio message e.g. an MP3 message to the user voice mail. The method then ends at state .

Returning to decision step when the user is available the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system transmits an audio greeting to the user . Thereafter at step the monitoring system prompts the user for a PIN in order to verify the user s identity. Proceeding to decision step the monitoring system determines whether a PIN is received.

When a PIN is not received the monitoring system prompts the user to determine whether the user would like the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN. If the user indicates that the user does not want the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN the method ends at state . Conversely when the user indicates to the monitoring system that the user does want the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system retrieves the user PIN. Next at block the monitoring system transmits the user PIN to the user email account. At block the monitoring system indicates that the PIN has been transmitted to the user email account.

Returning to decision step when a PIN is received from the user the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether the PIN is correct. If the PIN is incorrect the method moves to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the PIN is incorrect. The method then returns to block and continues as described.

When a correct PIN is received at decision step the method continues to block and the monitoring system indicates that a sought after item e.g. an item on a watch list or wish list established by the user with the monitoring system or the vendor website is available for purchase or is at a target price desired by the user. Next at block the monitoring system transmits a current price to the user. In a particular embodiment the monitoring system communicates with the user by transmitting audio messages to the user. Moving to decision step the monitoring system prompts the user in order to determine whether the user wants to purchase the sought after item. If the user does not want to purchase the sought after item the method ends at state .

On the other hand if the user indicates that the user wants to purchase the sought after item the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system transmits the user payment information previously supplied to the monitoring system to the vender website. Thereafter at block the monitoring system determines whether payment has been accepted by the vendor website. If payment is not accepted the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that payment has not been accepted by the vendor website. The method then ends at state . In a particular embodiment payment can be facilitated using previously stored payment data e.g. using a one click shopping mechanism at the vendor website.

When payment is accepted the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the sought after item has been purchased. Proceeding to block the monitoring system bills the vendor website for completing the transaction. The method then ends at state .

In one or more of the methods disclosed a user is authenticated by inputting a PIN. However the user can input one or more alternative authentication inputs. For example the authentication input can be a biometric input such as a voice input a fingerprint scan a palm scan an iris scan a retinal scan facial mapping infrared pattern matching etc. Alternatively the authentication can be performed using a physical token device e.g. a passkey or a universal serial bus USB dongle.

With the configuration of structure described above the system and method of event triggered voice call origination provides a way to monitor auction websites and e commerce websites and facilitate transactions with those websites. For each completed transaction the system can bill the websites for a referral fee. The system and method described above can login into the vendor websites with account credentials provided by users. In a particular embodiment the vendor websites can provide access to their systems via merchant level APIs. In another embodiment the system can create proxy sessions for each user at the vendor website and act as a virtual user at the vendor website.

Once an account is established with the monitoring system the user can associate the account with one or more vendor accounts that the user wants to monitor. Thereafter a user can establish a notification profile that can include one or more contact telephone numbers a PIN number for authenticating communication with the user and one or more rules that can control how the user would like to make future bid and or purchase decisions. For example the system can allow users to buy items or bid on items in real time. Alternatively the system can email details of a transaction to the user for confirmation and final purchase authorization.

Further in an illustrative embodiment a user can configure the type of notification events that the user would like to receive. The notification events can be linked to triggers which can also be configured by the user. Exemplary triggers can include outbid notification auction closing notification back order availability price decrease notification etc. In a particular embodiment the price decrease notification can be based on a target percentage amount decrease or a target dollar amount decrease.

The monitoring system described herein can periodically access a particular user profile connect with one or more vendors associated with the profile and pull information concerning the user from the vendor. The update process can be triggered i.e. the system may know that an auction in which the user is bidding may be ending within a particular time frame and the system can connect to the vendor to update the information after the trigger occurs. Data that is retrieved during the updates can be stored in a user history and analyzed for product availability trends pricing trends bidding trends etc. Further based on the analysis of the data the system can determine that user notification is necessary.

If notification is necessary the system accesses one or more caller contact rules and contacts the user based on a primary means of contact e.g. a cellular telephone number a home telephone number or a work telephone number. A caller identification presented to the user when the system dials the user can identify the call as being time sensitive form the monitoring system. Moreover when a user answers a call from the monitoring system the user can be greeted and prompted for the user s PIN. A correct PIN authenticates the user and provides the user with access to the system to make bids and or purchases based on the user account.

In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can triggers calls when the data available to the system indicates that historically the user would want to receive a call and take action based on the trigger event. Caller identification information can be presented to the user to let the user know why the monitoring system is calling the user. Particular numbers can be associated with particular vendors. If the user cannot recall the PIN associated with the account the user can input a request to the system to send the PIN to an email account associated with the user account. Alternatively the user may be connected to a customer service representative and receive the PIN after authenticating the identity of the user e.g. by inputting personal information and answering a series of secret questions.

In a particular embodiment the purpose of the call or the context of the call is established relatively quickly in order to reduce the costs associated with establishing the call. The system can us a combination of pre recorded auction files and dynamically generated text to speech audio to prompt the user about the item or opportunity about which the system is calling the user. For example when bidding on an item at an auction website the system can quickly convey to the user an auction title a bid status a starting bid a current price and a time left in the auction. Additionally the user may desire to receive other auction specific information that can presented via a menu or sub menu. The additional information can include a seller name a seller feedback rating a buy not status or availability a number of bids in auction an item location a cost of shipping and additional text content form the body of the auction.

For non auction transactions the system can identify the opportunity identify the trigger event that resulted in the call and allow the user to request additional information via a voice response menu.

The above disclosed subject matter is to be considered illustrative and not restrictive and the appended claims are intended to cover all such modifications enhancements and other embodiments which fall within the true spirit and scope of the present invention. Thus to the maximum extent allowed by law the scope of the present invention is to be determined by the broadest permissible interpretation of the following claims and their equivalents and shall not be restricted or limited by the foregoing detailed description.

