---

title: Smart container system for charging, storing, and using electronic devices
abstract: The present invention is an apparatus and method for associating electronic devices to portable containers. A smart container is a container used for transporting items while traveling and comprising electronic devices. The smart container may comprise at least one module bay configured for receiving a module and a controller comprising a processing device associated with a memory. The controller is electrically associated with the module bay and configured for sending and/or receiving data to/from an electronic device associated with the module bay. The controller may be either an integral component of the smart container or a controller module removably received by the smart container. The smart container further comprises a power source associated with a power bus. The power bus is electrically associated with at least one of (a) a module bay, and (b) the controller.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08397310&OS=08397310&RS=08397310
owner: 
number: 08397310
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051011
---
The present invention relates to smart portable containers for transporting items while traveling comprising electronic devices. Such smart containers provide for centralized storage and use of electronic devices with modular embodiments of the invention being configurable to accommodate travelers anticipated needs.

Since the invention of the solid state transistor advances in electronic based technology have had a dramatic impact on human existence. Such solid state electronics provided a means for sending a man to the moon and probes across the galaxy. Electronic computing devices hundreds of times more powerful than the computers used to send a person to the moon are now commonly owned by ordinary people. Wireless communication devices that were once only props in science fiction movies are now commonly used. Indeed such advances in electronic technology have been leveraged to improve the standard of living of the general populace to a level unthinkable just a few generations ago. One result of such advances is that most people routinely carry at least one electronic device such as a cell phone a PDA electronic watch a wireless remote for communication with a vehicle a garage door opener a DVD player a music player e.g. MP3 etc.

Travel is one area in particular that advancements in electronics have had a striking impact. Modern computing devices have given engineers the ability to design bigger and faster transportation devices such as the modern jet. With the advent of such technology long distance travel has become increasingly common. For example as a result of affordable long distance travel modern industries have been marked by a strong internationalization of their markets requiring global business strategies to achieve effective cross border markets. Such business strategies frequently require employees to travel and when they travel taking their electronic devices with them.

Similarly when people go on vacation affordable long distance travel provides the opportunity for the vacationer to visit in far off locations perhaps in a foreign country. In fact the tourism industry has reported a dramatic change in its structure over the last few years. Travelers wish for more frequent but shorter travel last minute reservations global advice and service quality. Electronic devices providing access to communication systems provide reliable information on facilities and services offered in unfamiliar locations. Such electronic devices allow the traveler to stay in touch with a service provider as well as consult various sources of information to assist them in their decision making processes.

Considering the above information at least two things seem certain people are going to travel and when they travel they are going to take at least one electronic device with them. Examples of travelers include a business man on a business trip a person on vacation a hiker in the great outdoors and a student moving between home and classes. When people travel they frequently take a container for housing and transporting items. Luggage is a familiar device used by people to store and transport items they wish to take along with them while they travel. Hikers for example often carry their luggage on their backs in a container referred to as a backpack. Students also carry luggage known as book bags. Bikers may have a utility belt. The hiker student business traveler and vacationer will likely have different luggage needs. Indeed two different hikers may have different needs depending on their anticipated environment and or destination. Thus the devices that a traveler decides to take along on a trip may also vary. Consequently the luggage needs of the traveler will likely be different depending on both the purpose of the travel and the travel destination.

Luggage portable container design is one area that has escaped the evolution resulting from the above described technological advances. Some prior art systems may have adapted somewhat to accommodate new ways of storing items during travel. However such prior art systems have not adequately addressed the need for transporting various electronic devices frequently used by travelers. More specifically what is needed is a smart container system that provides a centralized area for charging storing and or using electronic devices. Additionally such a smart luggage system should be configurable allowing the traveler to configure such luggage based on the travelers anticipated needs.

Some of the objects and advantages of the invention will now be set forth in the following description while other objects and advantages of the invention may be obvious from the description or may be learned through practice of the invention.

Broadly speaking a principle object of the present invention is to provide a smart container system comprising a centralized area for charging storing and or using electronic devices.

Another general object of the present invention is to provide a modular smart container system that may be configured by a traveler based on the traveler s anticipated needs.

Still another general object of the present invention is to provide a modular smart container system comprising a plurality of module bays configured for receiving electronic modules with at least one module bay electrically associated with a communication bus and or a power bus.

A further object of the present invention is to provide a smart container system comprising a communication device configured to receive transportation information from a computer associated with a transportation provider.

Another general object of the invention is to provide a smart container system comprising a vacuum pump configured to be associated with vacuum packs for vacuum packing items.

Additional objects and advantages of the present invention are set forth in the detailed description herein or will be apparent to those skilled in the art upon reviewing the detailed description. Also it should be further appreciated that modifications and variations to the specifically illustrated referenced and discussed steps or features hereof may be practiced in various uses and embodiments of this invention without departing from the spirit and scope thereof by virtue of the present reference thereto. Such variations may include but are not limited to substitution of equivalent steps referenced or discussed and the functional operational or positional reversal of various features steps parts or the like. Still further it is to be understood that different embodiments as well as different presently preferred embodiments of this invention may include various combinations or configurations of presently disclosed features or elements or their equivalents including combinations of features or parts or configurations thereof not expressly shown in the figures or stated in the detailed description .

It should be noted that for the purposes of this document traveling means simply to move from one place to another. Reasons for traveling are infinite and include school hunting business and vacation. One example of a container for transporting items while traveling is luggage.

One exemplary embodiment of the present invention relates to novel implementations of electronic technology associated with a container for transporting items while traveling. The smart container comprises at least one module bay configured for receiving a module. The smart container further comprises a controller comprising a processing device associated with a memory. The controller is electrically associated with the module bay and configured for sending and or receiving data to from an electronic device associated with the module bay. The controller may be either an integral component of the smart container or a controller module removably received by the smart container.

The smart container further comprises a power source associated with a power bus. The power bus is preferably associated with at least one of a a module bay and b the controller. The power source may be a power storage module installed in a module bay wherein the power storage module comprises at least one of a power status indicator b a power transfer port configured for at least one of i transferring power from said power storage module to an external device and ii transferring power to said power storage module from an external device.

The smart container may further comprise a vacuum pump configured for being associated with a vacuum pack configured for receiving an item to be sealed in the vacuum pack. The vacuum pump is further configured for removing air from the vacuum pack. The vacuum pump may be an integral component of the smart container or an electronic module configured to be received by a module bay.

The electronic modules of the system may be any number of electron devices configured for inserting into a module bay such as a a communication module b a security module c a recording module d an entertainment module e a time module and e a power module. A communication bus may be associated with said controller and at least one module bay for transferring data between the controller and a module installed in said module bay.

A receiver may be associated with the controller allowing the controller to receive signals from an external transmitter. The external transmitter may be a portable transmitter associated with a user or a transmitter associated with a remote information source.

The smart container may be secured by one or more electronic locks operatively associated with said controller and configured for securing the smart container and the smart container modules. The controller is configured to change the status of the electronic locks in response to a signal received from a plurality of sources including an external transmitter a biosensor and said processing device.

The smart container may further comprise a transceiver configured for facilitating communications between at least two of a an external electronic device b said controller c a module installed in said at least one module bay and d an integral electronic device electrically associated with said controller. Examples of such transceiver technology include Bluetooth technology and Wi Fi technology.

Yet another exemplary embodiment of the present invention relates to a portable container for transporting items while traveling. The portable container comprises an electronic module associated with a module bay. A user interface configured for receiving user input is electrically associated with said controller. The portable container further comprises a communication bus. The communication bus is electrically associated with at least one module bay and the controller. The controller is configured for communicating with said electronic module. The portable container further comprises a power source electrically associated with the controller.

Examples of electronic modules that may be associated with the module bay include the same modules described above. One possible embodiment of a security module is a device comprising a location determination device configured for generating location information relating to the location of the portable container. The controller is configured to retrieve at least part of said location information from said security module in response to a user request and to store monitored position location information MPLI in a memory associated with the controller. MPLI information comprises at least part of the location information generated by said location determination device for the portable container s location at the time said user request is received. The controller is further configured to monitor the status of the portable container s location and issue a security alert when the controller determines that the smart container s location has changed a predefined distance from the location associated with the MPLI. A security alert may comprise activating various devices associated with the smart container including lights and sound emitters. A security alert may further transmit a signal to a remote receiver.

The portable container may further comprise a signaling device associated with the controller said signaling device comprising at least one of a a light emitting device and 2 a sound emitting device. The signaling device may be an integral device electrically associated with said controller or an electronic module. The controller may be configured to activate said signaling device as part of a security alert.

The portable container may further comprise a transceiver operatively associated with said controller with the controller being configured to use said transceiver for transferring data between at least two of a the controller b an electronic module and c a portable electronic device associated with a user. The controller may be configured to transmit a data signal to a remote receiver as part of a security alert. Examples of transceivers including a a Bluetooth device b a Wi Fi device c a cellular phone d a satellite phone. The transceiver may be part of an electronic module installed in a module bay.

The portable container may further comprise a power bus electrically associated with the controller the module bay and or a power port. The power port is suitably configured for connecting to an external electronic device. At least one external surface of said portable container may be associated with an energy conversion device configured to supply power to at least one of a said power source b said controller and c a module bay.

Still another embodiment of the invention is an electronic housing configured for use with a portable container used for transporting items while traveling. The electronic housing is releasably associated with a portable container and comprises at least one module bay configured for receiving an electronic module. The electronic housing further comprises a controller comprising a processing device electrically associated with a memory. A power bus electrically associated with a power source may be electrically associated with the controller and module bays.

The electronic housing may further comprise a signaling device that is either an electronic module or an integral electronic device electrically associated with the controller. The signaling device comprises at least one of a light emitting device and a sound emitting device.

The electronic housing may further comprise a user interface electrically associated with the controller and configured for receiving user input. The controller may be further configured to place the signaling device in a signaling mode. The signaling mode can be activated by the controller in response to at least one of a user input b data received from an electronic module and c data received from an integral device electrically associated with said controller.

The electronic housing may further comprise a receiver for receiving transmitted signals. For this embodiment the user input may be a signal transmitted by at least one of a a portable transmitter associated with a user and b a remote transmitter associated with a monitoring device.

For one embodiment the electronic housing is associated with a backpack. At least one external surface of the backpack may be associated with a photovoltaic cell configured for supplying power to at least one of a the power source b the controller c an electronic module and d an integral electronic device electrically associated with said controller.

The electronic housing may further comprise a communication bus operatively connected to said controller and a module bay. The communication bus may also be electrically associated with a communication port suitably configured for connecting to an external electronic device or network. Similarly the power bus may be electrically associated with a power port configured for transferring power to an external device or receiving power from an external device. Internal devices could also be electrically associated with the power port using an external cable.

Another embodiment of the invention relates to electronic devices associated with a book bag used for transporting items while traveling. The book bag comprises an electronic signaling element comprising at least one of a a light emitting source and b a sound emitting source. The book bag further comprises a user interface electrically configured for receiving user input. A processing device is electrically associated with a memory and said user interface. The book bag further comprises a motion sensor electrically associated with the processing device. The motion sensor is configured for generating motion data. The processing device is configured to activate the signal device in response to at least one of a motion data and b user input. The book bag further comprises a power source electrically associated with the processing device and the signaling device.

The book bag may further comprise a receiver electrically associated with said processing device said receiver configured for receiving data signals transmitted from an electronic device. For this configuration the processing device is configured to activate said electronic signaling element in response to a received data signal.

The book bag may further comprise a recording device electrically associated with the processing device. The recording device is configured for generating recorder data. Examples of recording devices include digital cameras digital camcorders and electronic voice recorders. While the preferred recording format is a digital format analog recording formats may be used. Accordingly examples of recorder data include digital pictures and sound data. The processing device is further configured to activate said recording device in response to one of a user input and b a received transmitted data signal.

The book bag may further comprise a transmitter electrically associated with the processing device wherein said transmitter is configured for transmitting a data signal transmitted data signal . The processing device is further configured to transmit a transmitted data signal in response to at least one of a user input and b a received data signal. The transmitted data signal may comprise at least part of the motion data and or the recorder data.

The book bag may further comprise a photovoltaic cell associated with at least one exterior surface of said backpack. Preferably the photovoltaic cell is a flexible photovoltaic panel. The photovoltaic cell is configured for supplying power to at least one of the power source and at least part of the electronic components associated with the book bag.

A short range transceiver may additionally be associated with the book bag and said processing device. The processing device is further configured to use said transceiver to facilitate data transfers between at least two of a an external electronic device b said processing device d an integral electronic device. Examples of suitable short range transceivers include Bluetooth technology and Wi Fi technology.

The book bag may further comprise at least one module bay configured for receiving an electronic module. A communication bus is electrically associated with at least one module bay and the processing device. An electronic module received by a module bay may be electrically associated with the processing device via said communication bus. Similarly the book bag may comprise a power bus electrically associated with said at least one module bay and said processing device.

The book bag may further comprise a frame comprising a first wheel positioned at a first location on frame and a second wheel positioned at a second location. An extendable handle is associated with the frame and configured to adjustably extend from the frame to a position that allows a user to rest the book bag on said first wheel and said second wheel when moving the book bag. A magnetic device configured for generating power may be further associated with at least one wheel and at least one of a said power bus b said signaling device c said power source and d said controller. Alternatively a magnetic device configured for generating an oscillating magnetic field may be associated with the smart container. One embodiment of a magnetic device configured for generating an oscillating magnetic field is a magnet associated with a rod and configured to slide back and forth across the rod when the smart container is moved. A coil of wire surrounds the rod so that the oscillating magnetic flux lines induce a current in said coil.

Another exemplary embodiment of the present invention concerns methodology for associating electronic devices with a container used for transporting items while traveling. The method includes associating a controller with the container as well as associating a module bay with the container. The controller is electrically associating with the module bay. The controller is configured to receive data from an electronic module electrically associated with said module bay. The controller is further configured to send data to an electronic module electrically associated with said module bay. A power bus is provided wherein said power bus is electrically associated with said module bay and said controller. A power source is electrically associated with the power bus.

Additional embodiments of the present subject matter not necessarily expressed in this summarized section may include and incorporate various combinations of aspects of features or parts referenced in the summarized objectives above and or features or components as otherwise discussed in this application.

Those of ordinary skill in the art will better appreciate the features and aspects of such embodiments and others upon review of the remainder of the specification.

Repeat use of reference characters throughout the present specification and appended drawings is intended to represent the same or analogous features or elements of the present technology.

Reference now will be made in detail to the embodiments of the invention one or more examples of which are set forth below. Each example is provided by way of explanation of the invention not limitation of the invention. In fact it will be apparent to those skilled in the art that various modifications and variations can be made in the present invention without departing from the scope or spirit of the invention. For instance features illustrated or described as part of one embodiment can be used on another embodiment to yield a still further embodiment. Thus it is intended that the present invention covers such modifications and variations as come within the scope of the appended claims and their equivalents. Other objects features and aspects of the present invention are disclosed in or may be determined from the following detailed description. Repeat use of reference characters is intended to represent same or analogous features elements or steps. It is to be understood by one of ordinary skill in the art that the present discussion is a description of exemplary embodiments only and is not intended as limiting the broader aspects of the present invention.

While the particulars of the present invention and associated technology may be adapted for use with any type of container used to transport items while traveling the examples discussed herein are primarily in the context of travel luggage hiking backpacks and book bags.

For the purposes of this document a smart container is any receptacle for holding items while traveling and associated with electronic devices as described herein. Exemplary smart container includes a compartment for holding items comprising first section and a second section . First section is releasably associated with second section so as to form when closed a inter void for holding items inside the container. It will be appreciated that the container may be comprised of any number of sections as well as a plurality of compartments for holding items without departing from the scope of the present invention. Additionally the smart container may comprise only one section configured with a closable hole for example. One exemplary embodiment of such a container is a duffel bag comprising a string around the perimeter of a hole in one end of the duffel bag.

Smart container comprise at least one electronic module associated with a module bay described later . is a side view of a smart container . Handles and may be used to pick up and or carry smart container .

First section may be releasably associated with second via an electronic lock associated with a processing device. Similarly each electronic module may comprise an electronic lock for securing the modules. Such electronic locks are electrically associated with a processing device configured for controlling the open close status of the electronic locks based on user input as well as other control signals. Such technology will be discussed in more detail below.

For embodiments comprising at least one wheel at least one magnetic device may be associated with such wheel and configured for at least one of a generating energy and b providing a moving force to assist in moving the smart container. For this configuration the magnetic device may be a generator formed by associating a permanent magnet with a wheel. At least partially surrounding the permanent magnet is a coil of wire. When the wheel is rotated a rotating magnetic field is generated. The magnetic flux from the rotating magnetic field induces a current in the coil of wire. The coil output is electrically associated with power bus or directly to an electronic device associated with smart container . With this configuration the magnetic device can power an electronic module and or recharge a power source when the smart container is moving and generating a rotating magnetic field.

Alternatively a magnetic device may be configured for generating an oscillating magnetic field. One embodiment of a magnetic device configured for generating an oscillating magnetic field is a magnet associated with a rod and configured to slide back and forth across the rod when the smart container is moved. A coil of wire surrounds the rod so that the oscillating magnetic flux lines induce a current in said coil. The output of the coil is electrically associated with power bus an electronic module or integral electronic device.

For yet another embodiment of the invention the magnetic device may be a motor generator. A motor generator is a magnetic device that may be used as either a motor or a generator. For this configuration the magnetic device is associated with the smart container s power bus via electrical components such as a diode transistor etc. so that current only flows in the appropriate direction. When used as a motor the magnetic device provides a moving force to assist in moving the smart container. Such motor generator technology is well known and understood by those skilled in the art and a detailed explanation thereof is not necessary for purposes of describing the method and system according to the present invention.

For the embodiment shown in the electronic modules are housed in electronic housing associated with smart container . Electronic housing comprises at least one module bay configured for receiving electronic modules. Electronic housing is constructed of materials suitable for protecting the electronic modules from the containers anticipated environment. For example housing may be constructed from rubber armor or other suitable materials with the modules bays configured with vibration damping technology such as rubber mounts or springs. Additionally the module bays may be configured to receive a removable cover for protecting the outermost surface of a module. For example a removable cover not shown may be installed over outer surface of electronic module . Preferably such removable cover would be transparent.

The embodiment of smart container includes vacuum pump . Vacuum pump may be integral to smart container or vacuum pump may be an electronic module installed in a module bay. Vacuum pump sucks air in input port and exhaust air out output port . The input port of vacuum pump is associated with vacuum pack by attaching hose to connector . For this configuration connector is a one way check valve that allows air to exit vacuum pack while preventing air from entering vacuum pack when hose is removed. When activated vacuum pump will vacate the air from vacuum pack thereby vacuum sealing the clothing item housed by vacuum pack . Hose may be of any suitable design and is preferably configured to releasably attach to connector . Additional vacuum packs are shown inside the inter void of first section of smart container .

Vacuum pack may be of any suitable design appropriate for sealing items including clothing items and food items. Such vacuum pack technology is well known in the art and suitable vacuum pack designs are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 954 196 issued to Lin and U.S. Pat. No. 5 761 992 issued to Gallo and such patents are incorporated by this reference for all purposes.

Additionally the smart container may further comprise a removable pack that is configurable as both a vacuum pack and an inflatable pack. For this embodiment of the invention vacuum pack may be configured to inflate and serve for example as an air pillow. Connector is a reversible connector that allows air flow in only one direction either into the removable pack or out of the removable pack depending on the connector configuration. Connector of vacuum pack a removable pack is connected to output port of vacuum pump by associating one end of hose to connector and the opposite end of hose to output port of vacuum pump . When activated vacuum pump becomes an air pump that inflates vacuum pack into a predefined shape such as the shape of a typical pillow. The outer surface of vacuum pack may be covered with a lining comfortable to the touch.

One possible embodiment of a reversible connector is a connector comprising a check valve that is housed in a detachable housing. The detachable check valve is inserted into connector in a manner that allows air flow in the desired direction and blocks airflow in the opposite direction. Yet another embodiment of a removable pack that may be either inflated or vacuum sealed comprises two check valves an input check valve allows air in but not out and an output check valve allows air out but not in . One such valve would be disabled depending on the application of interest. For example when used to vacuum seal an item inside vacuum pack the input check valve would be disabled.

Power for vacuum pump may be supplied from a power source integral to smart container . Alternatively vacuum pump may comprise a power connection for connecting vacuum pump to an external power source.

Yet another embodiment of the invention is shown in depicting a front view of a portable system comprising an electronic housing shown in configured to be associated with a portable container for holding items while traveling. provides a back view of a portable system associated with electronic housing . For the exemplary embodiment shown in the container is a backpack typically carried by hikers. is an exploded view of portable system shown in . As better shown in electronic housing comprises at least one module bay configured for receiving an electronic module . Electronic housing further comprises a controller not shown electrically associated with electronic module . Additionally electronic housing further comprises a power source associated with the controller and the module bay described in detail later .

One possible power source is an energy converter associated an exterior surface of the container such as top flap . For this configuration the energy converter may be a flexible photovoltaic device comprising at least one photovoltaic cell and preferably constructed from plastics or other durable materials known in the art. The photovoltaic device may be a panel that is associated with top flap or top flap may be formed using photovoltaic thread. One suitable photovoltaic technology is PowerFilm manufactured by Iowa Thin Film Technologies. The electronic attributes of electronic housing will be discussed in detail later in this document.

As can be seen in electronic housing is configured to associate with external frame . As is well known external frame backpacks have a fully exposed external frame designed for receiving a backpack. For this embodiment of the invention electronic housing is configured to attach to external frame by straps and . Additionally straps and may also be used to secure the backpack to the frame thereby securing the electronic housing between the backpack and the external frame as shown in . .

It should be appreciated that external frames such as external frame are typically made of aluminum or other light weight materials. Such frames are substantially rigid with permanent non flexible attachment points. Such frames are known to work against the natural body movement of a hiker and have a tendency to tire a hiker quicker that flexible backpack designs. For one embodiment of the invention electronic housing also doubles as a flexible external frame thereby eliminating the need for external frame . For this embodiment the electronic housing is substantially constructed from light weight plastic materials or other flexible or rigid materials that provide a generally more flexible light weight designed compared to typical external frame systems. Such a frame better moves with the natural motion of the body carrying the portable system .

For yet another embodiment of electronic housing such housing is configured to be housed inside the container e.g. a backpack thereby providing a flexible or rigid comfortable internal frame design. For this configuration the backpack may comprise ports allowing access electronic modules associated with electronic housing . There internal frame configuration provides added protection to the electronic housing from environmental phenomenon such as rain.

Attention now is turned more particularly to the electronic attributes of the invention. Referring now to a block diagram representation of one possible configuration for the electronic components of the smart container system is depicted. shows a control unit electrically associated with at least one module bay . For this embodiment of the invention control unit is electrically associated with module bay through a communication bus via communication connector . Similarly module bay is electrically associated with power bus via power connector . Preferably both communication connector and power connector are keyed connectors that associated the communication bus and the power bus to a module bay in a predefined configuration. Additionally while depicts control unit as an integral component of the smart container it will be appreciated that for other embodiments of the invention control unit may be a module electrically associated with a module bay.

For the purposes of this document two items are electrically associated by bringing them together or into relationship with each other in any number of ways. For example two electronic items components may be electrically associated in numerous ways including a a direct indirect or inductive communication connection and b a direct indirect or inductive power connection. Additionally while the drawings illustrate various components of the system connected by a single line it will be appreciated that such lines represent one or more connections or cables as required by the smart container embodiment of interest.

Power bus comprises a ground connection or a plurality of ground connections and at least one power connection and is configured for distributing power to electronic components of the system. Alternatively a ground connection may be provided by a common connection such as an electrically conductive frame associated with the electronic components of the system. For the embodiment shown in power bus is electrically associated with portable power source . Power source may be an integral component of the smart container as shown in or it may be a module configured to be electrically associated with a module bay. For the embodiment shown in power source comprises at least one battery configured for supplying a direct current DC voltage. It will be appreciated that power source may comprise a plurality of batteries supplying a single output voltage or a plurality of output voltages without departing from the scope of the invention.

Additionally a power module may be electrically associated with a module bay. For this configuration the power module comprises a power port configured for connecting to an external power source. Power module may further comprise a converter for converting an input voltage to a form compatible with the system components. Power module may provide a single output voltage or a plurality of DC output voltages. For example converter may be configured to provide a device specific output as well as common DC output voltages including 3.3 volts 5.0 volts 12 volts 24 volts and 48 volts. Similarly power module may further comprise an inverter for generating an alternating current AC output voltage as well as AC output frequency. Such converter technology is well known and understood by those skilled in the art and a detailed explanation thereof is not necessary for purposes of describing the method and system according to the present invention.

As noted above the output of power module is electrically associated with power bus via power connector . Power connector is preferably a keyed power connector comprising at least one ground connection and at least one power connector. For example one embodiment of power bus may be configured to receive six different output voltages. For this embodiment power bus comprises twelve conductors or six ground power conductor pairs. Alternatively fewer ground conductors may be used including a signal common ground conductor. Keyed power connector is a female connector configured to receive a keyed male connector associated with an electronic module. When power bus is associated with power module the power module s keyed power connector associates the output voltages of power module to power bus in a predefined configuration. This allows an electronic module comprising an appropriately configured power connector to access the appropriated power connections when installed in a module bay.

Alternatively converter may be a programmable converter providing a range of output voltage levels. For this embodiment of the invention the output of converter is controlled by control unit by issuing commands over communication bus . One example of such programmable converter technology is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 903 950 issued to Afzal et al. which is incorporated by this reference for all purposes.

Preferably power module further comprises power status monitor configured to provide power status data. Such power status data may be provided to a display device integral to power module and or to control unit via communication bus . Display configurations include analog visual indicators digital numerical displays graphic displays and video displays.

Communication bus is now considered. As described above the smart container may comprise a plurality of electronic modules. Such electronic modules may be electrically associated with a communication bus for facilitating inter module communication as well as communication with control unit or microcontroller . Such electronic modules may comprise various technologies performing a multitude of functions. Accordingly it should be appreciated that communication bus may comprise different technologies depending on the smart container configuration. For example some smart container embodiments may have little need to exchange information with other processing devices located either near or far while other configurations may need to send and receive information over distances large and small via wires or through the air.

For the purposes of this document a communication bus is a communication path or link that conveys information such as data commands and addresses or all three in sequence or any combination thereof to a plurality of devices. The communication path may be a wired or wireless communication path comprising a plurality of wires or a single path such as a fiber optic link.

To fully leverage the capabilities of a smart container system comprising multiple electronic modules and devices a smart container networking scheme is used for the preferred embodiment. As is well known communication systems minimally require a transmitter wired or wireless to send information a receiver to receive the information and a link between the two. Communication bus is such a link between the control unit and one or more electronic modules and is part of a networking scheme for networking the various electronic devices associated with the smart container

Communication bus may be configured with multiple conductors such as a three conductor system comprising a ground conductor power conductor and data conductor over which serial communications is conducted. Similarly communication bus may comprise more advanced technologies such as a Universal Serial Bus USB or Ethernet. Indeed some configurations of the invention may comprise two or more communication buses.

For the embodiment of the invention illustrated in communication bus is an Ethernet bus electrically associated with control unit and at least one module bay. Communication bus is configured for transferring data using at least one of IP or UDP communication protocols. The system is designed to facilitate resource sharing and information exchange between electronic components associated with the smart container. Communication bus may comprise communication port for connecting the smart container to an external network such as the Internet or an external computing device. With such connection to the outside world many features become available including software upgrades BIOS updates and data sharing.

For the preferred embodiment electronic modules are hot pluggable and automatically announce their presence and capabilities to other devices and configure themselves when connected to the network saving the user from reading installation instructions and configuring network addresses and drivers.

Yet another possible communication architecture that may be used by the smart container is Home Audio Video Interoperability HAVi architecture using an API Application Programming Interface . For this configuration the communication bus complies with IEEE 1394 wiring Firewire . Such HAVi technology is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 829 656 issued to Szucs et al. which is incorporated by this reference for all purposes.

Referring now to a block diagram representation of one embodiment of control unit associated with communication bus and power bus is depicted. Control unit comprises a processing device associated with a memory. Examples of suitable controllers included personal computers as well as controllers comprising processing devices such as microcontrollers associated with a memory and I O interfaces. For the embodiment illustrated in control unit comprises microcontroller associated with RAM memory and ROM memory . ROM memory is used to store system level programs such as BIOS or other types of data that rarely change if ever. RAM memory is used to store data that may change frequently. Such data includes system data generated by microcontroller data received from an electronic module electrically associated with microcontroller or data received from an external device. It will be appreciated that other memory technologies may be used in place of ROM memory and RAM memory including PROM EPROM or EEPROM.

Microcontroller may be further associated a mass storage device such as mass storage . One example of a mass storage device is a magnetic optical hard drive. Mass storage may be used to store any data but is particularly suitable for storing large data files such as image files and sound files.

The smart container may further comprise a display device electrically associated with microcontroller . A Liquid Crystal Display LCD is one possible display device that may be used for displaying information to a user. While an electronic display is preferred mechanical displays may be used without departing from the scope of the invention. For the preferred embodiment of the invention LCD is configured for displaying information to a user. LCD may be further configured with touch screen technology thereby providing a user interface by which a user can input data into the system. Alternatively user interface may be electrically associated with controller and may comprise various technologies including a a single button b a keypad and c an auditory interface such as the ones used by the permanently blind.

Control unit may further comprise technology configured for wireless communications such as a receiver a transmitter and or a transceiver. For the embodiment of the invention shown in microcontroller is electrically associated with transceiver . Transceiver is further associated with antenna . Preferably the transceiver is configured for facilitating communications between two electronic devices. Examples of such transceiver technology include Bluetooth technology and Wi Fi technology. For example control unit might use transceiver to transmit music data generated by an electronic module playing a MP3 file to a blue tooth enabled headset associated with a user.

Some embodiments of a smart container may comprise a signaling device for providing a signaling function and or an entertainment function. For this configuration signaling device is electrically associated with microcontroller and comprises at least one of a light emitting element and a sound emitting element. For configurations including lights such lights are preferably positioned around the perimeter of the smart container. For example a user may carry a portable transmitter such as a key chain transmitter that comprises a lights button that when pressed transmits a signal that is received by transceiver . Such a received signal may instruct controller to activate signaling device in a predefined pattern thereby making the smart container easier to locate. For the purposes of this document a predefined pattern may be a random pattern. Similarly in response to user input microcontroller may be further configured to use transceiver to transmit a signal to the portable transmitter instructing it to activate a light associated with the key chain transmitter or to emit a sound to assist in locating the key chain transmitter.

Control unit and or the smart container may further comprise an integral power storage device such as power storage device . Power storage device is electrically associated with the microcontroller and or power bus . One possible power storage device is a battery or an array of batteries. Preferably power storage device is a backup power source that keeps the microcontroller and selected components active when power bus is not associated with a power source. For the embodiment of the invention shown in microcontroller is electrically associated with power storage device through conductor . Conductor may comprise a plurality of conductors that provide for power transfer as well as monitoring functions.

Power storage device may be further electrically associated with power bus through a switched connection. For such an embodiment microcontroller is electrically associated with the control input of power switch . Power storage device is electrically associated with one side of power switch and power bus is electrically associated with the other side of power switch . It will be appreciated that the electrical connections associating microcontroller power storage device and power bus may comprise a single conductor or a plurality of conductors. Similarly power switch represents at least one mechanical or electronic switch having a single switch with one pole a single switch with a plurality of poles or and plurality of switches. Additionally power switch may be bidirectional switch or unidirectional switch or a combination of the two.

Microcontroller may be further configured to monitor the status of power storage device and actuate power switch when it has determined that the power storage device needs recharging. Similarly microcontroller may actuate power switch so that power storage device supplies power to an electronic module associated with power bus .

Power storage device may be further associated with other electronic components integral to the container such as RAM memory mass storage LCD and integral device . For this embodiment power storage device is electrically associated with selected components of the system through switch and connection . Microcontroller is electrically associated with control input of switch . Power storage device is electrically associated with one side of switch and selected components of the system are electrically associated with the other side of switch through connection . As before it will be appreciated that the electrical connections associating microcontroller power storage device and selected components of the system together may comprise a single conductor or a plurality of conductors. Similarly switch represents at least one mechanical or electronic switch comprising a single switch with one pole a single switch with a plurality of poles or and plurality of switches. With this configuration microcontroller may perform numerous power functions such as a controlled shutdown. For example when no functional power source is associated with power bus and the power storage device is depleting its power microcontroller may determine that mass storage and transceiver are not currently required and turn off power to such systems to conserve power.

Microcontroller may further be associated with a biosensor configured for providing identification data used in an automated identification system. Biosensor is configured for sampling various features associated with a user such as facial features fingerprints hand geometry handwriting iris retinal vein and voice. For this embodiment microcontroller takes a baseline electrical interpretation of a biosample for a user attribute using biosensor and stores biodata or identification data in a memory associated with microcontroller . When a user wishes to access the container or system components the microcontroller requests a bioreading from the user and compares the newly sampled biodata with the stored identification data. If the microcontroller determines that the two biosamples are from the same person the microcontroller performs a desired function such as unlocking an electronic lock associated with the smart container or releasing an electronic module.

Attention is now directed to the electronic devices that may be electrically associated with a smart container. Electronic devices may be integral components of the smart container or they may be incorporated into electronic modules configured to be received by a module bay. That being said it should be appreciated that electronic devices described below as modules in one configuration may integrated into the smart container system as an integral device in a different configuration. Similarly electronic devices described below as integral devices may be integrated into electronic modules. Additionally the features of two or more modules may be incorporated into one module or integral device.

One example of an integral device is an electronic lock configured to secure the smart container. For this embodiment of the invention microcontroller controls the status of the electronic lock. Upon receiving user input from a user interface program routine a remote transmitter or biosensor etc. microcontroller changes the status of the electronic lock accordingly. For example as noted above a user may transmit a signal to the smart container using a portable transmitter associated with a key chain having for example a light and a unlock button. When the user presses the unlock button within range of the transceiver microcontroller receives the unlock signal and unlocks the electronic lock. Such electronic lock technology is well known and understood by those skilled in the art and a detailed explanation thereof is not necessary for purposes of describing the method and system according to the present invention.

One example of program routine that instructs microcontroller to cycle the electronic lock includes a program routine executed by microcontroller or other processing devices such as an ASIC Application Specific Integrated Circuit that monitors the smart container for movement for a predefined period of time using a motion sensor associated with the smart container. If the microcontroller detects movement for ten minutes for example the microcontroller will conclude the smart container is in transient and should be locked. Microcontroller then checks the status of the electronic lock and if it is not locked microcontroller generates a lock signal that is transferred to the electronic lock thereby locking the electronic lock and securing smart container .

Microcontroller may be further configured to use such motion sensors for other purposes such as monitoring the portable container environment for movement. For this embodiment microcontroller is associated with a motion sensor through either a wired or wireless link. The motion sensor may be an integral electronic device or an electronic module configured with a transmitter such as Bluetooth that may be removed from the container and placed at a strategic location near the smart container. When the motion sensor detects motion it generates motion data that is transferred to microcontroller . In response to the motion data microcontroller may perform any number of predefined functions including a activating a signaling device b activating a recording device and c transmitting a data signal. The transmitted data signal may comprise any container data linked to microcontroller . For example hikers may find such a configuration useful when leaving campsites and backpacks unattended while they go exploring. Such hikers would preferably carry an electronic device comprising a receiver such as a PDA watch etc. that is configured to received the transmitted data signal.

Similarly any number of sensors may be associated with microcontroller and used to monitor various attributes of the smart container. For example a magnetic sensor such as the well known magnetic sensors used in security systems may be associated with the smart container that detects when the smart container is opened. Microcontroller monitors the sensor and generates system data describing for example when the container was opened how long the container was opened and where it was opened for configurations that comprise a location determination module . For configurations associated with a recording module descried below the microcontroller may further record image data and or sound data. Other sensors include temperature sensors acceleration sensors hygrometers altimeters weight light current voltage magnetic field sensors or any device that may be electrically associated with microcontroller and configured to provide information about the smart container s environment.

Another integral device that may be associated with microcontroller is a transmitter configured to transmit a relatively high power signal compared to transceiver . Preferably such a transmitter may be used to transmit system data to a remote receiver at least one mile from the smart container. Additionally such a transmitter may be configured for a specific purpose such as transmitting a distress signal. One embodiment of such at transmitter comprises a device that transmits a signal at 406 MHz a frequency monitored by Search and Rescue SAR . The signal transmitted may be a personalized coded signal that uniquely identifies a user and tells SAR who the user is where the user is and that the user is in a life threatening situation.

Alternatively some situations may not warrant transmitting a SOS signal. For such situations the microcontroller may be configured to transmit a data signal to an electronic device comprising a receiver. Again using the example of a hiker exploring the area around his her campsite such a hiker may become lost or simply turned around. The hiker uses a portable electronic device comprising a transmitter watch PDA celluar phone etc. and transmits a signal to smart container . In response to the received signal microcontroller may perform any number of functions including transmitting the container s location data to the hiker transmitting a signal to a remote receiver associated with a third party or monitoring station and activating a signaling device associated with smart container .

Attention now is direction to the various electronic modules that may be electrically associated with a module bay. Examples of electronic modules include a a communication module b a security module c a recording module d an entertainment module e a clock module f location module g a display module and h a power module.

It will be appreciated that any number of electronic devices may be integrated into the smart container system without departing from the scope and spirit of the invention. The electronic modules described below are presented by way of example and the smart container system may comprise a plurality of physically separated but cooperatively associated electronic devices comprising electronic components that are not shown independently such as communication interfaces transmitters receivers processors one or more display means a magnetic card reader bioscanner audio speakers sensors and the like each preferably communicating with or under control of the microcontroller or another electronic module. As noted above for the preferred embodiment electronic modules are hot pluggable and automatically announce their presence and capabilities to other system modules and integral devices and configure themselves when connected to the smart container. Additionally module features of two or more electronic modules may be condensed into a single module without departing from the scope of the invention. For example the features of a recording module location module and communication module may be comprised in a single module or even a single integral electronic device.

A communication module is a module configured for transferring data between the smart container and external electronic devices. The communication module may comprise a wired port for connecting a data cable between the smart container and an information source such as the internet . Preferably the communication module comprises at least one transmitter receiver or transceiver based on technology such as Bluetooth Wi Fi cellular phones and satellite phones. For the preferred embodiment the communication module comprises cellular phone technology housed in typical cell phone housing block diagram representation shown in that is inserted into a module housing and releasably received thereby. The module housing is then inserted into a module bay . The cellular phone is configured with a communication port that is electrically associated with a module communication interface when the communication module is associated with the module housing . The module communication interface is electrically associated with communication bus thereby electrically associating the communication module with microcontroller and other appropriately configured electronic modules. Preferably the cellular phone comprises a power source housed in the cell phone housing which is electrically associated with power bus via a power connector .

Next one possible security module configuration is considered. The security module is configured to monitor the smart container system and or a user associated with the smart container system. A security module may comprise any combination of features including a sound emitter light emitter electronic sensors image and sound recording devices and a removable stun gun. The security module is electrically associated with microcontroller through communication bus and preferably comprises its own power source which may be electrically associated with power bus . The security module may further comprise a processing device that monitors at least one of a a user and b the smart container. Alternatively the security module may simply be a signaling device that activates a strobe light and horn for example upon receiving an activation signal from microcontroller .

One possible embodiment of a recording module is now considered. The recording module comprises various technologies for recording at least one of images and sound. For the preferred embodiment the recording module comprises a commercially available digital camcorder housed in a camcorder housing associated with a battery. The digital camcorder is received by a module housing configured for releasably receiving the camcorder. The module housing is inserted into module bay thereby electrically associating the camcorder with at least one of communication bus and power bus . Typical camcorder outputs include firewire and USB. Depending on the communication bus configuration and the camcorder output port configuration the camcorder output may be directly associated with communication bus or it may be electrically associated with a module communication interface which is electrically associated with communication bus . Preferably the camcorder may be removed from the smart container so that a user may record images and sound as desired. Additionally when associated with module housing and installed in the smart container system the camcorder is configured so that it may record images sound of the smart container s environment upon receiving a record signal from microcontroller . The record signal may be transmitted over communication bus or via a wireless signal for Bluetooth enable camcorders . Additionally microcontroller may be configured to retrieve image and sound data from the recording module and store such data in mass storage or transmit such image and sound data to a remote location.

Another embodiment of a recording module comprises a plurality of digital cameras associated with the smart container so that at least one digital camera is associated with a plurality of outside surfaces such as the top surface the side surfaces and the bottom surface. For the preferred embodiment of the invention the microcontroller is configurable to control the digital cameras and record images upon a local user request or a remote request such as a remote request transmitted from a distant transmitter. For one embodiment of the invention at least one digital camera is a fully contained system comprising its own power source and is preferably releasably associated with the smart container allowing a user to remove said camera and record images as desired. When the camera module is reinserted into a module bay associated with the smart container microcontroller may be further configured to transfer recorded images from the digital camera to mass storage or to transmit such images to a remote computer.

One possible embodiment of an entertainment module is now considered. The entertainment module is configured with any number of electronic devices used by people for enjoyment purposes. Typical examples of such electronic devices include MP3 players CD players DVD players and gaming computers such as GameBoy . The entertainment module may further comprise an LCD display. As described above such devices may be HAVi enabled to facilitate inter modular communications. For example lights associated with a signaling device may be activated in response to music played by a CD player associated with an entertainment module.

The next module considered is a clock module. The clock module is a time keeping device configured to display the time in at least one time zone. The clock module preferably comprises its own power source which may be electrically associated with power bus . Additionally the clock module may be electrically associated with microcontroller through communication bus . The clock module may be configured to maintain an accurate time for the smart container system. One embodiment of such a clock module would comprise Atomic clock technology that sets resets itself using a 60 kHz VLF radio time signal transmitted by NIST.

The clock module may further comprise alarm clock functionality to signal a user when a preset time has been reached. This feature may be particularly useful when traveling by eliminating the need for the user to learn how to operate an unfamiliar alarm clock. Additionally the clock module may further be configured to display the time in a plurality of time zones. Such a clock module might be particularly useful when traveling to other time zones by allowing the user to maintain readouts of his home time zone and the time for a different time zone.

The next module considered is a location determination module. The location determination module is configured with electronic equipment for determining the location of the smart container. Such technology includes GPS Global Positioning System basted technologies as well as other technologies such as those based on cellular phone transmissions. For the preferred embodiment an electronic module comprising a GPS receiver is electrically associated with a module bay. The GPS receiver is configured to determine the containers position and generate position data. Such position data is preferably available to microcontroller through communication buss .

For still another embodiment of the invention smart container comprises a plurality of location determination devices detachably associated with the smart container. For this embodiment a location determination device is associated with each member of a group of users. As the group explores the area around the smart container position data for each user is periodically transmitted to smart container thereby forming a monitoring center. Microcontroller is further configured to display the position data on a display device or module associated with smart container . For the purposes of this document periodically transmitting a signal means to transmit a signal at set intervals and random intervals.

The next module considered is a display module. The display module may comprise any of a number of technologies for displaying information to a user. For the preferred embodiment the display device complies with at least one of the following criteria small footprint light weight low power consumption completely flat screen crisp picture comprised of digital and uniform colors and fully digital signal processing technology with low electromagnetic emissions. One possible embodiment of such a display comprises Liquid Crystal Display LCD technology such as display shown in . As with the other modules the display module may be associated with the communication bus and the power bus . The display module may further comprise video and audio output ports and input ports for connecting the display module to external electronic devices such as a PlayStation or a DVD player.

By way of example one possible smart container system is examined to further illustrate the various aspects of one embodiment of the invention. For this embodiment of the invention the smart container is a bag such as book bags carried by students although such a bag may be used in any number of ways to transport items other than books . For this exemplary embodiment the book bag comprises an electronic signaling element comprising at least one of a a light emitting source and b a sound emitting source. For example in a child s book bag the signaling element may be lights positioned around the perimeter of the book bag. The book bag further includes a user interface configured for receiving user input. The user interface may be a wired or wireless interface. One embodiment of a wireless user interface would be a watch configured with a transmitter. The user interface and the electronic signaling device is further associated with a processing device.

The processing device is associated with a memory and configured for controlling monitoring the book bag components. The book bag is further configured with a motion sensor electrically associated with said processing device and configured for generating motion data. Motion data may be any type of data that is used by the processing device to determine when the book bag is moving. The processor is further configured to activate the electronic signaling device in response to at least one of a motion data and b user input. For example the processor may be figured to monitor the book bag for motion and upon detecting motion activating the signal device to catch the attention of the user. Alternatively upon detecting motion the processor may be configured to activate the signaling device in a predefined pattern similar to lights used in children s shoes . For some embodiments the predefined pattern may be defined by a user. Additionally for embodiments comprising a communication port or similar communication technology described above the predefined patterns may be shared between different book bags allowing friends to share their light patterns.

The book bag further comprises a power source electrically associated with the processing device and said signaling device. One possible power source is a magnetic device associated with a wheel for books bag embodiments having wheels . Alternatively the power source may be a battery or a flexible photovoltaic cell associated with the book bag.

The book bag may further comprise a receiver electrically associated with the processing device. The receiver is configured for receiving a data signal transmitted from an electronic device. The processing device is further configured to activate the electronic signaling element in response to a received data signal. For example the received data signal may be transmitted by a transmitter associated the user such as a watch or a key chain transmitter. This feature would be useful in locating the book bag among a group of book bags or for locating a lost book bag.

The book bag may further comprise a recording device electrically associated with the processing device and configured for generating recorder data. Exemplary embodiments of a recording device comprise at least one of a an image recording element and b a sound recording element as described earlier in this document . The processing device is further configured to activate said recording device in response to one of a user input and b a received data signal a wireless communication . With such a configuration a user can use the book bag to record a class lesson an event at school or an emergency situation. For example a child is approached by a person intending to do harm to the child. The child presses a panic button perhaps associated with the book bag or a watch transmitter as described earlier . The processing device would immediately begin recording image and sound data and activate the signaling device.

The book bag may further comprise a transmitter electrically associated with the processing device and configured for transmitting a data signal to a remote location. For this embodiment the processing device is configured to activate the transmitter and transmit a data signal in response to at least one of a user input and b a received data signal as described previously . The transmitted data signal comprises one of a at least part of said motion data and b at least part of said recorder data. Continuing the child adduction example described above when the child presses the panic button the recorder data is immediately transmitted to a remote location such as a monitoring station and or a parent. The transmitter may comprise cellular technology as well as other well known communication technologies.

The book bag may further comprise a flexible photovoltaic cell configured for supplying power to at least one of a said power source and b the electronic components associated with the book bag. Such photovoltaic cell technology was described earlier.

The book bag may further comprise a transceiver electrically associated with said processing device. Suitable transceiver technologies include Bluetooth and Wi Fi. With this technology a student can listen to and share with other students music played by an electronic device associated with the processing device. Students may talk among themselves using Bluetooth enabled headsets. More importantly a student could better listen to a class lecture given in a large lecture hall where the speaker s voice is transmitted by a Bluetooth transmitter.

Some embodiments of the book bag further comprise at least one module bay configured for receiving an electronic module such as the electronic modules described earlier. A communication bus is electrically associated with at least one module bay and the processing device. A power bus electrically associated with said at least one module bay and said processing device.

Another embodiment of the book bag comprises a frame associated with the container. A first wheel is positioned at a first location on the frame and a second wheel positioned at a second location on said frame. An extendable handle is associated with the frame and configured to adjustably extend from the frame to a position that allows a user to rest the container on said first wheel and said second wheel when moving the container. A magnetic device is associated with at least one wheel and is configured for generating power when the wheel is rotating. Alternatively a magnetic device configured for generating an oscillating magnetic field may be associated with the smart container. One embodiment of a magnetic device configured for generating an oscillating magnetic field is a magnet associated with a rod and configured to slide back and forth across the rod when the smart container is moved. A coil of wire surrounds the rod so that the oscillating magnetic flux lines induce a current in said coil. The output of the magnet device is electrically associated with at least one of a said power bus b said signaling device c said power source and d said controller.

Attention is now directed to methods for monitoring a container used for transporting items while traveling. For one preferred method the first step is to associate a controller with the container. As before the controller may comprise any number of electronic devices and is associated with a memory. Additionally the controller is electrically associated with at least one electronic module and a power source.

As noted above the electronic module may comprise any number of electronic devices including communication modules location determination modules entertainment modules and security modules. For one embodiment of the present method the electronic module is configured to monitor a container parameter and generate a data signal relating to said predefined parameter. A container parameter is simply any environmental or container attribute that is quantifiable by an electronic data signal. Examples of container parameters include temperature location information pressure acceleration light motion images sound electromagnetic waves voltage current and power.

The controller is configured to perform any number of predefined functions in response to said data signal. For example upon detecting motion the controller may activate a signaling device transmit a signal to a remote electronic device or verify that an electronic lock is locked and if not initiate a lock signal .

While the present subject matter has been described in detail with respect to specific embodiments thereof it will be appreciated that those skilled in the art upon attaining an understanding of the foregoing may readily adapt the present technology for alterations to variations of and equivalents to such embodiments. Accordingly the scope of the present disclosure is by way of example rather than by way of limitation and the subject disclosure does not preclude inclusion of such modifications variations and or additions to the present subject matter as would be readily apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art.

