---

title: Instant message broadcasting and presence enabling from electronic mail application
abstract: A system and method for broadcasting a message to multiple contacts in a list of contacts provided by an electronic mail application and furnishing presence information for contacts in the list of contacts provided by the electronic mail application includes an interface for adding functionality to an electronic mail application which supports instance messaging (IM). The interface interfaces with a distributed presence enabled communication platform for providing presence information regarding contact availability. The electronic mail application utilizes the interface for displaying the contact presence information and broadcasting a message to multiple contacts in the list of contacts.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07571190&OS=07571190&RS=07571190
owner: Siemens Communications, Inc.
number: 07571190
owner_city: Boca Raton
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050921
---
The present invention relates generally to the field of electronic mail and messaging and more particularly to a system and method for broadcasting a message to multiple contacts in a list of contacts provided by an electronic mail application and providing presence information for contacts in the list of contacts provided by the electronic mail application.

Instant messaging IM is an important technology for modern business. It has the ability to improve the communications efficiency of an organization potentially lowering communications costs reducing cycle times improving customer retention and enhancing partner effectiveness. IM allows workers to collaborate with colleagues partners and customers. Moreover it can help to quickly solve business questions share files supplement conference calls and provide other valuable workplace services. Generally instant messaging utilizes real time information about users systems and device availability enabling both users and applications to make more informed decisions about information and request routing. For example by determining a user s location an IM application can route information to the appropriate computer or device providing the critical information in a timely fashion.

Instant messaging utilizes an underlying technical capability known as presence. Broadly presence refers to information about a user s availability. By indicating which users are available online and which users are away e.g. away from their computer terminals a presence service provides information for determining who is available to answer a question complete a task collaborate and the like. For instance knowing that a user is available often allows for an immediate response to a request for information or an urgent task. Visualization of user availability provided by typical IM services is also important since a variety of users may be qualified to handle a request or task. Typically visualization of user availability is provided in the form of an icon or visual cue alerting a user to the status of another user e.g. one icon for representing a user is online and another for representing the user is away .

Many electronic mail applications incorporate some form of instant messaging along with electronic mail functionality such as the ability to send an instant message to an electronic mail contact. However these electronic mail applications do not include functionality for broadcasting an instant message to more than one contact. Thus it is not possible to simultaneously send a common message to several contacts. Instead in present applications a user must copy the message and send it to each contact individually. This process is time consuming and can result in errors as the message is copied. Moreover these electronic mail applications do not integrate contact information with presence information obtained from a distributed presence enabled communication platform. Thus the applications can only provide IM status and cannot provide integrated presence information such as telephone or mobile telephone availability office availability pager availability and the like.

Consequently it would be desirable to provide an electronic mail application with the ability to broadcast a message to multiple contacts in a list of contacts provided by the electronic mail application and to integrate contact information with presence information from a distributed presence enable communication platform to furnish presence information for contacts within the list of contacts.

Accordingly the present invention is directed to a system and method for broadcasting a message to multiple contacts in a list of contacts provided by an electronic mail application and providing presence information for contacts in the list of contacts provided by the electronic mail application.

The present invention adds functionality to the electronic mail application which supports instance messaging IM . In exemplary embodiments the present invention employs an interface which may be implemented via a plug in application which interfaces with a distributed presence enabled communication platform for providing presence information regarding contact availability. The distributed presence enabled communication platform includes an application programming interface API defining how the plug in application may access the distributed presence enabled communication platform for contact presence information which is displayed with the list of contacts via the electronic mail application. The electronic mail application utilizes the interface for broadcasting a message to multiple contacts in the list of contacts.

It is to be understood that both the foregoing general description and the following detailed description are exemplary and explanatory only and are not necessarily restrictive of the invention as claimed. The accompanying drawings which are incorporated in and constitute a part of the specification illustrate an embodiment of the invention and together with the general description serve to explain the principles of the invention.

Reference will now be made in detail to the presently preferred embodiments of the invention examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings.

Referring to a system for broadcasting a message to multiple contacts in a list of contacts provided by an electronic mail application and providing presence information for contacts in the list of contacts provided by the electronic mail application are described in accordance with exemplary embodiments of the present invention. An interface which comprises a software component such as a plug in application or the like is provided for adding functionality to an electronic mail application such as Microsoft Outlook or Outlook Express Microsoft Corporation IBM Lotus Notes IBM Corporation and other mail applications as contemplated by those of skill in the art.

The plug in application is added to the electronic mail application for adding features such as facilitating broadcasting of a message to multiple contacts in a list of contacts provided by the electronic mail application and providing presence information for contacts in the list of contacts provided by the electronic mail application . In embodiments the plug in application is added to a mail application which supports instance messaging IM . For example in one specific embodiment the plug in application is added to an electronic mail application including an IM application . In another specific embodiment the plug in application is added to an electronic mail application which interfaces with an IM application . It is contemplated that the plug in application may be added to other mail applications including instant messaging functionality as well without departing from the scope and intent of the present invention.

The plug in application is interfaced with a distributed presence enabled communication platform for providing presence information to the electronic mail application . In embodiments the distributed presence enabled communication platform provides information regarding user availability for contacts in the list of contacts such as information for determining which contacts are available online and which contacts are away e.g. away from their computer terminals . It should be noted that the list of contacts may be stored by the electronic mail application by an IM application which interfaces with the electronic mail application by a mail server interfaced with the electronic mail application or by another application interfaced with the electronic mail application . Further it will be appreciated that the list of contacts may be transmitted to the electronic mail application across a network or via other transmission techniques without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention.

In order to provide presence information to the electronic mail application the distributed presence enabled communication platform includes an application programming interface API . The API provides a set of calling conventions e.g. software calls functions methods protocols routines and tools prescribed by the distributed presence enabled communication platform defining how the plug in application may access the distributed presence enabled communication platform to determine a contact s availability. For instance the API allows the plug in application to interrogate the distributed presence enabled communication platform for contact presence information which is then displayed via the electronic mail application .

In embodiments the list of contacts displayed by the electronic mail application may include contact presence information retrieved from the distributed presence enabled communication platform . For example in one specific embodiment illustrated in contact presence information is displayed proximal to a corresponding first contact in the list of contacts when a mouse pointer or a like pointing device hovers over the first contact . In other embodiments the contact presence information may be displayed when requested by a user. For example a user may click on the first contact using the mouse pointer to view the contact presence information . Alternatively a series of key strokes may be utilized. It is contemplated that the contact presence information may be displayed in a variety of ways without departing from the scope and intent of the present invention.

In embodiments the electronic mail application may utilize the plug in application for broadcasting a message to multiple contacts in the list of contacts . For example in one specific embodiment illustrated in the electronic mail application may provide a button added via the plug in application for opening a dialogue box or another interface for broadcasting a message to multiple contacts. As illustrated in the dialogue box may include the list of contacts displayed with contact presence information retrieved from the distributed presence enabled communication platform .

For instance a second contact may be displayed with a list of media comprising presence information obtained from the distributed presence enabled communication platform . A highlighted region or another visual cue may be utilized to identify media at which the second contact may be readily contacted. Similarly a grayed out region or another visual cue may be utilized to identify media at which the second contact may not be readily contacted. Check boxes or other various selection tools may be provided for selecting media to which an instant message should be routed. Alternatively another set of selection boxes may be provided for indicating that the electronic mail application may select the best routing destination from the list of media based on information received form the distributed presence enabled communication platform .

As illustrated in the dialogue box may include the list of contacts assigned to various groups such as a first group a second group and a third group . Contact presence information may be provided to identify media at which members of the first group the second group and the third group may be readily contacted. Those of skill in the art will appreciate that while the interfaces illustrated in have been described with some specificity these interfaces are exemplary and explanatory only and are not restrictive of the invention. Thus other interfaces including different functionality may be provided which still fall within the scope and extent of the present invention.

Referring now to a method for providing presence information for contacts in a list of contacts provided by an electronic mail application is described. First a contact s presence information is requested . For example the electronic mail application may utilize a plug in application to request the contact s presence information from a distributed presence enabled communication platform. The plug in application may utilize an application programming interface API provided by the distributed presence enabled communication platform to format the request for the contact s information .

In exemplary embodiments the distributed presence enabled communication platform is configured for determining the contact presence information of a contact for different media utilized by the contact. For instance the contact may utilize two or more of instant messaging via a network a telephone a mobile telephone a paging service text messaging via a wireless network and other various media. Preferably the distributed presence enabled communication platform is configured for selecting the media at which the contact may be readily contacted.

Once the contact s presence information has been requested from the distributed presence enabled communication platform the distributed presence enabled communication platform determines the contact s presence information and provides it to the electronic mail application via the plug in application. Then the contact s presence information is provided by the electronic mail application utilizing the plug in application e.g. the electronic mail application displays the contact information via an interface .

Referring now to a method for broadcasting a message to multiple contacts in a list of contacts provided by an electronic mail application is described. The electronic mail application utilizes a plug in application to display a list of contacts . The list of contacts may be stored by the electronic mail application by an IM application which interfaces with the electronic mail application by a mail server interfaced with the electronic mail application or by another application interfaced with the electronic mail application. Preferably the list of contacts is displayed by an interface for entering and sending an instant message. In specific embodiments contact information obtained from a distributed presence enabled communication platform may be displayed with the list of contacts . The presence information may include two or more media for each contact such as contexts including instant messaging via a network a telephone a mobile telephone a paging service text messaging via a wireless network and other various media.

In one embodiment the electronic mail application receives multiple selections from the list of contacts displayed via the interface . For example in one instance a first contact and a second contact are selected from the list of contacts. In another instance a first context and a second context e.g. first and second media are selected from a list of contexts. The first and second contexts may be selected for the same contact or alternatively for different contacts. In another embodiment the interface selects a first context and a second context e.g. first and second media from the list of contexts. For example the interface may select one or more contexts for a contact based on context information received from the distributed presence enabled communication server. Finally the message is broadcast simultaneously to the contacts and or contexts selected from the list of contacts .

In exemplary embodiments the message is broadcast by the electronic mail application via an instant messaging service. For example the message may be broadcast by an electronic mail application including an IM application. In another embodiment the electronic mail application interfaces with an IM application for broadcasting the message. It is further contemplated that the message may be broadcast by other mail applications including instant messaging functionality as well without departing from the scope and intent of the present invention.

In the exemplary embodiments methods and may be implemented as sets of instructions or software readable by the radiographic imaging device. Further it is understood that the specific order or hierarchy of steps in the methods disclosed are examples of exemplary approaches. Based upon design preferences it is understood that the specific order or hierarchy of steps in the method can be rearranged while remaining within the scope and spirit of the present invention. The accompanying method claims present elements of the various steps in a sample order and are not necessarily meant to be limited to the specific order or hierarchy presented.

It is believed that the present invention and many of its attendant advantages will be understood by the foregoing description and it will be apparent that various changes may be made in the form construction and arrangement of the components thereof without departing from the scope and spirit of the invention or without sacrificing all of its material advantages. The form herein before described being merely an explanatory embodiment thereof it is the intention of the following claims to encompass and include such changes.

