---

title: Synthesis and complete stereochemical assignment of psymberin/irciniastatin for use as antitumor compounds
abstract: 

The invention further provides processes for making the compounds, their synthetic intermediates, and for methods of using the compounds and their pharmaceutical compositions for the treatment of neoplastic diseases.

url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07429616&OS=07429616&RS=07429616
owner: Board of Regents, University of Texas System
number: 07429616
owner_city: Austin
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050715
---
The subject matter of this application was supported in part by research Grant No. CA090349 from the National Institutes for Health NIH Bethesda Md. and the U.S. Government may therefore have certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates generally to the field of organic synthesis and stereochemical assignments of compounds exhibiting efficacy against neoplastic diseases.

Natural products that elicit a specific and unique biological response in mammalian cells represent valuable tools for new pharmaceuticals for the treatment for various disease states. In this context the recent isolation of irciniastatin and psymberin from the marine sponges and sp respectively is noteworthy. Both irciniastatins and psymberin have potent inhibitory activity in human tumor cell assays. They also have partial structural resemblance to the pederin family of natural products and therefore could share the latter s well documented pharmacological role as potent eukaryotic protein synthesis inhibitors. The total synthesis of these natural products analogs thereof and probe reagents for mode of action studies should provide a solid foundation for lead identification and preclinical studies in the area of human cancer.

In 2004 two research groups led by Pettit and Crews independently disclosed the isolation of structurally novel constitutionally identical cytotoxins. Both irciniastatin and psymberin shown below were isolated based on their potent inhibitory activity in human tumor cell assays. Irciniastatin A was isolated from the Indo Pacific marine sponge Pettit G. R. et al. 2004 47 1149 whereas psymberin was obtained from a marine sponge sp. collected from the waters of Papua New Guinea Cichewicz R. H. et al. 2004 6 1951 . See also WO 2005 054809.

High field multidimensional NMR studies and chiroptical data Circular Dichroism Cotton effect at n transition of dihydroisocoumarin substantiated the proposed relative and absolute configuration for psymberin except for the undefined configuration at C Cichewicz R. H. et al. supra . The relative stereochemistry of irciniastatin A was only resolved for the C Caminal fragment Pettit G. R. et al. supra . Notably the C aminal configuration in irciniastatin A based on nOe data was opposite to the corresponding center assigned for psymberin. No copies of actual NMR spectra were included in the irciniastatin publication Pettit G. R. et al. supra and combined with the fact that spectra for irciniastatin and psymberin were acquired in different NMR solvents no conclusion could be drawn whether these two constitutionally ident ical metabolites bear an identical or diastereomeric correspondence. Therefore a need exists to define the stereochemistry of these purified active cytotoxins together with synthetic routes to make them.

This invention satisfies this need and others by providing in one embodiment a pharmaceutically acceptable salt or prodrug of the compound of formula 28 a 

Still another embodiment of the invention is a method for treating a subject suffering from a neoplastic disease. The method comprises administering to the subject a therapeutically effective amount of a compound according to formula 28 a 28 b 29 a or 29 b.

The invention also provides in other embodiments processes for preparing the compound of formula 28 a and certain synthetic intermediate compounds. In that regard other embodiments relate to those synthetic intermediate compounds.

The inventors discovered highly convergent syntheses of the cytotoxic compounds according to the invention. Spectrochemical analyses of the compounds led for the first time to correct stereochemical assignments for all chiral centers. Those compounds pharmaceutically acceptable salts and prodrugs thereof are useful for treating neoplastic diseases in a subject.

As noted above the invention provides for compounds of formulae 28 a 28 b 29 a and 29 b. These compounds can also exist as pharmaceutically acceptable salts solvates or prodrugs as more fully described below.

In general a salt refers to a salt form of a free base compound of the present invention as appreciated by persons of ordinary skill in the art. Salts can be prepared by conventional means known to those who are skilled in the art. The term pharmaceutically acceptable when used in reference to a salt refers to salt forms of a given compound which are within governmental regulatory safety guidelines for ingestion and or administration to a subject. The term pharmaceutically acceptable salts embraces salts commonly used to form alkali metal salts and to form addition salts of free acids or free bases. The nature of the salt is not critical provided that it is pharmaceutically acceptable.

The category of suitable pharmaceutically acceptable base addition salts of compounds of formulae 28 a 28 b 29 a and 29 b encompasses metallic salts such as salts made from aluminum calcium lithium magnesium potassium sodium and zinc as well as salts made from organic bases including primary secondary and tertiary amines and substituted amines including cyclic amines such as caffeine arginine diethylamine N ethyl piperidine aistidine glucamine isopropylamine lysine morpholine N ethyl morpholine piperazine piperidine triethylamine and trimethylamine. In one embodiment the pharmaceutically acceptable salt is the lithium sodium or potassium salt.

Additional examples of such acid and base addition salts can be found in Berge et al. 66 1 1977 . All of these salts can be prepared by conventional means from the corresponding compound of the invention by reacting for example the appropriate acid or base with the compound of formula 28 a 28 b 29 a and 29 b respectively.

The present invention also contemplates prodrugs of the compounds described here. A prodrug is a compound that when administered to the body of a subject such as a mammal undergoes a conversion in situ that yields an active agent of formula 28 a 28 b 29 a or 29 b. More specifically a prodrug is an active or inactive masked compound that is modified chemically through in vivo physiological action such as hydrolysis metabolism and the like into a compound of this invention following administration of the prodrug to a subject or patient. The suitability and techniques of making and using prodrugs are well known. In one embodiment for example the invention provides for an ester prodrug. A discussion of prodrugs involving esters appears in Svensson and Tunek 165 1988 and in Bundgaard DP Elsevier 1985 .

Also hydroxy groups can be masked as esters and ethers respectively. EP 039 051 Sloan and Little Apr. 11 1981 discloses Mannich base hydroxamic acid prodrugs along with their preparation and use. Thus one or more hydroxy substituents in the compounds of formulae 28 a 28 b 29 a and 29 b can be masked as esters. Additionally the hydroxyl groups can be masked as phosphate or phosphonate esters. The hydroxy groups include aliphatic hydroxyl groups such as those bound to carbons C5 C11 and C15 and phenolic hydroxy groups in the compounds of the invention.

In other embodiments the invention contemplates solvates of compounds of formulae 28 a 28 b 29 a and 29 b. In general the term solvate when used with reference to a compound connotes a compound that is associated with one or more molecules of a solvent such as an organic solvent inorganic solvent aqueous solvent or mixtures thereof.

In some embodiments for example the compounds of formulae 28 a 28 b 29 a and 29 b exist as hydrates. Hydration can occur during manufacturing of the compounds or compositions comprising the compounds or the hydration can occur over time due to the hygroscopic nature of the compounds.

Compounds of the invention can exist as organic solvates as well including DMF ether and alcohol solvates among others. The identification and preparation of any particular solvate falls within the skill of the ordinary artisan of synthetic organic or medicinal chemistry.

Compounds of the invention along with synthetic intermediate compounds can be prepared according to the processes as described below.

In general the synthetic approach to making compounds of the invention focused on the coupling of fragments 6 7 via carbon bond formation to control stereochemistry of the C Cstereotriad followed by appending carboxylic acid 5.

In light of the previously unknown stereochemistry at C both anti and syn 5 were prepared via the sequence shown in Scheme IA below for acid anti 5.

Thus asymmetric methallylation see Jadhav P. K. Bhat et al. 1986 51 432 acid syn 5 was prepared with antipodal Ipc borane reagent as described by Evans D. A. et al. 1993 34 6871 of aldehyde 8 followed by methylation and acetonide hydrolysis provided diol 9. Diol 9 was converted to benzoate 10 via silylation benzoylation and desilylation. The relative stereochemistry in compound 10 was confirmed through H NMR analysis of acetal 11. Finally a two step oxidation of alcohol 10 yielded anti 5 8 steps 49 from 8 .

Scheme 1B below depicts how the aryl fragment 6 was obtained in 7 steps 41 overall yield from known aldehyde 12. See Lambooy J. P. 1956 78 771.

Thus compound 12 was subjected to 1 oxidation amidation CHO CONEt 2 ortho metallation allylation to give compound 13 see Kamila S. et al. 2003 59 1339 Casas R. et al. 1995 36 1039 3 BBr mediated methyl ether deprotection 4 methyl ester formation using a protocol described by Keck G. E. et al. 2000 56 9875 5 phenol protection and 6 oxidative double bond cleavage to give compound 6.

The synthesis of central fragment 7 as depicted in Scheme 1C below commenced with the preparation of homochiral C symmetrical diol 17.

The reaction sequence began with the allylation of mono protected dialdehyde 14 see Johnson P. R. et al. 1984 49 4424 using Leighton s silane reagent 15 Kubota K. et al. 2003 42 946 followed by a second allylation of aldehyde 16 which was unmasked during the workup. Monosilylation 18 and ozonolysis destroyed the symmetry and provided a lactol trapped as acetate 19 that differentiates the chain termini. Addition of diethylzinc using conditions described by Takahashi H. et al. 1992 48 5691 gave a secondary alcohol which was oxidized to ketone 7 after acetate displacement with TMSCN 8 steps 30 from 14 .

Scheme 2 depicts below a double convergent coupling strategy that was employed to prepare final compounds 28 a 28 b 29 a and 29 b. Thus treating the Z chlorophenylboryl enolate derived from 7 with aldehyde 6 yielded one major syn aldol product 20 that was predicted from an enolate facial bias imposed by the alkoxy substituent Evans. et al. supra .

Reduction of 20 with catecholborane provided lactone 21 directly after basic workup. See Evans D. A. et al. 1990 55 5190. Workup of compound 21 with aqueous Na K tartrate as described in the examples below allowed the diol to be isolated for derivatization as an acetonide derivative which confirmed the relative 1 2 syn 2 3 syn stereochemistry at C C. Silyl deprotection of 21 gave alcohol 22. Crystallographic analysis of crystals obtained from benzyl ether 22a fully confirmed the assigned structure and relative stereochemistry . Hydrolysis of the nitrile group in 22 with the platinum II catalyst of Ghaffar and Parkins Ghaffar T. et al. 1995 36 8657 Ghaffar T. et al. 2000 160 249 yielded amide 23 in greater than 95 yield. Hydrogenolysis of 23 gave compound 24 and subsequent peracetylation furnished tetraacetate 25 90 2 steps .

Imidate 26 was generated by a convenient and beneficial procedure by adding polyvinylpyridine during the imidate formation with MeOBF. After TLC analysis indicated complete conversion the reaction mixture was filtered and concentrated followed by dissolving the crude imidate 26 in toluene and addition of Hunigs base and acid chloride 27 from 5 with COCl . The mixture was heated to 40 C. for 2 h cooled to 0 C. and treated with an ethanolic sodium borohydride solution.

After workup the crude final compounds were saponified to afford a separable mixture of 28 a and 28 b 71 29 ratio with acid chloride anti 27 56 from 25 or an inseparable mixture of 29 a and 29 b 75 25 ratio with syn 27 50 . Of the 4 diastereomers only that spectral data H C recorded for 28 corresponded exactly with psymberin CDOD Cichewicz R. H. et al supra and irciniastatin A CDCl obtained by private communication from Profs. Cherry Herald and George Pettit . The rotation of synthetic 28 a 25.2 c 0.11 MeOH agreed with those reported for psymberin 29 c 0.02 MeOH Cichewicz R. H. et al supra and irciniastatin A 24.4 c 0.55 MeOH Pettit G. R. et al. supra .

The invention further contemplates processes for making a compound of formula 28 a and certain of its synthetic intermediate compounds as described above. Still other embodiments provide for those intermediate compounds as such.

The reaction mixture resulting from the process described above may include one or more stereoisomers of a compound of formula 28 a. Thus in another embodiment the process further comprises the step of isolating the compound of formula 28 a. The isolation can entail any procedure that is well known to the person who is skilled in the art. Without limitation exemplary procedures include various kinds of chromatography such as flash chromatography.

In still another embodiment the invention provide a process for preparing the compound of formula 20. The process comprises the step of reacting a compound having the formula 6 

Other embodiments of the invention relate to the intermediate compound of formula 7. Accordingly one embodiment is the intermediate compound which another embodiment is a process for making the intermediate compound of formula 7. The process comprises the steps of 

The skill person will recognize that TBS in above described process denotes tert butyldimethylsilyl. The process can be modified readily to employ other well known alcohol protecting groups such as those described in the examples below.

In other embodiments the invention provides a pharmaceutical composition comprising a compound of formula 28 a 28 b 29 a or 29 b and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. A pharmaceutical composition of the invention may comprise an effective amount of a compound of the invention or an effective dosage amount of a compound of the invention. An effective dosage amount of a compound of the invention includes an amount less than equal to or greater than an effective amount of the compound. For example a pharmaceutical composition in which two or more unit dosages such as in tablets capsules and the like are required to administer an effective amount of the compound or alternatively a multi dose pharmaceutical composition such as powders liquids and the like in which an effective amount of the compound may be administered by administering a portion of the composition.

The pharmaceutical compositions may generally be prepared by a compound of formula 28 a 28 b 29 a or 29 b including the tautomers solvates pharmaceutically acceptable salts derivatives or prodrugs thereof with pharmaceutically acceptable carriers excipients binders adjuvants diluents and the like to form a desired administrable formulation to treat or ameliorate a neoplastic disease such as cancer.

Pharmaceutical compositions can be manufactured by methods well known in the art such as conventional granulating mixing dissolving encapsulating lyophilizing emulsifying or levigating processes among others. The compositions can be in the form of for example granules powders tablets capsules syrup suppositories injections emulsions elixirs suspensions or solutions.

The instant compositions can be formulated for various routes of administration for example by oral administration by transmucosal administration by rectal administration or subcutaneous administration as well as intrathecal intravenous intramuscular intraperitoneal intranasal intraocular or intraventricular injection. The compound or compounds of the instant invention can also be administered in a local rather than a systemic fashion such as injection as a sustained release formulation. One embodiment provides for intravenous administration.

Besides those representative dosage forms described herein pharmaceutically acceptable excipients and carriers are generally known to those skilled in the art and are thus included in the instant invention. Such excipients and carriers are described for example in RPS Mack Publ. Co. 2000 and in P TSDFD 2ed. Churchill Livingstone 2002 . The following dosage forms are given by way of illustration and should not be construed as limiting the invention.

For oral buccal and sublingual administration powders suspensions granules tablets pills capsules gelcaps and caplets can be used as solid dosage forms. These can be prepared for example by mixing one or more compounds of the instant invention or solvates prodrugs pharmaceutically acceptable salts or tautomers thereof with at least one additive or excipient such as a starch or other additive and tableted encapsulated or made into other desirable forms for conventional administration. Suitable additives or excipients are sucrose lactose cellulose sugar mannitol maltitol dextran sorbitol starch agar alginates chitins chitosans pectins tragacanth gum gum arabic gelatins collagens casein albumin synthetic or semi synthetic polymers or glycerides methyl cellulose hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose and or polyvinylpyrrolidone. Optionally oral dosage forms can contain other ingredients to aid in administration such as an inactive diluent or lubricants such as magnesium stearate or preservatives such as paraben or sorbic acid or anti oxidants such as ascorbic acid tocopherol or cysteine a disintegrating agent binders thickeners buffers sweeteners flavoring agents or perfuming agents. Additionally dyestuffs or pigments may be added for identification. Tablets and pills may be further treated with suitable coating materials known in the art.

Liquid dosage forms for oral administration may be in the form of pharmaceutically acceptable emulsions syrups elixirs suspensions slurries and solutions which may contain an inactive diluent such as water. Pharmaceutical formulations may be prepared as liquid suspensions or solutions using a sterile liquid including but not limited to an oil water an alcohol and combinations of these. Pharmaceutically suitable surfactants suspending agents emulsifying agents and the like may be added for oral or parenteral administration.

For nasal administration the pharmaceutical compositions may be a spray or aerosol containing an appropriate solvent and optionally other compounds such as but not limited to stabilizers antimicrobial agents antioxidants pH modifiers surfactants bioavailability modifiers and combinations of these. A propellant for an aerosol formulation may include compressed air nitrogen carbon dioxide or a hydrocarbon based low boiling solvent. The compound or compounds of the instant invention are conveniently delivered in the form of an aerosol spray presentation from a nebulizer or the like.

Injectable dosage forms for parenteral administration generally include aqueous suspensions or oil suspensions which may be prepared using a suitable dispersant or wetting agent and a suspending agent. Injectable forms may be in solution phase or a powder suitable for reconstitution as a solution. Both are prepared with a solvent or diluent. One embodiment of the invention for example provides for a lyophilized powder of the pharmaceutical composition. Acceptable solvents or vehicles include sterilized water Ringer s solution or an isotonic aqueous saline solution. Alternatively sterile oils may be employed as solvents or suspending agents. Typically the oil or fatty acid is non volatile including natural or synthetic oils fatty acids mono di or tri glycerides. In one embodiment for example the pharmaceutically acceptable carrier comprises polyethylene glycol and saline solution.

For injection the formulations may optionally contain stabilizers pH modifiers surfactants bioavailability modifiers and combinations of these. The compounds may be formulated for parenteral administration by injection such as by bolus injection or continuous infusion. A unit dosage form for injection may be in ampoules or in multi dose containers.

For rectal administration the pharmaceutical formulations may be in the form of a suppository an ointment an enema a tablet or a cream for release of compound in the intestines sigmoid flexure and or rectum. Rectal suppositories are prepared by mixing one or more compounds of the instant invention or pharmaceutically acceptable salts or tautomers of the compound with acceptable vehicles for example cocoa butter or polyethylene glycol which is solid phase at room temperature but liquid phase at those temperatures suitable to release a drug inside the body such as in the rectum. Various other agents and additives may be used in the preparation of suppositories as is well known to those of skill in the art.

The formulations of the invention may be designed to be short acting fast releasing long acting and sustained releasing as described below. Thus the pharmaceutical formulations may also be formulated for controlled release or for slow release. The instant compositions may also comprise for example micelles or liposomes or some other encapsulated form or may be administered in an extended release form to provide a prolonged storage and or delivery effect. Therefore the pharmaceutical formulations may be compressed into pellets or cylinders and implanted intramuscularly or subcutaneously as depot injections or as implants such as stents. Such implants may employ known inert materials such as silicones and biodegradable polymers.

Specific dosages may be adjusted depending on conditions of disease the age body weight general health conditions sex and diet of the subject dose intervals administration routes excretion rate and combinations of drugs. Any of the above dosage forms containing effective amounts are well within the bounds of routine experimentation and therefore well within the scope of the instant invention.

A therapeutically effective dose may vary depending upon the route of administration and dosage form. Typically the compound or compounds of the instant invention are selected to provide a formulation that exhibits a high therapeutic index. The therapeutic index is the dose ratio between toxic and therapeutic effects which can be expressed as the ratio between LDand ED. The LDis the dose lethal to 50 of the population and the EDis the dose therapeutically effective in 50 of the population. The LDand EDare determined by standard pharmaceutical procedures in animal cell cultures or experimental animals.

The dosage regimen for neoplastic diseases as described more fully below with the compounds of this invention and or compositions of this invention is based on a variety of factors including the type of disease the age weight sex medical condition of the patient the severity of the condition the route of administration and the particular compound employed. Thus the dosage regimen may vary widely but can be determined routinely using standard methods. In general dosage levels of the order from about 0.01 mg to 30 mg per kilogram of body weight per day for example from about 0.1 mg to 10 mg kg or from about 0.25 mg to 1 mg kg are useful for all methods of use disclosed herein. In one embodiment the dosage is about 0.1 to about 2.0 mg kg. For example compound 28 a can be administered at dosages within this range. In another embodiment the dosage is about 0.1 to about 30 mg kg which is illustrative of dosages for compounds 28 b 29 a and 29 b.

For oral administration the pharmaceutical composition may be in the form of for example a capsule a tablet a suspension or liquid. The pharmaceutical composition can be made in the form of a dosage unit containing a given amount of the active ingredient. For example these may contain an amount of active ingredient from about 1 to 2000 mg for example from about 1 to 500 mg or from about 5 to 150 mg. A suitable daily dose for a human or other mammal may vary widely depending on the condition of the patient and other factors but once again can be determined using routine methods.

As noted above the compounds pharmaceutically acceptable salts tautomer solvates and prodrugs of this invention may also be administered by injection as a composition with suitable carriers including saline dextrose or water. The daily parenteral dosage regimen can range from about 0.1 to about 30 mg kg of total body weight such as from about 0.1 to about 10 mg kg or from about 0.25 mg to 1 mg kg.

Formulations suitable for topical administration include liquid or semi liquid preparations suitable for penetration through the skin e.g. liniments lotions ointments creams or pastes and drops suitable for administration to the eye ear or nose.

Topical doses of a compound of the invention can be from 0.1 mg to 150 mg administered from one to four for example one or two times daily. For topical administration the active ingredient can comprise from 0.001 to 10 w w e.g. from 1 to 2 by weight of the formulation although it can comprise as much as 10 w w but typically not more than 5 w w. In one embodiment the concentration is from 0.1 to 1 of the formulation.

The pharmaceutical compositions can be subjected to conventional pharmaceutical operations such as sterilization and or may contain adjuvants such as preservatives stabilizers wetting agents emulsifiers buffers etc. The pharmaceutically active compounds of this invention can be processed in accordance with conventional methods of pharmacy to produce medicinal agents for administration to patients including humans and other mammals.

The invention also provides as another embodiment a method for treating a neoplastic disease in a subject. For the treatment of such diseases the compounds of the present invention can be administered in therapeutically effective amounts by several different modes including without limitation oral parental by spray inhalation rectal or topical as discussed above. The term parenteral is used here to encompass subcutaneous intravenous intramuscular and intrasternal administration as well as infusion techniques and intraperitoneal administration.

Treatment of diseases and disorders herein is intended to also include therapeutic administration of a compound of the invention or a pharmaceutical salt solvate or prodrug thereof or a pharmaceutical composition containing the compound to a subject believed to be in need of preventative treatment e.g. for pain inflammation and the like. A subject can include but is not limited to an animal such as a mammal including a human.

Treatment also encompasses administration of the compound or pharmaceutical composition to subjects not having been diagnosed as having a need thereof i.e. prophylactic administration to the subject. Generally the subject is initially diagnosed by a licensed physician and or authorized medical practitioner and a regimen for prophylactic and or therapeutic treatment via administration of the compound s or compositions of the invention is suggested recommended or prescribed.

 Treating or treatment of within the context of the instant invention denotes an alleviation in whole or in part of symptoms associated with a disorder or disease or halt of further progression or worsening of those symptoms or prevention or prophylaxis of the disease or disorder. Similarly as used herein an effective amount or therapeutically effective amount of a compound of the invention refers to an amount of the compound that alleviates in whole or in part symptoms associated with a disorder or disease or halts of further progression or worsening of those symptoms or prevents or provides prophylaxis for the disease or disorder. For example within the context of treating patients suffering from a neoplastic disease successful treatment can include a reduction in tumor adhesion and anchorage an alleviation of symptoms related to a cancerous growth or tumor or proliferation of diseased tissue a halting in the progression of a disease such as cancer or in the growth of cancerous cells. Exemplary neoplastic diseases that can be treated by the compounds or pharmaceutical compositions of this invention include but are not limited to pancreatic cancer bladder cancer breast cancer lung cancer colon cancer prostate cancer brain cancer ovarian cancer cervical cancer gastrointestinal cancer head cancer neck cancer and leukemia.

While it may be possible to administer a compound of the invention alone in the methods described the compound administered is generally present as an active ingredient in a desired dosage unit formulation such as pharmaceutically acceptable composition containing conventional pharmaceutically acceptable carriers as described above.

The following examples are proffered merely to illustrate the invention described above they are not intended to limit in any way the scope of this invention.

Unless otherwise noted commercially available materials were used without further purification. All solvents were of HPLC or ACS grade. Solvents used for moisture sensitive operations were distilled from drying reagents under a nitrogen atmosphere EtO and THF from sodium benzophenone ketyl benzene and toluene from sodium CHClfrom CaH pyridine over solid KOH anhydrous N N dimethylformamide and CHCN were purchased from commercial sources. Reactions were performed under an atmosphere of nitrogen with magnetic stirring unless noted otherwise. Flash chromatography FC was performed using E Merck silica gel 60 240 400 mesh according to the protocol of Still Kahn and Mitra 1978 43 2923 . Thin layer chromatography was performed performed using precoated plates purchased from E. Merck silicagel 60 PF254 0.25 mm that were visualized using a KMnOor Ce IV stain.

Nuclear magnetic resonance NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian Inova 400 or Mercury 300 spectrometer at operating frequencies of 400 300 MHz H NMR or 100 75 MHz C NMR . Chemical shifts are given in ppm relative to residual solvent usually chloroform 7.26 for H NMR or 77.23 for proton decoupled C NMR and coupling constants J in Hz. Multiplicity is tabulated as s for singlet d for doublet t for triplet q for quadruplet and m for multiplet whereby the prefix app is applied in cases where the true multiplicity is unresolved and br when the signal in question is broadened.

Infrared spectra were recorded on a Perkin ElmerI 1000 series FTIR with wavenumbers expressed in cmusing samples prepared as thin films between salt plates. Electrospray ionization mass spectra ESI MS were recorded on a Shimadzu 2010 LCMS. Optical rotations were measured at 20 C. on a Rudolph Research Analytical Autopole IV polarimeter.

To a round bottom flask containing TMEDA 3.03 mL 20.00 mmol and n BuLi 2.5 M in hexane 8.0 mL 20 mmol in EtO 12 mL was added under Nand at 78 C. 2 methylpropene 3.40 g 60.00 mmol . The reaction was allowed to stir at 78 C. for 1 h and at room temperature overnight. The mixture obtained was added to a stirred solution of Ipc BOMe 6.34 g 20.00 mmol in EtO 20 mL at 78 C. After stirring at 78 C. for 1 h and at room temperature for 1 h the reaction was cooled to 78 C. and a solution of aldehyde 8 Ahrendt K. A. Williams R. M. 2004 6 4539 2.60 g 20.00 mmol in EtO 34 mL was added dropwise. After 1 h the reaction was quenched by adding pH 7 buffer 120 mL MeOH 120 mL and 30 HO 60 mL and stirred at room temperature for 30 min. The crude was extracted with EtO and the combined organic phases were washed with water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel EtOAc hexanes 1 4 to give allylic alcohol i 2.6 g 70 dr 95 5 as a colorless oil contaminated with isopinocampheol and was used without further purification. 16.38 CHCl c 1.0 H NMR CDCl3 1.37 s 3H 1.44 s 3H 1.78 s 3H 2.01 d 1H J 2.4 Hz 2.11 dd 1H J 9.4 14.2 Hz 2.30 dd 1H J 4.0 14.2 Hz 3.85 m 1H 4.00 m 3H 4.82 s 1H 4.89 s 1H C NMR CDCl3 22.3 25.3 26.6 41.7 65.4 68.8 78.4 109.1 113.7 141.9 IR 3477 1219 1066 cm MS ES m z 209.05 MNa .

To a suspension of NaH 60 in mineral oil 620 mg 15.4 mmol in THF 70 mL was added a solution of allylic alcohol i 2.6 g 13.98 mmol Example 1 in THF 14 mL at 0 C. After stirring at 0 C. for 30 min Mel 1.05 mL 16.77 mmol was added and the reaction was allowed to stir at ambient temperature overnight. The crude was extracted with EtO and the combined organic phases were dried over MgSO filtered and concentrated. The residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel EtO Hexanes 1 1 to afford methyl ether ii 2.52 g 90 as a colorless volatile oil. 1.92 CHCl c 1.0 H NMR CDCl 1.35 s 3H 1.43 s 3H 1.80 s 3H 2.22 m 2H 3.45 s 3H 3.47 m 1H 3.90 dd 1H J 6.4 7.6 Hz 4.02 app t 1H J 6.8 Hz 4.06 app q 1H J 6.4 Hz 4.80 d 1H J 0.8 Hz 4.83 s 1H C NMR CDCl 22.9 25.3 26.5 39.5 58.8 65.8 77.5 79.7 109.0 113.0 142.4 IR 1219 1104 1078 cm MS ES m z 223.05 MNa .

A mixture of the methyl ether ii 1.53 g 7.65 mmol Example 2 PPTS 408 mg 1.63 mmol and water 2.55 mL in MeOH 40 mL was stirred at 50 C. overnight and then brought to room temperature. NaHCO 600 mg 7.14 mmol was added and solvent was removed under reduced pressure. The residue obtained was dissolved in EtOAc 50 mL dried with MgSO filtered and concentrated. The residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel EtOAc to afford 1.13 g 93 of compound 9 as colorless oil. 29.0 EtOAc c 0.29 H NMR CDCl 1.78 s 3H 2.17 dd 1H J 6.0 14.4 Hz 2.36 dd 1H J 6.9 14.4 Hz 2.53 bs 1H 2.58 bs 1H 3.41 s 3H 3.52 m 1H 3.68 m 2H 3.77 ddd 1H J 1.2 6.3 12.0 Hz 4.79 bs 1H 4.83 t 1H J 1.5 Hz C NMR CDCl 22.7 38.7 58.3 63.0 72.3 81.8 113.3 142.2 IR 3391 2919 1646 1448 1094 cm MS ES m z 183.00 MNa .

To a solution of compound 9 640 mg 4.0 mmol and imidazole 408 mg 6.0 mmol in CHCl 15 mL was added TBSCl 724 mg 4.8 mmol in CHCl 3 mL at 0 C. After 30 min the reaction mixture was washed with sat. NaHCOand water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 10 1 to give iii 1.04 g 95 as colorless oil. 8.57 EtOAc c 0.28 H NMR CDCl 0.08 s 3H 0.08 s 3H 0.90 s 9H 1.80 s 3H 2.30 m 2H 2.45 d 1H J 3.3 Hz 3.40 s 3H 3.42 m 1H 3.69 m 3H 4.81 m 2H C NMR CDCl 5.4 18.3 22.9 25.9 38.5 58.2 63.4 72.7 79.9 112.7 142.9 IR 3468 1650 1463 1255 1103 cm MS ES m z 297.10 MNa .

To a solution of iii 1.00 g 3.65 mmol in pyridine 8 mL was added benzoyl chloride 1.69 mL 7.30 mmol . After 30 min at room temperature benzoyl chloride 0.56 mL 2.43 mmol was added again and stirred for another 30 min. Sat. NaHCOsolution was added and the crude was extracted with EtOAc. The combined organic extracts were washed with 1 N HCl and water and concentrated. 3N HCl 6 mL was added to a solution of the crude benzoate in THF 30 mL . After stirring at room temperature for 2 h NaHCO 2.0 g was added and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure. The residue obtained was extracted with CHCland the combined organic extracts were washed with water and dried over MgSO. After removal of solvent the residue was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 3 1 to give compound 10 914 mg 95 as colorless oil. 26.4 EtOAc c 0.55 H NMR CDCl 1.81 s 3H 2.30 dd 1H J 6.0 14.4 Hz 2.42 dd 1H J 7.5 14.4 Hz 3.49 s 3H 3.80 ddd 1H J 3.9 6.0 7.5 Hz 3.92 dd 1H J 3.9 12.0 Hz 3.97 dd J 4.8 12.0 Hz 4.80 m 1H 4.84 m 1H 5.13 ddd 1H J 3.9 3.9 4.8 Hz 7.45 m 2H 7.58 m 1H 8.07 m 2H C NMR CDCl 22.6 39.6 58.9 61.8 76.2 80.2 113.5 128.4 129.7 129.9 133.2 141.6 166.3 IR 3439 2918 1715 1250 1272 1114 cm MS ES m z 287.00 MNa 319.05 MNa MeOH .

Ozone was bubbled through a solution of compound 10 30 mg 114 mol in CHCl 10 mL at 78 C. until the solution became slightly blue. MeS 1 mL was added and the resultant solution was stirred at room temperature overnight. After removal of solvent the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 1 1 to give a mixture of four hemiketals 24 mg 89 as viscous oil. To a solution of hemiketals 24 mg 90 mol in MeOH 3 mL was added HC OMe 0.2 mL and a catalytic amount of pTsOH. After stirring at room temperature for 1 h EtN 50 L was added and stirred for 5 min. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure and the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 3 1 to give compound 11 20 mg 80 as a colorless oil. H NMR CDCl 1.42 s 3H 1.96 dd 1H J 12.0 12.4 Hz 2.06 dd 1H J 4.8 12.4 Hz 3.23 s 3H 3.37 s 3H 3.75 dd 1H J 1.0 12.8 Hz 3.81 ddd 1H J 2.8 4.8 12.0 Hz 3.92 dd 1H J 2.0 12.8 Hz 5.44 ddd 1H J 1.0 2.0 2.8 Hz 7.44 t 2H J 7.6 Hz 7.56 t 1H J 7.6 Hz 8.08 d 2H J 7.6 Hz C NMR CDCl 23.3 37.2 48.2 56.1 62.3 66.5 73.3 99.7 128.3 129.8 133.0 166.2 MS ES m z 303.00 MNa .

To a mixture of 10 115 mg 435 mol and NaHCO 73 mg 870 mol in CHCl 6 mL was added Dess Martin Periodinane 369 mg 870 mol at 0 C. After stirring 1 h at room temperature ether 20 mL and 10 NaSO 10 mL was added. After 5 min the organic layer was separated and washed thoroughly with sat. NaHCOand water and dried over MgSO. Filtration and concentration afforded the crude aldehyde. To a mixture of the crude aldehyde t BuOH 13 mL water 3.3 mL and 2 methyl 2 butene 3.3 mL was added NaHPO 197 mg 1.43 mmol and NaClO 197 mg 1.74 mmol at 0 C. After stirring at room temperature for 1.5 h EtOAc 30 mL and 0.05 N NaHSO 30 mL was added. After 5 min the crude was extracted with EtOAc and the combined organic extracts were washed with water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue was purified by column chromatography silica gel MeOH CHCl 1 5 to give anti 5 105 mg 87 as a viscous oil. 13.6 EtOAc c 0.36 H NMR CDCl 1.68 s 3H 2.31 dd 1H J 3.6 14.0 Hz 2.41 dd 1H J 8.4 14.0 Hz 3.45 s 3H 3.86 m 1H 4.76 bs 2H 5.45 bs 1H 7.38 m 2H 7.52 m 1H 8.02 m 2H C NMR CDCl 22.5 38.7 57.9 73.7 79.5 113.0 128.2 129.4 129.9 133.2 141.8 166.1 174.2 IR 3438 2918 1726 1601 1273 1116 cm MS ES m z 301.00 MNa .

Syn 5 was synthesized form aldehyde 8 using the similar procedure as the synthesis of anti 5 but starting with enantiomeric borane Ipc BOMe . H NMR CDCl 1.75 s 3H 2.33 dd 1H J 7.8 13.8 Hz 2.45 dd 1H J 6.6 13.8 Hz 3.42 s 3H 4.04 ddd 1H J 2.1 6.6 7.8 Hz 4.68 bs 1H 4.79 t 1H J 1.5 Hz 5.25 d 1H J 2.1 Hz 7.42 m 2H 7.55 m 1H 8.09 m 2H C NMR CDCl 22.5 38.2 58.2 73.3 78.8 114.1 128.4 129.2 129.9 133.3 140.9 166.1 172.9 IR 3446 2938 1726 1602 1266 1107 1072 cm MS ES m z 301.00 MNa .

To a solution of benzaldehyde 12 Lambooy J. P. 1956 78 771 4.19 g 23.28 mmol in DMSO 67 mL were added NaHPO 8.03 g 58.20 mmol in HO 9 mL and NaClO 5.26 g 46.56 mmol in HO 33 mL at 10 C. After stirring overnight at room temperature sat NaCO 200 mL was added. After 5 min the crude was extracted with EtOAc 100 mL and the aqueous phase was acidified with conc. HCl to pH 2. The white precipitate that formed was collected by filtration to give acid iv 3.88 g 85 . H NMR CDCl 2.16 s 3H 3.92 s 3H 4.07 s 3H 6.46 s 1H 7.91 1H d J 0.8 Hz 10.61 br 1H C NMR CDCl 15.1 55.6 56.7 94.1 108.8 120.6 134.7 158.2 162.9 165.6 IR 3242 1725 1621 1280 1021 828 cm MS ES m z 197.05 MH 219.00 MNa .

To a solution of benzoic acid iv 3.88 g 19.79 mmol in benzene 110 mL was added dropwise thionyl chloride 8.52 mL 77 mmol at room temperature. The reaction mixture was cooled down after refluxing for 2 h. The solvent and excess of thionyl chloride were removed under reduce pressure to give crude acid chloride. To a solution of crude acid chloride in benzene 56 mL was added dropwise diethylamine 6.14 mL 59.38 mmol at 0 C. After stirring 2 h at 0 C. and overnight at room temperature the reaction was concentrated and the crude oil was purified by FC silica gel EtOAc Hexanes NEt9 1 0.05 to afford compound v 4.82 g 97 . H NMR CDCl 1.03 t 3H J 7.2 Hz 1.23 t 3H J 7.2 Hz 2.13 s 3H 3.17 q 2H J 7.2 Hz 3.55 q 2H J 7.2 Hz 3.81 s 3H 3.85 s 3H 6.41 s 1H 6.95 s 1H C NMR CDCl 12.9 14.0 15.2 38.8 42.8 55.4 55.9 95.0 118.5 118.6 129.2 154.5 158.7 169.0 IR 1614 1462 1207 1143 1033 cm MS ES m z 252.10 MH .

To a solution of amide v 1.61 g 6.40 mmol in THF 16 mL was added sec BuLi 1.4 M in cyclohexane 10.06 mL 14.09 mmol at 78 C. dropwise. After 1 h at 78 C. CuBr.MeS 2.63 g 12.81 mmol was added and the reaction was allowed to warm to 15 C. After 30 min allylbromide 1.12 mL 12.81 mmol was added at 78 C. and kept at this temperature for 1 h. The reaction was warmed to room temperature filtered through a pad of silica gel and washed with EtOAc. The filtrate was dried over MgSO concentrated and purified by FC silica gel EtOAc Hexanes NEt85 15 0.5 to give 1.41 g 76 of compound 13. H NMR CDCl 1.02 t 3H J 6.8 Hz 1.23 t 3H J 7.2 Hz 2.09 s 3H 3.04 dt 1H J 7.6 Hz 3.15 dt 1H J 7.6 Hz 3.24 3.40 3H m 3.79 s 3H 3.84 s 3H 4.97 m 2H 5.84 m 1H 6.36 m 1H C NMR CDCl 10.8 12.5 13.5 34.7 38.1 42.7 55.4 55.5 93.2 115.3 117.9 119.2 135.4 136.1 154.0 158.3 168.5 IR film 1626 1594 1460 1436 1318 1207 1140 1094 cm MS ES m z 292.10 MH .

To a solution of 13 1.00 g 3.61 mmol in CHCl 60 mL was added a solution of BBr 2.05 mL 21.7 mmol in CHCl 20 mL at 78 C. After stirring at 78 C. for 30 min 0 C. for 4 h and 25 C. for 1 h water was added at 0 C. and the crude was extracted with CHCl. The combined extracts were washed with water dried over MgSOand concentrated. The residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel CHCl EtOAc 20 1 to give vi 730 mg 81 as white solid H NMR CDOD 1.07 t 3H J 6.9 Hz 1.22 t 3H J 6.9 Hz 2.04 s 3H 3.11 3.45 m 5H 3.65 m 1H 4.98 m 2H 5.82 m 1H 6.28 s 1H C NMR CDOD 11.3 13.1 14.1 36.0 40.2 45.0 101.6 116.0 116.3 117.5 137.1 137.3 153.1 157.8 172.3 IR 3307 1600 1577 1439 1144 cm MS ES m z 264.10 MH 286.05 MNa .

To a solution of vi 845 mg 3.21 mmol in CHCl 25 mL was added MeOBF 590 mg 3.99 mmol at room temperature. After 20 h the reaction was concentrated and mixed with MeOH 9 mL and saturated NaCOsolution 9 mL . After stirring at room temperature for 6 h ether 50 mL was added and the aqueous phase was adjusted to pH 2 using 0.5 N HCl. The crude was extracted with ether and the combined ether extracts were washed with water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel Hexanes EtOAc 6 1 to give vii 520 mg 73 as white solid H NMR CDCl 2.11 s 3H 3.70 dt 2H J 1.7 5.8 Hz 3.91 s 3H 4.95 m 2H 5.52 s 1H 5.91 m 1H 6.33 s 1H 11.30 s 1H C NMR CDCl 10.9 35.6 52.0 101.5 106.1 114.9 117.2 136.2 142.1 159.2 161.6 171.9 IR 3330 1654 1597 1439 1329 1262 1159 cm MS ES m z 286.05 MNa MeCN .

The mixture of compound vii 520 mg 2.34 mmol KCO 971 mg 7.03 mmol PMBCl 953 uL 7.02 mmol BuNI 173 mg 0.47 mmol and DMF 30 mL was heated at 80 C. for 20 h. Remove DMF under vacuum 5 mmHg at 50 C. add water and the crude was extracted with CHCl. The combined organic extracts were washed with water dried over MgSOand concentrated. The residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel Hexanes EtOAc 9 1 to give viii 990 mg 92 as white solid H NMR CDCl 2.12 s 3H 3.35 m 2H 3.78 s 3H 3.80 s 3H 3.82 s 3H 4.93 s 2H 4.97 s 2H 4.99 m 2H 5.85 m 1H 6.46 s 1H 6.91 m 4H 7.27 m 4H C NMR CDCl 11.0 35.0 51.9 55.15 55.18 70.1 70.6 97.1 113.8 113.9 115.6 117.7 118.6 128.6 128.8 128.8 128.9 135.4 136.9 154.4 158.1 159.2 159.3 169.2 IR 2949 1725 1593 1515 1250 1155 cm MS ES m z 485.10 MNa .

To a solution of viii 462 mg 1 mmol in THF 5 mL and HO 1 mL were added 4 methyl morpholine N oxide 234 mg 2 mmol and OsO 0.1 M solution in t BuOH 800 L 0.08 mmol at 0 C. After stirring at ambient temperature for 12 h 10 NaSOsolution was added. After 30 min the crude was extracted with EtOAc and the combined organic extracts were washed with water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue obtained was filtered through a short column silica gel and washed with EtOAc. Removal of the solvent from the combined filtrate gave the crude diol. NaIO 321 mg 1.5 mmol was added to a solution of crude diol in 90 MeOH 25 mL . After stirring at room temperature for 1 h EtOAc 50 mL was added and the reaction mixture was washed with water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel CHCl EtOAc 20 1 to give compound 6 408 mg 88 as white crystals H NMR CDCl 2.08 s 3H 3.68 d 2H J 1.8 Hz 3.81 s 3H 3.82 s 3H 3.83 s 3H 4.97 s 2H 5.01 s 2H 6.53 s 1H 6.91 m 4H 7.30 m 4H 9.64 t 1H J 1.8 Hz C NMR CDCl 11.6 45.8 52.1 55.2 55.2 70.1 70.8 98.2 113.9 114.0 117.6 119.5 128.5 128.6 128.7 128.8 130.7 155.3 158.6 159.3 159.4 168.6 198.6 IR 3000 2951 1722 1594 1515 1250 1156 cm MS ES m z 487.10 MNa .

To a solution of 14 Johnson P. R. White J. D. J. Org. Chem. 1984 49 4424 2.0 g 14.1 mmol in toluene 20 mL was added allylsilane 15 5.69 g 21.1 mmol at 15 C. After 48 h at 10 C. 0.5 N HCl 20 mL was added to the reaction mixture and stirred at room temperature for 30 min. The crude was extracted with ether and combined organic extracts were washed with water sat. NaHCO brine and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 15 1 to give 16 1.38 g 69 94 ee as a colorless oil 3.73 CHCl c 2.0 H NMR CDCl 1.08 s 3H 1.11 s 3H 2.07 m 1H 2.15 d 1H J 3.6 Hz 2.32 m 1H 3.78 dt 1H J 3.6 10.4 Hz 5.17 m 2H 5.85 m 1H 9.57 s 1H C NMR CDCl 16.5 19.0 36.2 50.0 73.8 118.6 134.9 206.2 IR 3417 3077 2977 1724 1642 cm. MS ES m z 307.10 MNa . The enantiomeric excess was determined from the H NMR spectrum of the Mosher ester derivative prepared with S MTPA major isomer has Me resonances at 1.064 and 1.067 ppm the minor isomer has Me resonances at 1.094 and 1.100 ppm. Integration of the Me resonances was used to calculate an ee of 94 .

To a solution of 16 1.30 g 9.15 mmol in toluene 15 mL was added allylsilane 15 4.93 g 18.3 mmol at 15 C. After kept at this temperature for 20 h 0.5 N HCl 15 mL was added to the reaction mixture and stirred at room temperature for 15 min. The crude was extracted with ether and the combined organic extracts were washed with water sat. NaHCO brine and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 15 1 to give 17 1.33 g 79 dr 17 1 as white solid. 21.4 CHCl c 1.43 H NMR CDCl 0.94 s 6H 2.11 m 2H 2.32 m 2H 3.13 dm 2H J 3.4 Hz 3.57 ddd 2H J 2.9 3.7 10.7 Hz 5.16 m 4H 5.90 m 2H C NMR CDCl 20.9 36.4 40.0 77.4 117.6 136.2 IR 3350 3077 2974 1641 1471 1431 cm MS ES m z 207.05 MNa . The C NMR data matches the reported data for racemic 17 Trieselmann T. Hoffmann R. W. Menzel K. Eur. 2002 1292 .

To a solution of 17 465 mg 2.53 mmol and 2 6 lutidine 0.44 mL 3.80 mmol in CHCl 20 mL was added TBSOTf 0.64 mL 2.78 mmol at 0 C. After stirring for 10 min MeOH 1 mL was added and stirred for 10 min. The solvent was removed under vacuo and the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 50 1 to give 18 692 mg 92 as a colorless oil 29.2 EtOAc c 1.05 H NMR CDCl 0.09 s 3H 0.10 s 3H 0.80 s 3H 0.90 s 9H 1.00 s 3H 2.13 m 2H 2.33 m 1H 2.52 m 1H 3.57 dd 1H J 4.6 6.4 Hz 3.87 dd 1H J 4.1 8.7 Hz 5.10 m 4H 5.91 m 2H C NMR CDCl 4.2 3.8 18.1 20.4 23.3 26.0 36.4 37.7 41.2 75.0 83.2 116.3 116.8 136.5 136.8 IR 3494 3077 2955 1641 1470 1255 cm MS ES m z 299.15 MH 321.15 MNa .

Ozone was bubbled through a solution of 18 692 mg 2.32 mmol in CHCl 50 mL at 78 C. until the solution became slightly blue. PhP 2.43 g 9.28 mmol was added and the resultant solution was stirred at room temperature overnight. After concentration the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 10 1 to 3 1 to give hemiacetal ix 692 mg 99 as viscous oil. To a solution of ix in CHCl 18 mL was added EtN 1.27 mL 9.19 mmol DMAP 50 mg and AcO 431 L 4.59 mmol successively at 0 C. After 10 min sat NaHCO 20 mL was added and the crude was extracted with ether. The combined ether extracts were washed with water dried over MgSOand concentrated. The residue obtained was purified by column chromatography silica gel hexanes EtOAc 6 1 to give 19 633 mg 81 as a mixture of two epimers and was used without further separation. The compound with axial OAc has H NMR CDCl 2.13 s 3H 3.75 dd 1H J 5.2 11.3 Hz 4.13 dd 1H J 2.9 10.1 Hz 6.12 dd 1H J 0.9 3.7 Hz 9.71 t 1H J 1.5 Hz The compound with equatorial OAc has H NMR CDCl 2.09 s 3H 3.49 dd 1H J 4.9 11.6 Hz 3.71 dd 1H J 3.1 9.8 Hz 5.68 dd 1H J 2.8 10.1 Hz 9.74 t 1H J 2.1 Hz IR 2929 2856 1727 1367 1235 1076 833 cm MS ES m z 399.15 MNa MeOH .

To a suspension of R R 1 2 bis trifluoromethanesulfonamido cyclohexane in anhydrous toluene 10 mL was added Ti OPr 2.16 mL 7.32 mmol at room temperature. After stirring at 45 C. for 40 min the reaction was cooled to 78 C. and ZnEt 1.0 M in hexanes 7.32 mL 7.32 mmol was added dropwise. After 10 min a solution of compound 19 630 mg 1.83 mmol in toluene 10 mL was added. After stirring for 8 h at 10 C. sat NHCl 30 mL was added and the reaction mixture was filtered through a pad of celite. The crude was extracted with EtOAc and the combined organic phases were washed with water and brine dried over MgSOand concentrated. The residue obtained was purified by column chromatography silica gel hexanes EtOAc 20 1 to give x 569 mg 84 as a mixture of four diastereomers and was used without further separation.

TMSCN 0.81 mL 6.09 mmol was added to x 569 mg 1.53 mmol and stirred at room temperature for 15 min. After cooled to 0 C. MeCN 20 mL TMSCN 0.41 mL 3.08 mmol and ZnI 114 mg 0.36 mmol were added successively and stirred for 40 min. Sat. NaHCOsolution 20 mL was added and the reaction was extracted with EtOAc. The combined organic extracts were shaken with 1N HCl for 20 min and washed with aq. NaHCOand water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 8 1 to give compound xi 471 mg 91 as a mixture of two alcohol epimers in the ratio of 3 1. The major isomer is a color less oil. 67.6 EtOAc c 0.55 H NMR CDCl 0.05 s 3H 0.06 s 3H 0.81 s 3H 0.87 s 9H 0.89 s 3H 0.93 t 3H J 7.4 Hz 1.49 m 4H 1.76 ddd 1H J 1.2 4.5 13.8 Hz 1.97 ddd 1H J 6.0 11.7 13.8 Hz 2.10 s 1H 3.65 m 2H 3.76 dd 1H J 5.1 6.6 Hz 4.83 dd 1H J 1.2 6.0 Hz C NMR CDCl 5.1 4.3 10.1 12.3 17.9 22.5 25.6 30.4 33.5 35.4 39.5 63.7 69.7 72.3 78.5 117.8 IR 3436 2959 1472 1258 1104 1082 880 cm MS ES m z 364.20 MNa . The minor is a colorless oil 50.2 EtOAc c 0.69 H NMR CDCl 0.06 s 3H 0.07 s 3H 0.85 s 3H 0.88 s 9H 0.89 s 3H 0.94 t 3H J 7.4 Hz 1.49 m 2H 1.60 dd 1H J 7.5 10.2 Hz 1.68 ddd 1H J 2.7 3.3 11.4 Hz 1.75 ddd 1H J 1.2 4.5 13.5 Hz 1.99 ddd 1H J 6.0 11.4 13.5 Hz 2.03 s 1H 3.69 m 3H 4.88 dd 1H 1.2 6.0 Hz C NMR CDCl 5.02 4.22 9.66 12.35 17.90 22.60 25.66 29.76 33.41 35.11 39.88 63.81 71.99 72.65 82.85 117.35 IR 3306 2857 1461 1082 884 cm MS ES m z 364.20 MNa .

To a solution of xi 468 mg 1.38 mmol in CHCl 30 mL was added Dess Martin periodinane 2.0 g 4.72 mmol at 0 C. After stirring at ambient temperature for 3 h 10 NaSOsolution 20 mL was added and stirred for 10 min. The reaction was extracted with CHCland the combined extracts were washed with NaHCO water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 10 1 to give compound 7 444 mg 95 as white solid 40.6 EtOAc c 0.16 H NMR CDCl3 0.08 s 3H 0.09 s 3H 0.85 s 3H 0.90 s 9H 0.91 s 3H 1.07 t 3H J 7.3 Hz 1.79 ddd 1H J 1.5 4.6 13.7 Hz 1.98 ddd 1H J 6.1 11.3 13.7 Hz 2.52 m 4H 3.74 dd 1H J 4.6 11.3 Hz 4.07 dd 1H J 2.8 9.8 Hz 4.80 dd 1H J 1.5 6.1 Hz . C NMR CDCl3 5.0 4.2 7.5 12.5 17.9 22.7 25.7 33.6 36.1 39.4 42.4 63.7 72.1 77.8 117.2 208.4 IR 3402 2958 1716 1462 1256 1099 885 cm.

To a solution of compound 7 100 mg 0.296 mmol in CHCl 3 mL was added PhBCl 46 L 0.35 mmol at 78 C. After 20 min DIPEA 75 uL 0.43 mmol was added. The reaction was stirred at 78 C. for 1 h and 0 C. for 1 h. Aldehyde 6 165 mg 0.35 mmol in CHCl 1.5 mL was added at 78 C. and the reaction was kept at this temperature for 3.5 h. A mixture of MeOH 4 mL and pH 7 buffer 4 mL was added 78 C. and the pH was adjusted to neutral using pH 8 buffer. After stirring at 0 C. for 1.5 h the reaction was extracted with CHCland the combined organic phases were washed with water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue was purified by FC silica gel CHCl EtOAc 20 1 to give compound 20 210 mg 88 dr 12 1 as a white foam 42.3 EtOAc c 0.40 H NMR CDCl 0.07 s 3H 0.09 s 3H 0.86 s 3H 0.90 s 9H 0.92 s 3H 1.21 d 3H J 7.0 Hz 1.77 ddd 1H J 1.3 4.6 13.6 Hz 1.96 ddd 1H J 6.0 11.5 13.6 Hz 2.17 s 3H 2.57 m 2H 2.73 m 2H 2.88 dd 1H J 3.3 14.3 Hz 3.75 m 2H 3.80 s 3H 3.82 s 3H 3.85 s 3H 4.02 m 1H 4.13 dd 1H J 2.1 9.0 Hz 4.77 d 1H 5.1 Hz 4.95 s 4H 6.47 s 3H 6.89 m 4H 7.28 m 4H C NMR CDCl 5.1 4.3 11.4 11.6 12.6 17.8 22.6 25.6 33.6 35.2 39.2 42.0 52.5 52.7 55.1 55.1 63.6 70.0 70.7 71.4 72.1 77.3 97.2 113.7 113.9 117.2 117.3 118.7 128.55 128.64 128.7 136.6 155.0 158.8 159.2 159.3 170.8 210.5 IR 3430 2954 1715 1593 1515 1250 1159 1082 cm MS ES m z 826.35 MNa .

To a solution of 20 100 mg 125 mol in anhydrous THF 10 mL was added catecholborane 1.0 M in THF 3.74 mL 3.74 mmol at 78 C. After stirring at 0 C. for 20 h 2 N NaOH 12 mL was added and the resultant reaction mixture was stirred at ambient temperature for 0.5 h. The reaction was extracted by CHCland the combined organic extracts were washed with 1 N NaOH solution until the aqueous phase is colorless and then washed with water. The extracts were dried over MgSOand concentrated to give a white solid in quantitative yield which is a 8 1 mixture of compound 21 and its diastereomer. Pure compound 21 was obtained through recrystallization from CHCl acetone. 39.4 CHCl c 0.20 H NMR CDCl 0.08 s 3H 0.10 s 3H 0.88 s 3H 0.90 s 9H 0.93 s 3H 1.12 d 3H J 7.2 Hz 1.74 t 2H J 6.0 Hz 1.79 dd 1H J 4.6 13.7 Hz 1.91 m 1H 2.01 ddd 1H J 6.2 11.9 13.7 Hz 2.10 s 3H 2.83 dd 1H J 12.0 16.3 Hz 2.96 dd 1H J 2.6 16.3 Hz 3.68 m 2H 3.80 s 3H 3.82 s 3H 4.07 m 1H 4.41 ddd 1H J 2.7 4.9 12.0 Hz 4.87 d 1H J 5.3 Hz 4.98 s 2H 5.09 d 1H J 12.0 Hz 5.16 d 1H J 12.0 Hz 6.49 s 1H 6.90 m 4H 7.30 d 2H J 8.6 Hz 7.44 d 2H J 8.6 Hz C NMR CDCl 5.0 4.2 8.8 11.1 12.4 17.9 22.7 25.7 29.6 32.9 33.4 40.0 41.5 55.2 55.3 63.8 69.9 70.9 71.97 72.0 78.7 83.0 98.2 107.5 113.9 114.0 116.0 117.4 128.3 128.5 128.8 141.4 159.2 159.5 160.2 161.0 163.1 IR 3364 1671 1588 1515 1249 1098 cm MS ES m z 796.50 MNa 812.45 MK .

The acetonide derivative xii of the diol obtained from 20 by omitting a basic workup Na K tartrate workup instead was prepared for determination of the relative stereochemistry. C NMR CDCl3 resonances of the acetonide Me peaks and quaternary carbon 19.5 29.8 and 98.9 ppm confirm the C C syn configuration Rychnovsky S. D. Rogers B. Yang G. 1993 58 3511 the H NMR H Hcoupling constant of 2.4 Hz 4.02 ppm is in agreement with an equatorial disposition of H confirming the C C anti configuration. H NMR CDOD 0.11 s 3H 0.12 s 3H 0.87 s 3H 0.92 s 9H 0.95 d 3H J 6.4 Hz 0.96 s 3H 1.22 s 3H 1.29 s 3H 1.58 m 1H 1.62 m 1H 1.67 m 1H 1.80 ddd 1H J 1.2 4.4 14.0 Hz 2.00 ddd 1H J 5.6 11.6 14.0 Hz 2.14 s 3H 2.54 dd 1H J 2.4 14.4 Hz 3.01 dd 1H J 8.8 14.4 Hz 3.44 dd 1H J 2.0 11.8 Hz 3.69 dd 1H J 8.4 11.6 Hz 3.79 s 3H 3.80 s 3H 3.82 s 3H 4.02 ddd 1H J 2.4 2.4 8.8 Hz 4.07 ddd 1H J 1.6 4.8 13.2 Hz 4.99 bs 4H 6.60 s 1H 6.90 m 4H 7.30 m 4H C NMR CDCl 5.0 4.2 4.8 11.8 12.3 17.9 19.5 22.6 25.7 29.8 31.2 33.5 33.8 34.2 39.8 52.1 55.2 55.3 63.7 70.1 70.6 70.8 72.4 74.8 77.8 97.3 98.9 113.8 113.9 117.6 118.2 119.6 128.6 128.8 129.0 129.1 137.8 154.3 158.0 159.2 159.3 169.3 MS ES m z 868.45 MNa .

To a solution of 21 50 mg 65 mol in THF 10 mL was added TBAF 1.0 M in THF 100 L 0.1 mmol at room temperature. After 2 h the reaction was concentrated and the residue was purified by FC silica gel hexanes EtOAc 1 2 to EtOAc to give 22 43 mg quant. as a viscous oil. 33.6 EtOAc c 0.60 H NMR CDCl 0.91 s 3H 1.02 s 3H 1.11 d 3H J 6.8 Hz 1.76 m 2H 1.89 2.06 m 3H 2.10 s 3H 2.84 dd 1H J 12.0 16.0 Hz 2.94 dd 1H J 2.8 16.0 Hz 3.68 dd 1H J 4.6 7.8 Hz 3.76 dd 1H J 4.8 11.6 Hz 3.80 s 3H 3.83 s 3H 4.07 m 1H 4.43 ddd 1H J 2.8 4.4 11.6 Hz 4.91 d 1H J 4.8 Hz 4.98 s 2H 5.10 d 1H J 12.2 Hz 5.16 d 1H J 12.2 Hz 6.49 s 1H 6.90 t 4H J 8.4 Hz 7.29 d 2H J 8.4 Hz 7.43 d 2H J 8.4 Hz C NMR CDCl 8.8 11.1 12.1 22.2 29.6 32.5 32.6 39.5 41.4 55.2 55.3 64.0 69.9 70.9 71.5 72.0 78.6 82.7 98.1 107.4 113.9 114.0 116.0 117.2 128.2 128.5 128.7 128.8 141.4 159.2 159.5 160.2 161.1 163.2 IR 3394 2966 1674 1588 1514 1248 1097 cm MS ES m z 682.35 MNa .

M. p. acetone 197 C. H NMR CDCl 0.95 s 3H 1.00 s 3H 1.11 d 3H J 7.2 Hz 1.74 m 2H 1.89 m 1H 1.97 m 1H 2.04 m 1H 2.10 s 3H 2.83 s 1H 2.84 dd 1H J 12.0 16.0 Hz 2.95 dd 1H J 2.8 16.0 Hz 3.44 dd 1H J 4.6 11.4 Hz 3.68 dd 1H J 6.8 6.8 Hz 3.80 s 3H 3.83 s 3H 4.06 m 1H 4.42 ddd 1H J 2.8 4.8 12.0 Hz 4.50 d 1H J 11.6 Hz 4.63 d 1H J 11.6 Hz 4.93 d 1H J 4.8 Hz 4.98 s 2H 5.10 d 1H J 12.0 Hz 5.16 d 1H J 12.0 Hz 6.49 s 1H 6.90 m 4H 7.28 7.45 m 9H C NMR CDCl 8.9 11.1 13.1 22.4 29.6 32.6 39.5 41.5 55.2 55.3 64.0 69.9 70.9 71.9 72.0 78.6 78.7 83.3 98.2 107.5 113.9 114.0 116.0 117.2 127.6 127.8 128.3 128.4 128.5 128.7 128.8 138.0 141.4 159.2 159.5 160.2 161.0 163.1 IR 3369 2963 1669 1513 1247 1097 cm MS ES m z 772.25 MNa .

Crystals of 22a for single crystal X ray analysis were obtained by the slow evaporation from acetone colorless needles m.p. 197 C. . X ray data were collected using a Bruker Kappa CCD charge couple device based diffractometer. A suitable crystal 0.2 mm 0.2 mm 0.8 mm was mounted on a glass fiber. Data were measured using phi scans of 2 per frame for 60 seconds using collect data collection software Nonius 1999. The data were processed using HKL2000 Z. Otwinowski et al. Processing of X ray Diffraction Data Collected in Oscillation Mode Volume 276 Macromolecular Crystallography part A p. 307 326 1997 C. W. Carter Jr. R. M. Sweet Eds. Academic Press New York . Based on the systematic absences the crystals were monoclinc belonging to the space group P2. The structure was solved using SHELXS 90 Sheldrick G. M. SHELXS 90 Program for the solution of Crystal Structure University of Gottingen Germany 1990 and refined by least squares methods on Fusing SHELXL 97 Sheldrick G. M. SHELXL 97 Program for the refinement of Crystal Structure University of Gottingen Germany 1997 . Non hydrogen atoms were refined anisotropically and the hydrogen atoms located in the difference fourier densities were refined isotropically. The crystal was stable during data collection. drawing depicts an ORTEP Michael N. Burnett et al. ORTEP III Oak Ridge Thermal Ellipsoid Plot Program for Crystal Structure Illustrations Oak Ridge National Laboratory Report ORNL 6895 1996 .

To a suspension of 22 42 mg 64 mol in 80 ethanol 8 mL was added PtH PMeOH PMeO H 7 mg 16 mol . After refluxing in air for 80 min the reaction was cooled to room temperature. Water was added and the crude was extracted with EtOAc. The combined organic extracts were washed with water dried over MgSOand concentrated to give a residue which was purified by FC silica gel CHCl MeOH 20 1 to give 23 42 mg 97 as a viscous oil. 37.5 EtOAc c 0.43 H NMR CDCl 0.89 s 3H 0.91 s 3H 1.13 d 3H J 7.2 Hz 1.67 m 2H 1.79 m 1H 1.88 m 1H 2.09 s 3H 2.46 dd 1H J 3.8 13.0 Hz 2.82 dd 1H J 3.2 16.4 Hz 2.89 dd 1H J 12.0 16.4 Hz 3.37 d 1H J 8.0 Hz 3.41 dd 1H J 4.4 11.6 Hz 3.80 s 3H 3.83 s 3H 4.11 bd 1H J 7.6 Hz 4.42 ddd 1H J 3.2 3.6 11.6 Hz 4.45 d 1H J 6.4 Hz 4.99 s 2H 5.08 d 1H J 12.0 Hz 5.16 d 1H J 12.0 Hz 5.59 bs 1H 6.51 s 1H 6.91 t 4H J 8.0 Hz 7.29 d 2H J 8.8 Hz 7.42 d 2H J 8.8 Hz 7.75 bs 1H C NMR CDCl 7.9 11.1 11.9 22.5 29.2 29.2 34.2 38.6 41.7 55.3 55.3 70.0 70.9 71.9 73.8 74.1 80.0 81.2 98.0 107.0 114.0 114.1 115.9 128.1 128.5 128.6 128.9 141.3 159.3 159.6 160.5 161.3 162.7 174.0 IR 3402 2965 1682 1596 1515 1247 1157 1081 cm MS ES m z 700.35 MNa .

10 Pd C 10 mg was added to a solution of 23 40 mg 59 mmol in ethanol 10 mL and hydrogenated H 1 atm for 24 h. The catalyst was filtered and ethanol was removed under reduced pressure. The residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel CHCl MeOH 10 1 to give 24 26 mg in quantitative yield as viscous oil. 34.0 EtOAc c 0.20 H NMR CDCl CDOD 10 1 0.85 s 3H 0.88 s 3H 1.09 d 3H J 6.8 Hz 1.67 m 2H 1.78 ddd 1H J 6.8 12.0 13.2 Hz 1.88 m 1H 2.01 s 3H 2.30 ddd 1H J 1.4 4.6 9.0 Hz 2.88 m 2H 3.30 dd 1H J 4.4 11.6 Hz 3.34 m 1H 4.01 ddd 1H J 2.4 7.8 7.8 Hz 4.39 dd 1H J 6.0 Hz 4.52 ddd 1H J 4.4 6.0 10.0 Hz 5.97 bs 1H 6.25 s 1H 7.78 bs 1H C NMR 8.2 10.3 11.9 22.4 27.9 28.9 33.7 38.4 42.0 71.3 73.1 73.3 81.0 81.1 100.5 114.1 139.1 161.8 162.0 162.9 170.6 175.1 IR 3401 2967 1659 1651 1376 1254 cm MS ES m z 460.20 MNa .

To a solution of 24 25 mg 57 mol was dissolved in pyridine 2.5 mL was added AcO 1.25 mL at room temperature. After 20 h EtOAc 20 mL and sat. NaHCO 10 mL was added at 0 C. and stirred at room temperature for 15 min. The organic phase was separated washed with water 1N HCl and water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue obtained was purified by FC silica gel EtOAc hexanes 2 1 to give compound 25 32 mg 92 as a viscous oil. 48.4 CHCl c 0.80 H NMR CDCl 0.94 s 3H 0.95 s 3H 1.17 d 3H J 7.2 Hz 1.79 ddd 1H J 2.4 4.8 15.2 Hz 1.91 ddd 1H J 5.2 9.2 13.6 Hz 2.06 s 3H 2.08 s 3H 2.10 s 3H 2.12 m 1H 2.26 m 2H 2.33 s 3H 2.35 s 3H 2.78 dd 1H J 12.0 16.4 Hz 3.04 dd 1H J 2.8 16.4 Hz 3.46 dd 1H J 2.4 11.6 Hz 4.38 m 2H 4.83 dd 1H J 4.0 8.4 Hz 5.29 m 1H 5.48 bs 1H 6.82 bs 1H 6.84 s 1H C NMR CDCl 9.4 12.1 14.2 16.7 20.8 21.0 21.1 21.4 24.2 27.4 28.7 30.6 37.0 40.5 72.2 73.4 78.3 79.6 115.7 117.0 125.7 141.1 150.5 153.1 161.5 168.3 169.5 170.0 171.0 173.4 IR 3466 2975 1771 1727 1693 1598 1371 1241 1192 1060 cm MS ES m z 628.15 MNa .

To a solution of acid anti 5 43 mg 155 mol in CHCl 2.5 mL was added oxalyl chloride 54 L 620 mol and a catalytic amount of DMF at 0 C. After stirring at room temperature for 2 h solvent was removed by Nflushing. The acid chloride obtained was dried on vacuum pump for 5 min and dissolved in CHCl 770 L to give a 0.2 M solution of compound anti 27.

To a mixture of compound 25 14.5 mg 24 mol and poly 2 vinylpyridine 30 mg 286 mol in CHCl 1.5 mL was added MeOBF 17.7 mg 120 mol at room temperature. After 1.5 h ether 3 mL was added and allowed to stir for 5 min to precipitate the excess MeOBF. The reaction mixture was filtered and the solvent was removed by Nflushing. The residue obtained was dissolved in anhydrous toluene 2 mL and cooled to 0 C. DIPEA 83 L 0.48 mmol and anti 27 0.2 M solution prepared in situ 360 L 72 mol was added at 0 C. and the reaction mixture was stirred at 40 C. for 80 min. Anti 27 0.2 M solution in CHCl 120 L 24 mol was added again and stirred for another 40 min and cooled to 0 C. NaBH 45 mg and ethanol 2 mL was added and the reaction mixture was stirred at 0 C. for 2 h. EtOAc was added and the crude was washed with water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue was roughly purified by FC silica gel EtOAc hexanes 1.5 1 to give a mixture of peracetylated compounds. This mixture was dissolved in MeOH 3 mL and 1 N LiOH 0.6 mL was added. After stirring at room temperature for 6 h EtOAc was added and the aqueous phase was adjusted to pH 6 using 0.05 N NaHSO. The crude was extracted with EtOAc and the combined organic extracts were washed with sat. NaHCO water and dried over MgSO. After concentration the residue was purified by FC silica gel CHCl MeOH 20 1 to give compound 28 a 5.8 mg and 28 b 2.4 mg in 56 total yield from 25 ratio determined by H NMR of crude mixture 71 29 .

28 a 25.2 MeOH c 0.11 H NMR CDOD 0.89 s 3H 0.97 s 3H 1.09 d 3H J 6.8 Hz 1.71 s 3H 1.74 m 2H 1.77 ddd 1H J 6.4 11.0 13.2 Hz 1.91 ddq 1H J 2.4 6.0 6.8 Hz 2.01 ddd 1H J 2.8 4.2 13.2 Hz 2.08 dd 1H J 3.2 14.4 Hz 2.10 s 3H 2.35 dd 1H J 9.4 14.4 Hz 2.85 dd 1H J 12.2 16.6 Hz 3.13 dd 1H J 3.2 16.6 Hz 3.21 s 3H 3.35 s 3H 3.50 dd 1H J 1.6 11.2 Hz 3.59 dd 1H J 4.2 11.0 Hz 3.67 ddd 1H J 2.8 3.2 9.4 Hz 3.94 m 2H 4.35 d 1H J 2.4 Hz 4.49 ddd 1H J 3.2 6.0 12.2 Hz 4.72 bs 1H 4.74 bs 1H 5.38 d 1H J 8.0 Hz 6.25 s 1H H NMR CDCl 0.92 s 3H 0.98 s 3H 1.09 d 3H J 7.2 Hz 1.62 m 2H 1.76 s 3H 1.80 m 1H 1.88 m 1H 2.04 s 3H 2.07 m 1H 2.18 dd 1H J 4.0 14.6 Hz 2.37 dd 1H J 8.8 14.6 Hz 2.82 dd 1H J 12.0 16.8 Hz 2.91 dd 1H J 4.0 16.8 Hz 3.38 s 6H 3.53 d 1H J 10.0 Hz 3.67 dd 1H J 4.4 11.8 Hz 3.74 ddd 1H J 3.2 4.0 8.8 Hz 3.88 ddd 1H J 2.4 6.4 8.0 Hz 3.95 dm 1H J 8.8 Hz 4.40 d 1H J 3.2 Hz 4.54 ddd 1H J 4.0 4.8 12.0 Hz 4.80 bs 2H 5.45 dd 1H J 8.8 10.0 Hz 7.09 d 1H J 10.0 Hz 6.30 s 1H 11.15 bs 1H C NMR CDOD 7.7 9.4 12.5 21.5 22.2 28.1 29.0 32.9 37.2 38.4 41.8 55.1 56.1 70.6 71.7 72.0 72.8 78.4 80.5 80.8 81.2 99.9 111.6 113.8 139.7 142.2 162.3 163.1 171.0 174.9 C NMR CDCl 9.2 10.4 13.5 22.7 23.0 28.4 29.6 32.1 37.5 38.7 42.6 56.2 57.9 71.4 73.0 73.9 78.2 79.5 80.5 81.9 101.3 101.4 113.0 113.3 139.6 142.0 161.1 162.3 170.5 173.6 IR 3368 2932 1660 1652 1622 1506 1456 1378 1253 1174 1108 1069 973 896 cm MS ES m z 632.25 MNa .

28 b 19.2 MeOH c 0.12 H NMR CDOD 0.89 s 3H 0.97 s 3H 1.13 d 3H J 6.8 Hz 1.73 m 4H 1.77 s 3H 2.00 m 1H 2.06 s 3H 2.14 dd 1H J 3.2 14.6 Hz 2.34 dd 1H J 9.2 14.6 Hz 2.85 dd 1H J 12.4 16.8 Hz 3.17 dd 1H J 3.0 16.8 Hz 3.38 s 3H 3.41 s 3H 3.53 dd 1H J 4.0 8.0 Hz 3.58 dd 1H J 6.0 10.0 Hz 3.69 ddd 1H J 3.2 3.6 9.2 Hz 3.93 m 1H 4.11 m 1H 4.35 d 1H J 3.2 Hz 4.49 ddd 1H J 3.0 6.8 12.4 Hz 4.77 bs 1H 4.79 bs 1H 5.48 d 1H J 8.8 Hz 6.25 s 1H H NMR CDCl 0.92 s 3H 0.99 s 3H 1.15 d 3H J 7.2 Hz 1.76 s 3H 1.77 m 1H 1.88 m 1H 1.94 m 1H 2.05 s 3H 2.11 dd 1H J 3.0 14.4 Hz 2.29 dd 1H J 8.8 14.4 Hz 2.91 dd 1H J 12.0 16.4 Hz 3.02 dd 1H J 2.8 16.4 Hz 3.14 bs 1H 3.41 s 3H 3.42 s 3H 3.63 d 1H J 10.4 Hz 3.73 m 2H 3.90 m 1H 4.07 m 2H 4.41 bs 1H 4.58 ddd 1H J 3.0 5.2 12.0 Hz 4.80 bs 1H 4.83 bs 1H 5.35 dd 1H J 7.6 9.6 Hz 6.00 bs 1H 6.30 s 1H 7.17 d 1H J 9.6 Hz 11.2 s 1H C NMR CDOD 9.9 10.8 13.6 23.2 23.5 29.5 30.5 34.2 38.9 40.1 42.9 56.2 58.1 72.5 72.7 73.2 74.5 79.9 80.1 82.5 83.1 101.4 101.6 113.4 115.2 141.2 144.0 163.8 164.9 172.6 176.2 IR 3396 2931 1652 1511 1462 1376 1254 1173 1108 1067 cm MS ES m z 632.25 MNa .

Compounds 29 a and 29 b were prepared 2.4 mg 48 yield 75 25 ratio from compound 25 5 mg 8.2 mol and syn 27 using the same procedure described for the synthesis of 28 a and 28 b. They were inseparable but partial separation could be achieved before acetate hydrolysis. 29 a could be obtained diastereomerically pure.

29 a H NMR CDOD 0.90 s 3H 0.97 s 3H 1.08 d 3H J 7.2Hz 1.64 m 1H 1.70 s 3H 1.78 m 2H 1.88 ddq 1H J 2.4 6.4 7.2 Hz 2.04 m 1H 2.09 s 3H 2.25 dd 1H J 8.0 14.0 Hz 2.37 dd 1H J 6.0 14.0 Hz 2.83 dd 1H J 12.0 16.8 Hz 3.09 dd 1H J 3.2 16.8 Hz 3.34 s 3H 3.36 s 3H 3.51 dd 1H J 1.6 10.4 Hz 3.60 dd 1H J 4.4 10.8 Hz 3.83 ddd 1H J 1.8 6.0 8.0 Hz 3.93 m 2H 4.01 d 1H J 1.8 Hz 4.44 ddd 1H J 3.2 6.4 12.0 Hz 4.64 bs 1H 4.72 bs 1H 5.41 d 1H J 8.4 Hz 6.26 s 1H H NMR CDCl 0.92 s 3H 1.00 s 3H 1.09 d 3H J 6.8 Hz 1.55 m 1H 1.74 s 3H 1.78 m 1H 1.86 m 2H 2.03 m 1H 2.07 s 3H 2.35 m 2H 2.80 dd 1H J 12.0 16.4 Hz 2.94 dd 1H J 3.6 16.4 Hz 3.38 s 3H 3.39 s 3H 3.53 d 1H J 10.0 Hz 3.68 m 1H 3.85 ddd 1H J 2.0 7.6 8.4 Hz 3.92 m 2H 4.09 d 1H J 2.0 Hz 4.25 s 1H 4.53 ddd 1H J 3.6 5.2 12.0 Hz 4.71 bs 1H 4.75 bs 1H 5.40 dd 1H J 8.0 10.4 Hz 6.30 s 1H 7.14 d 1H J 10.4 Hz 11.21 bs 1H MS ES m z 632.25 MNa .

29 b was obtained as a mixture with 29 a. The peaks that can be identified are H NMR CDOD 1.14 d 3H J 6.8Hz 1.64 m 1H 1.81 s 3H 3.17 dd 1H J 2.8 16.4 Hz 3.36 s 3H 3.37 s 3H 4.49 ddd 1H J 2.8 6.4 12.0 Hz 4.60 bs 1H 4.67 bs 1H 5.50 d 1H J 8.8 Hz 6.26 s 1H H NMR CDCl 0.92 s 3H 0.98 s 3H 1.15 d 3H J 7.2 Hz 1.79 s 3H 2.07 s 3H 3.05 dd 1H J 3.0 16.8 Hz 3.37 s 3H 3.41 s 3H 4.80 bs 1H 4.86 bs 1H 5.35 dd 1H J 6.8 10.0 Hz 6.30 s 1H 7.16 d 1H J 10.0 Hz 11.23 bs 1H .

The cytotoxicities of compounds 28 a 28 b and 29 a were evaluated against the human cancer cell lines HeLa SK MEL 5 and SK MEL 28. The cytotoxicity evaluations were performed over a concentration range of 0.2 nM to 20 M using the CellTiter Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay a product of Promega Corporation Madison Wis. USA according to the protocol detailed in Promega s Technical Bulletin No. 288. Table 1 presents the results of these assays. Each value is the average value obtained from three experiments. GIis the concentration that inhibits 50 growth TGI is the concentration that inhibits 100 growth and LCis the concentration that kills 50 of the cells.

