---

title: Risk mitigation in a virtual world
abstract: Embodiments include an apparatus, device, system, computer-program product, and method. In an embodiment, a system includes a computer-simulated environment wherein a participant is able to take part. The system also includes a risk management element of the computer-simulated environment, and a computer storage medium operable to save a record of the arrangement.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08096882&OS=08096882&RS=08096882
owner: The Invention Science Fund I, LLC
number: 08096882
owner_city: Bellevue
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050727
---
The present application is related to claims the earliest available effective filing date s from e.g. claims earliest available priority dates for other than provisional patent applications claims benefits under 35 U.S.C. 119 e for provisional patent applications and incorporates by reference in its entirety all subject matter of the herein listed application s the present application also claims the earliest available effective filing date s from and also incorporates by reference in its entirety all subject matter of any and all parent grandparent great grandparent etc. applications of the herein listed application s . The United States Patent Office USPTO has published a notice to the effect that the USPTO s computer programs require that patent applicants reference both a serial number and indicate whether an application is a continuation or continuation in part. The present applicant entity has provided below a specific reference to the application s from which priority is being claimed as recited by statute. Applicant entity understands that the statute is unambiguous in its specific reference language and does not require either a serial number or any characterization such as continuation or continuation in part. Notwithstanding the foregoing applicant entity understands that the USPTO s computer programs have certain data entry requirements and hence applicant entity is designating the present application as a continuation in part of its parent applications but expressly points out that such designations are not to be construed in any way as any type of commentary and or admission as to whether or not the present application contains any new matter in addition to the matter of its parent application s .

For purposes of the USPTO extra statutory requirements the present application constitutes a continuation in part of U.S. patent application entitled VIRTUAL CREDIT IN SIMULATED ENVIRONMENTS naming Edward K. Y. Jung Royce A. Levien Mark A. Malamud and John D. Rinaldo Jr. as inventors filed Feb. 4 2005 Ser. No. 11 051 514 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 958 047 

For purposes of the USPTO extra statutory requirements the present application constitutes a continuation in part of U.S. patent application entitled PAYMENT OPTIONS FOR VIRTUAL CREDIT naming Edward K. Y. Jung Royce A. Levien Mark A. Malamud and John D. Rinaldo Jr. as inventors filed Feb. 28 2005 Ser. No. 11 069 905 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 774 275 

For purposes of the USPTO extra statutory requirements the present application constitutes a continuation in part of U.S. patent application entitled VIRTUAL CREDIT WITH TRANSFERABILITY naming Edward K. Y. Jung Royce A. Levien Mark A. Malamud and John D. Rinaldo Jr. as inventors filed Mar. 30 2005 Ser. No. 11 096 265 

For purposes of the USPTO extra statutory requirements the present application constitutes a continuation in part of U.S. patent application entitled PARTICIPATING IN RISK MITIGATION IN A VIRTUAL WORLD naming Edward K. Y. Jung Royce A. Levien Robert W. Lord Mark A. Malamud and John D. Rinaldo Jr. as inventors filed Jul. 27 2005 Ser. No. 11 191 248.

For purposes of the USPTO extra statutory requirements the present application constitutes a continuation in part of U.S. patent application entitled PROVIDING RISK MITIGATION IN A VIRTUAL WORLD naming Edward K. Y. Jung Royce A. Levien Robert W. Lord Mark A. Malamud and John D. Rinaldo Jr. as inventors filed Jul. 27 2005 Ser. No. 11 191 233 

An embodiment provides a system. The system includes a program comprising computer readable instructions operable to manage a virtual world configured to interact with at least two participants over a network. The system also includes a risk mitigation module operable to facilitate an arrangement that includes a protection entity providing a benefit to a participant of the at least two participants hereafter referred to as the participant upon an occurrence of a defined loss in the virtual world in exchange for a consideration. The system further includes a computer storage medium operable to save a record of the arrangement. In addition to the foregoing other system embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

Another embodiment by way of non limiting example includes a method. The method includes operating a virtual world in communication with a plurality of players over a network. The method also includes enabling a player of the plurality of players hereafter referred to as the player and a risk distribution entity to form an agreement whereby a thing of value is conveyed to the risk distribution entity and the risk distribution entity undertakes to provide a benefit upon the player experiencing a specified loss in the virtual world. The method further includes making a digital record of the arrangement. In addition to the foregoing other method embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

A further embodiment includes a computer program product. The computer program product includes program instructions operable to perform a process in a computer system. The process includes communicating with a virtual world and with a participant. The process also includes providing an opportunity for the participant to make an arrangement with a protection entity that includes the protection entity providing a compensation upon a described loss being experienced in the virtual world in exchange for a consideration. The process further includes creating a record of the arrangement. The product further includes a computer readable signal bearing medium bearing the program instructions. In addition to the foregoing other computer program product embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

An embodiment provides a system. The system includes a computer simulated environment wherein a participant is able to take part. The system also includes a risk management element of the computer simulated environment that facilitates an arrangement that includes a protection entity providing a future benefit to the participant upon an occurrence of a defined loss in the computer simulated environment in exchange for a transfer of a thing of value to the protection entity. The system further includes a computer storage medium operable to save a record of the arrangement. The system may include a participant interface communication link that enables the participant to access to the computer simulated environment and participate in the risk management element. In addition to the foregoing other computer program system embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

Another embodiment provides a system. The system includes a computing device couplable to a virtual world via a public network. The system also includes instructions that when executed on the computing device cause the computing device to activate a virtual character that represents a participant in the virtual world. Further the instructions enable a participation by the virtual character in an arrangement with a protection entity that includes the protection entity providing a compensation to the virtual character upon a future occurrence of a described loss in the virtual world in exchange for a consideration transferred to the protection entity. Also the instructions make a record of the arrangement. In addition to the foregoing other system embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

A further embodiment provides a method. The method includes accepting an input operating a virtual character in a virtual world. The method also includes participating in an arrangement with a protection entity that includes the protection entity providing a compensation to the virtual character upon a future occurrence of a described loss in the virtual world in exchange for a consideration transferred to the protection entity. The method further includes saving data indicative of the arrangement in a computer readable medium. In addition to the foregoing other method embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

An embodiment provides a computer program product. The computer program product includes program instructions operable to perform a process in a computing device and a computer readable signal bearing medium bearing the program instructions. The process includes sending an instruction to a virtual world related to a virtual character. The process also includes enabling a participation by the virtual character in an arrangement with a risk distribution entity that includes the risk distribution entity providing a compensation to the virtual character upon a future occurrence of a described loss in the virtual world in exchange for a consideration transferred to the risk distribution entity. The process further includes saving data representative of the arrangement.

Another embodiment provides a method. The method includes operating a protection entity associated with a virtual world configured to interact with a participant via a network. The method also includes participating in an arrangement with the participant that includes the protection entity providing a compensation to the participant upon a future occurrence of a described loss in the virtual world in exchange for receiving a consideration. The method includes saving a record of the arrangement. In addition to the foregoing other method embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

A further embodiment provides system. The system includes a computing system that includes a computing device which is configured to communicate with a virtual world via a network. The virtual world including an operability to interact with a participant via the network. The system also includes instructions that when executed on the computing device cause the computing system to operate a protection entity having an association with the virtual world. The instructions also cause the computing system to participate in an arrangement with the participant that includes the protection entity providing a compensation to the participant upon a future occurrence of a described loss in the virtual world in exchange for receiving a consideration. The instructions further cause the computing system to save data indicative of the arrangement. In addition to the foregoing other system embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

An embodiment provides a computer program product. The computer program product includes program instructions operable to perform a process in a computing device. The process includes operate a protection entity having an association with the virtual world that includes an operability to interact with a participant via a network. The process also includes participate in an arrangement with the participant that includes the protection entity providing a compensation to the participant upon a future occurrence of a described loss in the virtual world in exchange for receiving a consideration. The process further includes save data indicative of the arrangement. The computer program product includes a computer readable signal bearing medium bearing the program instructions. In addition to the foregoing other computer program product embodiments described in the claims drawings and text form a part of the present application.

The foregoing is a summary and thus by necessity contains simplifications generalizations and omissions of detail. Consequently those skilled in the art will appreciate that the summary is illustrative only and is not intended to be in any way limiting. Other aspects inventive features and advantages of the devices and or processes described herein as defined by the claims will become apparent by reference to the drawings and the following detailed description.

In the following detailed description of exemplary embodiments reference is made to the accompanying drawings which form a part hereof. In the several figures like referenced numerals identify like elements. The detailed description and the drawings illustrate exemplary embodiments. Other embodiments may be utilized and other changes may be made without departing from the spirit or scope of the subject matter presented here. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense and the scope of the claimed subject matter is defined by the appended claims.

A user may enter commands and information into the computing device through input devices such as a number of switches and buttons illustrated as hardware buttons connected to the system via a suitable interface . Input devices may further include a touch sensitive display screen with suitable input detection circuitry . The output circuitry of the touch sensitive display is connected to the system bus via a video driver . Other input devices may include a microphone connected through a suitable audio interface and a physical hardware keyboard not shown . In addition to the display the computing device may include other peripheral output devices such as at least one speaker .

Other external input or output devices such as a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like may be connected to the processing unit through a USB port and USB port interface to the system bus . Alternatively the other external input and output devices may be connected by other interfaces such as a parallel port game port or other port. The computing device may further include or be capable of connecting to a flash card memory not shown through an appropriate connection port not shown . The computing device may further include or be capable of connecting with a network through a network port and network interface and or through wireless port and corresponding wireless interface . Such a connection may be provided to facilitate communication with other peripheral devices including other computers printers and so on not shown . It will be appreciated that the various components and connections shown are exemplary and other components and means of establishing communications links may be used.

The computing device may be primarily designed to include a user interface having a character key based other user data input via the touch sensitive display using a stylus not shown . Moreover the user interface is not limited to an actual touch sensitive panel arranged for directly receiving input but may alternatively or in addition respond to another input device such as the microphone . For example spoken words may be received at the microphone and recognized. Alternatively the computing device may be designed to include a user interface having a physical keyboard not shown .

The device functional elements not shown are typically application specific and related to a function of the electronic device. The device functional elements are driven by a device functional element s interface which coupled with the system bus . A functional element may typically perform a single well defined task with little or no user configuration or setup such as a refrigerator keeping food cold a cell phone connecting with an appropriate tower and transceiving voice or data information and a camera capturing and saving an image.

The computing system environment typically includes a variety of computer readable media products. Computer readable media may include any media that can be accessed by the computing device and include both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not of limitation computer readable media may include computer storage media and communications media. Computer storage media includes volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media include but are not limited to random access memory RAM read only memory ROM electrically erasable programmable read only memory EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by the computing device . Communications media typically embody computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and include any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communications media include wired media such as a wired network and a direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF optical and infrared media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and nonvolatile memory such as ROM and RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within the computing device such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and program modules that are immediately accessible to or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates an operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Often the operating system offers services to applications programs by way of one or more application programming interfaces APIs not shown . Because the operating system incorporates these services developers of applications programs need not redevelop code to use the services. Examples of APIs provided by operating systems such as Microsoft s WINDOWS are well known in the art.

The computing device may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media products. By way of example only illustrates a non removable non volatile memory interface hard disk interface that reads from and writes to non removable non volatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from and writes to a removable non volatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from and writes to a removable non volatile optical disk such as a CD ROM. Other removable nonremovable volatile non volatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards DVDs digital video tape solid state RAM and solid state ROM. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as the interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable non volatile memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computing device . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing an operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from the operating system application programs other program modules and program data . The operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computing device through input devices such as a microphone keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a joystick game pad satellite dish and scanner. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computing system environment may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computing device although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks such as a personal area network PAN not shown . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computing system environment is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computing device typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or via another appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computing device or portions thereof may be stored in a remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on computer storage medium . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

In the description that follows certain embodiments may be described with reference to acts and symbolic representations of operations that are performed by one or more computing devices such as computing device of . As such it will be understood that such acts and operations which are at times referred to as being computer executed include the manipulation by the processing unit of the computer of electrical signals representing data in a structured form. This manipulation transforms the data or maintains them at locations in the memory system of the computer which reconfigures or otherwise alters the operation of the computer in a manner well understood by those skilled in the art. The data structures in which data is maintained are physical locations of the memory that have particular properties defined by the format of the data. However while an embodiment is being described in the foregoing context it is not meant to be limiting as those of skill in the art will appreciate that the acts and operations described hereinafter may also be implemented in hardware.

Embodiments may be implemented with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing devices and computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and configurations that may be suitable for use with an embodiment include but are not limited to personal computers handheld or laptop devices personal digital assistants multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network minicomputers server computers game server computers web server computers mainframe computers and distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices.

Embodiments may be described in a general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. An embodiment may also be practiced in a distributed computing environment where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

Each of the clients may include a personal computer running client software which facilitates a participant s activation operation and or interaction with the virtual world. In other embodiments the clients may include other computing devices for example but not limited to the thin computing devices such as the thin computing device of general purpose computing systems such as the computing system of cellular telephones wireless or palmtop computers portable digital assistants handheld game systems and or game consoles. Each client is generally responsible for displaying interacting objects other participants terrain non participant characters etc. displaying the virtual world s interface processing a participant s inputs playing music and sound and performing other operations.

In an embodiment a computing system may include one or more computing devices operating in a coordinated and or cooperative manner. In another embodiment a computing system may include two or more computing systems operating in a coordinated and or cooperative manner.

Each of the servers generally includes a computer system having a server platform portion of the virtual world for communication database storage coordination and overall control and administration of the virtual world. The servers generally maintain state information and coordinate client interaction with various objects in a virtual environment including but not limited to other clients vehicles artificial intelligence terrain music and sound. Each server provides additional functions such as security recording virtual world goals and scoring and tracking each participant s advancement towards those goals.

The clients communicate with the server platform via the communication network . In an embodiment the communication network may include the Internet. In other embodiments the communication network may include an intranet a WAN a LAN and or any other type of network utilizable for communicating between the server platform and the client platform . For example the communications network could include without limitation a wireless network a cellular network or any other system that facilitates transmission of data. Each participant has an associated communications link or session with one or more of the servers . As shown in participant could communicate with server A via a communications link . Similarly participant could communicate with server B via communications link . The servers are preferably interconnected via a communications network .

During operation of the system a particular client for example participant who desires to enter a virtual world communicates through a communications link with an allocated server A . The determination of which specific server to which a particular participant is linked may depend on a number of parameters such as server load number of participants location of clients status of participant e.g. position within the virtual world itself and other parameters. In the particular embodiment shown in the number of servers needed for allocation depends upon the number of participants. illustrates operation of the system when a number of participants are logged onto a plurality of servers .

When there are relatively few clients participating in the virtual world only one server may be needed to serve the clients . During virtual world operation there may be no need for direct communication between participants. The server platform communicates with each participant positional status and event data referred to as participant or participant data or as a participant s attributes for other participants and for objects that the participant may see or interact with the virtual world. Such participant data may include but is not limited to avatar attributes type physics modeling scoring position orientation motion vector animation background music participant music inventory vehicle call sign or other participant or object attributes necessary for the particular virtual world. Typically the server includes a database of information that is maintained and updated as the participants interact within the virtual world. Through the interaction between the client platform and the server platform the virtual world is facilitated.

A virtual world may include a virtual reality environment. A virtual world may include a computer simulated environment. A virtual world may be intended for virtual inhabitation and interaction often using avatars. In an embodiment a participant may include a human user a spectator an entity human or otherwise based and or an entity that provides a service to a virtual world. Inhabitation may include a representation of its participants in a form of two or three dimensional graphical representations of humanoids or other graphical or text based avatars. In an embodiment such as illustrated in a virtual world allows for multiple participants. In further embodiments a virtual world may include a limited environment. For example a limited environment may include a classroom a city an organization and or a special purpose space.

2. Graphical User Interface a virtual world may depict space visually ranging in style from 2D cartoon imagery to more immersive 3D environments.

3. Simulation a virtual world may include a simulation of the real world or a simulation of an imaginary world.

4. Virtual identity a participant may participate in a virtual world through a virtual identity. A virtual identity may include one or more attributes and or associations utilized by a virtual world in managing a participation in the virtual world. Further a participant may interact with objects that are part of the virtual world through their virtual identity. These objects may be representations of items or other participants such as avatars.

6. Interactivity a world may allow participants to alter develop build or submit customized content. A virtual world may allow inter participant communication.

7. Persistence a virtual world s existence may continue regardless of whether individual participants are logged in. In an embodiment a virtual world includes an online persistent world active and available 24 hours a day and seven days a week. In another embodiment a virtual world may persist for less than a whole day or less than a whole week.

8. Socialization Community a virtual world may allow and encourage the formation of in world social groups like guilds clubs cliques housemates neighborhoods etc.

In certain embodiments a virtual world may include a single player game. A virtual world may include a graphical reality as presently exists in multi participant virtual worlds. In other embodiments a virtual world may include communities and chat rooms. In further embodiments a virtual world may include a training and or classroom setting. A virtual world may be adapted for educational purposes. Educators may create an online community in which students log into and interact. Within an educational virtual world students may use their avatar to learn about new assignments and to create projects that are viewable within the virtual world. For example students taking a computer class may log into a virtual world in which they are the inhabitants of a village that needs their expertise. In other embodiments a virtual world may be adapted for commerce for professional military and vocational training for medical consultation and psychotherapy and even for social and economic experimentation.

In further embodiments a virtual world may include a virtual monetary system that constitutes a medium of exchange that allows virtual world transactions. The monetary system may include virtual currency monetary chips discount coupons award points access rights entrance keys experience medals level permits bonus vouchers skill merits character traits health benefits success awards entrance tickets authorization passes eligibility credentials benefit tokens vested rights licenses permissions decryption codes bonus vouchers test certificates game time credits additional characters control over other player characters control over non player characters aliases privacy levels visibility levels and disguises.

The computer storage medium provides a storage capability. Various categories of data stored in the computer storage medium may include a record or data indicative of assents to arrangements consideration transfers loss occurrences and benefit provisions . The system enables at least two participants to respectively form an arrangement with a protection entity not shown that includes the protection entity providing a respective benefit to a participant upon an occurrence of a defined loss in the virtual world in exchange for a consideration.

In an embodiment the system includes a program comprising computer readable instructions operable to manage a virtual world configured to interact with at least two participants over a network. In an embodiment the computer readable instructions operable to manage a virtual world include computer readable instructions operable to administer a virtual world. In another embodiment the computer readable instructions operable to manage a virtual world include computer readable instructions operable to control a virtual world. In another embodiment the computer readable instructions operable to manage a virtual world include computer readable instructions operable to provide a virtual world a virtual world experience to the at least two participants.

The system also includes a risk mitigation module such as the risk mitigation module . The risk mitigation module includes operability to facilitate an arrangement that includes a protection entity not shown providing a benefit to a participant such as the participant of upon an occurrence of a defined loss in the virtual world in exchange for a consideration. The system also includes the computer storage medium such as for example the computer storage medium operable to save a record of the arrangement.

In an embodiment the at least two participants may include at least two participants who control their respective virtual identity in the virtual world. The virtual identity may be embodied in an avatar. For example a participant A would individually control their virtual identity A which by way of further example may be an avatar representative of warrior. Participant B would individually control their virtual identity B which by way of further example may be an avatar representative of a queen. The at least two participants who control their respective virtual identity in the virtual world include at least two participants who control their respective virtual identity having at least one attribute in the virtual world. The at least one attribute may include at least one of an attribute native to the virtual world an attribute acquired from a source not native to the virtual world an attribute created by another participant of the at least two participants an attribute created by a third party a weapon a property an asset and or an item.

The network may include at least one of a private computer network or a public computer network. The network may include the Internet.

In another embodiment the risk mitigation module operable to facilitate an arrangement may include a submodule operable to facilitate at least one of forming the arrangement an interaction between the participant and the protection entity creating the arrangement negotiating a term of the arrangement revising the arrangement resolution of disputes transferring the consideration transferring a right of the participant in the arrangement memorializing the arrangement and notification regarding matters relevant to the arrangement.

In a further embodiment the protection entity not shown may include a participant protection entity. The participant protection entity may include at least one of a real world entity a real world entity engaged in a real world business of entering into agreements similar to the arrangement a person an individual a virtual world entity a virtual world entity engaged in a business of entering into contracts similar to the arrangement a fictional protection entity or an avatar of the virtual world.

In an embodiment the protection entity may include a non participant protection entity. The non participant protection entity may include at least one of a provider of the virtual world an operator of the virtual world a person associated with the virtual world or a program associated with the virtual world program .

The providing a benefit to the participant may include providing a virtual world benefit to the participant. The providing a benefit to the participant may include providing a real world benefit to the participant. The providing a benefit to the participant may include providing a compensation to the participant. For example the compensation may include payment in a form of a real world currency and or a virtual world currency. The providing a benefit to the participant may include providing an agreed upon benefit to the participant. The providing a benefit to the participant may include providing a predetermined benefit to the participant. For example a predetermined benefit for a loss of an avatar attribute such as a life an arm or weapon may include restoration of the life arm or weapon. In another example a predetermined benefit may include extending a participant s subscription to a virtual world for a predetermined length of time. In a further example a predetermined benefit may include a fixed amount of virtual world compensation. The providing a benefit to the participant may include providing a compensation determined with relative to a circumstance existing at an occurrence of the loss. For example a loss of life of an avatar having a high attained level in a virtual world may receive a greater benefit than a loss of an avatar life at a low attained level in the virtual world. In a further example a loss of life of an avatar owning significant attributes and or associations may receive a greater benefit than loss of a life of an avatar owning insignificant attributes and or associations.

The providing a benefit to the participant may include providing a compensation that is a function of a participant attribute and or environmental attribute measured at an occurrence of the loss. The providing a benefit to the participant may include providing an attribute replacement to the participant. The providing an attribute replacement to the participant may include providing at least one of a replacement of an attribute a resurrection of a virtual identity of the participant in the virtual world a replacement of a virtual world property a payment of a virtual world fine and a satisfaction of a virtual world punishment.

In another embodiment the defined loss may include a determinable contingency. The defined loss may include at least one of loss suffered by a participant occurring by reason of a harm an injury a death a damaging a casualty a disability and an imposed punitive obligation. The defined loss may include a loss relative to a subject matter of the arrangement in which the participant has an interest. The defined loss may include at least one of loss suffered by another participant having a relationship with the participant. For example a loss suffered by another participant may include a loss suffered by another participant with whom the participant has a business relationship a community relationship and or a familial relationship.

In an embodiment a first participant may have an interest in a subject matter of the arrangement when a loss or damage to it would cause the first participant to suffer a financial loss or other kind of loss. For example if a property owned by the first participant is damaged the value of the property is reduced and whether the first participant pays to have the property repaired or sells it at a reduced price the first participant has suffered a financial loss resulting from the damage. By contrast if a second participant s property is damaged the first participant may be emotionally upset or disadvantaged but the first participant would not directly suffer any loss by the damage. The first participant has an interest in their own property but in this example the first participant does not have an insurable interest in the second participant s property.

In a further embodiment the consideration may include a virtual world consideration. The virtual world consideration may include virtual world money. The virtual world consideration may include at least one of an attribute a right a body part a weapon or a token. The consideration may include a real world consideration. The real world consideration may include a real world money. The consideration may include anything having a value. The consideration may include a consideration provided by the participant. The consideration may include a consideration provided by another participant of the at least two participants.

In an embodiment the computer storage medium operable to save a record of the arrangement may include a computer storage medium operable to save at least one of a record of a conveyance of the consideration to the protection entity a record of assents to the arrangement such as for example a record of the protection entity s assent to the arrangement a record of an occurrence of the loss or a record of any provision of the benefit . The computer storage medium operable to save a record of the arrangement may for example include the computer storage media described in conjunction with .

In an embodiment the system further includes a monetary module operable to manage a medium of exchange in the virtual world expressed as a virtual world currency unit. In an embodiment the virtual world program may include the monetary module. In another embodiment the monetary module may not be included in the virtual world program. The virtual world currency unit may include a virtual world currency having a value in the virtual world and facilitating an exchange for goods and services. The virtual world currency having a value in the virtual world and facilitating an exchange for goods and services may include a virtual world currency having a value in the virtual world and usable as at least one of the consideration and the benefit.

In another embodiment the system further includes the monetary module providing a native virtual world medium of exchange expressed as a native virtual world currency unit having a value in the virtual world. The system also includes a secondary monetary module coupled with the virtual world. In an embodiment the secondary monetary module may be an integral component of the system . In an alternative embodiment the secondary monetary module may be coupled with the system such as for example it may be coupled by communication via a computer network. The secondary money module includes an operability to manage a secondary virtual world medium of exchange expressed as a secondary virtual world currency unit having a value in the virtual world and facilitating at least one of the benefit and the consideration. The monetary module coupled with the virtual world may include a monetary module coupled with the virtual world and subject to control of the virtual world. The monetary module coupled with the virtual world and subject to control of another participant of the at least two participants may include a monetary module coupled with the virtual world and subject to control of a participant protection entity. The secondary virtual world currency may include a secondary virtual world currency having a value in another virtual world.

Although a participant may be illustrated and or described herein as a single illustrated figure a participant may be representative of a human user a robotic user e.g. computational entity and or substantially any combination thereof e.g. a participant may be assisted by one or more robotic agents . In addition a participant as set forth herein although shown as a single entity may in fact be composed of two or more entities. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that in general the same may be said of player protection entity and or other entity oriented terms as such terms are used herein. Further a participant may include an agent a program agent a proxy and or a representative of the participant.

The following includes a series of illustrations depicting implementations of processes. For ease of understanding certain illustrations are organized such that initial illustrations present implementations from an overall big picture viewpoint and following illustrations present alternate implementations and or expansions of the big picture illustrations as either sub steps or additional steps building on one or more earlier presented illustrations.

In an embodiment the thing of value may include virtual world thing of value or a real world thing of value. The thing of value may be conveyed to the risk distribution entity by the player. The thing of value may be conveyed to the risk distribution entity by another player of the plurality of players. The risk distribution entity may undertake to provide a benefit to the player or to another player of the plurality of players. The risk distribution entity may undertake to provide a benefit upon the player experiencing a specified loss in the virtual world or upon to another player of the plurality of players experiencing a specified loss in the virtual world.

A documenting operation makes a digital record of the arrangement. The digital record of the arrangement may include at least one of a digital record of a conveyance of a thing of value to the protection entity the protection entity s assent to the arrangement the player s assent to the arrangement a provision of the benefit in the virtual world or in the real world or an occurrence of the specified loss in the virtual world. The operational flow then moves to an end operation.

The operational flow may include at least one additional operation such as an assistance operation . The assistance operation facilitates a transfer of the benefit in response to an indication that the player experienced the specified loss in the virtual world.

In an alternative embodiment the computer process may further include an additional process such as a process a process and or a process . At the process the communicating with a virtual world and with a participant may include communicating with a virtual world and with a participant via a network. At the process the computer process may further include communicating between the virtual world and the protection entity. At the process the computer process may further include providing a notification of an occurrence of the described loss.

In another embodiment the computer readable signal bearing medium may include a computer storage medium which may be carried by a computer readable carrier not shown . The computer readable signal bearing medium may include a communications medium . In an alternative embodiment the computer program may be implemented in hardware software and or firmware and or a combination thereof.

In an alternative embodiment the networked environment may include a participant protection entity . The participant protection entity may be coupled with the networked environment via the network .

It will be understood that separately owned virtual environments may be included as part of the virtual network environment including the virtual game environment the virtual world and or the role playing virtual community . The services of the non participant protection entity may also be usable in these separate individual virtual environments based on appropriate agreements with their owners and or operators.

A system embodiment may be implemented employing the environments illustrated in . The system includes a computer simulated environment wherein a participant is able to take part. In an embodiment the computer simulated environment may include the virtual world I the virtual world II and or the virtual world III of . In another embodiment the computer simulated environment may include the virtual game environment the virtual world and or the role playing virtual community of .

The system also includes a risk management element of the computer simulated environment. In an embodiment the risk management element may include the risk management element of . The risk management element includes an operability that facilitates an arrangement that includes a protection entity providing a future benefit to the participant upon an occurrence of a defined loss in the computer simulated environment in exchange for a transfer of a thing of value to the protection entity. In an embodiment the future benefit may include at least one of a compensation or an attribute replacement. In another embodiment the defined loss may include at least one of harm damage injury death damage to others damage to property of others or criminal penalties or punishment. In a further embodiment the thing of value may include at least one of a virtual world or a real world thing of value. In an embodiment the transfer may be procured by the participant or by another participant.

The system includes a computer storage medium operable to save a record of the arrangement. In an embodiment the record of the arrangement may include at least one of a record of any provision of the benefit to the participant.

In an embodiment the system may further include a participant interface communication link that enables the participant to access to the computer simulated environment and participate in the risk management element. In another embodiment the system may further include a protection entity interface communications link that enables the protection entity to access to the computer simulated environment and participate in the risk management element.

Returning to the figure illustrates another embodiment that provides a system. The system includes a computing device couplable to a virtual world via a public network. The computing device is illustrated as the computing device . The system also includes instructions illustrated as the program . The instructions when executed on the computing device cause the computing device to activate a virtual character that represents a participant in the virtual world. The instructions also enable participation by the virtual character in an arrangement with a protection entity that includes the protection entity providing a compensation to the virtual character upon a future occurrence of a described loss in the virtual world in exchange for a consideration transferred to the protection entity. The instructions further make a record of the arrangement.

In an embodiment the protection entity includes a participant protection entity. In another embodiment the protection entity includes a non participant protection entity.

In an embodiment the control operation may include at least one additional operation such as the operation . The additional operation includes operating an avatar that represents a participant in a virtual world.

In an alternative embodiment the operational flow may include at least one additional operation . An additional operation may include an operation and or an operation . The operation includes establishing a communication link via a network between the virtual world and the participant. The operation includes receiving a notification of an occurrence of the described loss.

In another embodiment the computer readable signal bearing medium may include a computer storage medium which may be carried by a computer readable carrier not shown . The computer readable signal bearing medium may include a communications medium . In an alternative embodiment the computer program may be implemented in hardware software and or firmware and or a combination thereof.

In an embodiment the operational flow may include at least one additional operation such as an operation . The operation receives an evidence of a transfer of the compensation.

In an alternative embodiment the computer executable instructions may include an additional instruction. Additional instructions may include instructions instructions instructions instructions and or instructions . The instructions operate a protection entity having a presence within the virtual world. In a further embodiment the protection entity may be under control of the virtual world operator or a player participant. In another embodiment the player participant may be an individual or a company. The instructions operate a protection entity having a presence within the virtual world and under a control of the virtual world. The instructions operate a protection entity having a presence within the real world and an operability to interact with the virtual world via the network. The instructions operate a protection entity involved in a business of a risk mitigation in the real world and having an operability to interact with the virtual world via the network. The instruction operate a protection entity having a presence in the real world and having an operability to interact with the participant via the network in response to a referral from the virtual world.

In an embodiment the protection entity may include a participant protection entity. The participant protection entity may include at least one of a real world entity a real world entity engaged in a business of entering into contracts similar to the arrangement a person an individual a virtual world entity a virtual world entity engaged in a business of entering into contracts similar to the arrangement a fictional protection entity or an avatar of the virtual world. In another embodiment the protection entity may include a non participant protection entity. The non participant protection entity includes at least one of a provider of the virtual world an operator of the virtual world or a person associated with the virtual world.

In another embodiment the computer readable signal bearing medium may include a computer storage medium which may be carried by a computer readable carrier not shown . The computer readable signal bearing medium may include a communications medium . In an alternative embodiment the computer program may be implemented in hardware software and or firmware and or a combination thereof.

For example as shown in a participant John having an actual logon time period commencing at time and terminating at time has the capability of having real time interaction during logon time period with participant David . It is noted that David s actual logon time period commencing at time and terminating at time partially overlaps with John s logon time period and similarly with active time of the third party virtual provider as well as with an active time period of a real world group participant . It is further noted that John s logon time period completely overlaps with active period of the protection entity and with the active period of the virtual world provider and further with an active period of a participant character role . This enables real time interaction between entities including repeated dialogue communications if deemed appropriate while risk mitigation arrangements are being negotiated arranged implemented transferred resolved and or canceled. Of course it is understood that time delays between real time interactive messages may also occur intentionally or because of system limitations.

Even though John is logged off between his termination time and his re commencement time other entities that are active or logged on during the interim period may respond to any of John s requests actions or questions that have been appropriately stored in memory or may pursue their own dialogue with respect to new pending or existing risk mitigation arrangements. Such other entities may include Mary whose logon period commences at time and terminates at time . Similarly John can resume his virtual world risk mitigation arrangement participation during his new logon time period until termination at time . This new period may include responses to requests action or question previously made by Mary whose logon period does not overlap either of John s logon time periods .

Further real time interaction may be initiated or received by participants or other entities in the virtual world environment through links in the virtual world environment as shown by a real world website link activated to commence at time and terminate at time a virtual environment link activated to commence at time and terminate at time and a real world protection entity link activated to commence at time and terminate at time . It is therefore to be understood that both unidirectional and bi directional links across a boundary between a virtual world environment and a real world location or real world entity may be used to facilitate effectuate implement resolve or perpetuate a risk mitigation arrangement.

As illustrated in participation in a virtual world environment may include activities events and transactions that are wholly within the simulated or virtual world environment as well as activities events and transactions that are initiated or partly pursued in the simulated or virtual world environment. A virtual world participant or participant taking a class for example could mean a virtual character taking a class in the virtual world to increase his virtual world skill level as well as a participant using his virtual character to interact with a real world course for example to take an online class or some combination of these.

Those having skill in the art will recognize that the state of the art has progressed to the point where there is little distinction left between hardware and software implementations of aspects of systems the use of hardware or software is generally but not always in that in certain contexts the choice between hardware and software can become significant a design choice representing cost versus efficiency tradeoffs. Those having skill in the art will appreciate that there are various vehicles by which processes and or systems and or other technologies described herein can be effected e.g. hardware software and or firmware and that the preferred vehicle may vary with the context in which the processes and or systems and or other technologies are deployed. For example if an implementer determines that speed and accuracy are paramount the implementer may opt for a mainly hardware and or firmware vehicle alternatively if flexibility is paramount the implementer may opt for a mainly software implementation or yet again alternatively the implementer may opt for some combination of hardware software and or firmware. Hence there are several possible vehicles by which the processes and or devices and or other technologies described herein may be effected none of which is inherently superior to the other in that any vehicle to be utilized is a choice dependent upon the context in which the vehicle may be deployed and the specific concerns e.g. speed flexibility or predictability of the implementer any of which may vary. Those skilled in the art will recognize that optical aspects of implementations will require optically oriented hardware software and or firmware.

The foregoing detailed description has set forth various embodiments of the devices and or processes via the use of block diagrams flow diagrams operation diagrams flowcharts illustrations and or examples. Insofar as such block diagrams operation diagrams flowcharts illustrations and or examples contain one or more functions and or operations it will be understood by those within the art that each function and or operation within such block diagrams operation diagrams flowcharts illustrations or examples can be implemented individually and or collectively by a wide range of hardware software firmware or virtually any combination thereof. In one embodiment several portions of the subject matter described herein may be implemented via Application Specific Integrated Circuits ASICs Field Programmable Gate Arrays FPGAs digital signal processors DSPs or other integrated formats. However those skilled in the art will recognize that some aspects of the embodiments disclosed herein in whole or in part can be equivalently implemented in standard integrated circuits as one or more computer programs running on one or more computers e.g. as one or more programs running on one or more computer systems as one or more programs running on one or more processors e.g. as one or more programs running on one or more microprocessors as firmware or as virtually any combination thereof and that designing the circuitry and or writing the code for the software and or firmware would be well within the skill of one of skill in the art in light of this disclosure. In addition those skilled in the art will appreciate that the mechanisms of the subject matter described herein are capable of being distributed as a program product in a variety of forms and that an illustrative embodiment of the subject matter described herein applies equally regardless of the particular type of signal bearing media used to actually carry out the distribution. Examples of a signal bearing media include but are not limited to the following recordable type media such as floppy disks hard disk drives CD ROMs digital tape and computer memory and transmission type media such as digital and analog communication links using TDM or IP based communication links e.g. packet links .

It will be understood by those within the art that in general terms used herein and especially in the appended claims e.g. bodies of the appended claims are generally intended as open terms e.g. the term including should be interpreted as including but not limited to the term having should be interpreted as having at least the term includes should be interpreted as includes but is not limited to etc. . It will be further understood by those within the art that if a specific number of an introduced claim recitation is intended such an intent will be explicitly recited in the claim and in the absence of such recitation no such intent is present. For example as an aid to understanding the following appended claims may contain usage of the introductory phrases at least one and one or more to introduce claim recitations. However the use of such phrases should not be construed to imply that the introduction of a claim recitation by the indefinite articles a or an limits any particular claim containing such introduced claim recitation to inventions containing only one such recitation even when the same claim includes the introductory phrases one or more or at least one and indefinite articles such as a or an e.g. a and or an should typically be interpreted to mean at least one or one or more the same holds true for the use of definite articles used to introduce claim recitations. In addition even if a specific number of an introduced claim recitation is explicitly recited those skilled in the art will recognize that such recitation should typically be interpreted to mean at least the recited number e.g. the bare recitation of two recitations without other modifiers typically means at least two recitations or two or more recitations . Furthermore in those instances where a convention analogous to at least one of A B and C etc. is used in general such a construction is intended in the sense one having skill in the art would understand the convention e.g. a system having at least one of A B and C would include but not be limited to systems that have A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and or A B and C together etc. . In those instances where a convention analogous to at least one of A B or C etc. is used in general such a construction is intended in the sense one having skill in the art would understand the convention e.g. a system having at least one of A B or C would include but not be limited to systems that have A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and or A B and C together etc. .

The herein described aspects depict different components contained within or connected with different other components. It is to be understood that such depicted architectures are merely exemplary and that in fact many other architectures can be implemented which achieve the same functionality. In a conceptual sense any arrangement of components to achieve the same functionality is effectively associated such that the desired functionality is achieved. Hence any two components herein combined to achieve a particular functionality can be seen as associated with each other such that the desired functionality is achieved irrespective of architectures or intermedial components. Likewise any two components so associated can also be viewed as being operably connected or operably coupled to each other to achieve the desired functionality. Any two components capable of being so associated can also be viewed as being operably couplable to each other to achieve the desired functionality. Specific examples of operably couplable include but are not limited to physically mateable and or physically interacting components and or wirelessly interactable and or wirelessly interacting components.

While particular aspects of the present subject matter described herein have been shown and described it will be apparent to those skilled in the art that based upon the teachings herein changes and modifications may be made without departing from this subject matter described herein and its broader aspects and therefore the appended claims are to encompass within their scope all such changes and modifications as are within the true spirit and scope of this subject matter described herein. Furthermore it is to be understood that the invention is defined by the appended claims.

