---

title: Methods and systems for integrating fluid dispensing technology with stereolithography
abstract: An integrated system and method of integrating fluid dispensing technologies (e.g., direct-write (DW)) with rapid prototyping (RP) technologies (e.g., stereolithography (SL)) without part registration comprising: an SL apparatus and a fluid dispensing apparatus further comprising a translation mechanism adapted to translate the fluid dispensing apparatus along the Z-, Y- and Z-axes. The fluid dispensing apparatus comprises: a pressurized fluid container; a valve mechanism adapted to control the flow of fluid from the pressurized fluid container; and a dispensing nozzle adapted to deposit the fluid in a desired location. To aid in calibration, the integrated system includes a laser sensor and a mechanical switch. The method further comprises building a second part layer on top of the fluid deposits and optionally accommodating multi-layered circuitry by incorporating a connector trace. Thus, the present invention is capable of efficiently building single and multi-material SL fabricated parts embedded with complex three-dimensional circuitry using DW.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07658603&OS=07658603&RS=07658603
owner: Sandia Corporation, Operator of Sandia National Laboratories
number: 07658603
owner_city: Albuquerque
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050331
---
This invention was developed under Contract DE AC04 94AL85000 between Sandia Corporation and the U.S. Department of Energy. The U.S. Department of Energy has certain rights to this invention.

The present invention relates to the general field of rapid prototyping RP technology and in particular to stereolithography SL and fluid dispensing technologies such as direct write DW technologies.

RP technologies also known as Solid Freeform Fabrication SFF layered manufacturing and other similar technologies enable the manufacture of complex three dimensional 3D parts. RP technologies in particular generally construct parts by building one layer at a time for use in for example the toy automotive aircraft and medical industries. Oftentimes prototypes made by RP technologies aid in research and development and provide a low cost alternative to traditional prototyping.

SL is one of the most widely used RP technologies known in the art. The resolution of SL machines and the ability of SL to manufacture highly complex 3D objects make SL ideal for building both functional and non functional prototypes. In particular SL techniques provide economical physical models of objects quickly prior to making more expensive finished parts. The models are readily customizable and design changes may be easily implemented.

SL generally involves a multi stage process. For example the first stage involves designing and inputting a precise mathematical and geometric description of the desired structure s shape into one of many computer aided design CAD programs and saving the description in the standard transform language STL file format. In the second stage the STL file is imported into SL machine specific software RP software . The RP software slices the design into layers and determines the placement of support structures to hold each cross section in place while building the structure layer by layer. By computing build parameters the RP software controls the part s fabrication. In the layer preparation stage the build parameters for the desired part are translated into machine language. Finally the machine language controls the SL machine to build a desired part and its support structures layer by layer. SL machines typically focus an ultraviolet UV laser onto a cross section of a liquid photopolymer resin. The laser in turn selectively cures a resin to form a structure layer by layer. Ultimately the part is cleaned the support structure is removed and the part is post cured typically exposed to UV prior to completion.

SL technologies known in the art generally include for example a laser a liquid level sensing system laser beam optics and controllable scanning mirror system a vertically movable platform a resin retaining receptacle or vat and a recoating device. During the laser scanning phase a series of optics and controllable scanning mirrors raster a UV laser beam to solidify a photopolymer resin. The subject 3D part is first attached to the platform by building a support structure with the platform in its topmost position. This step allows for misalignment between the platform and the surface of the liquid resin once constructed the base support structure is parallel with the surface of the liquid. When building the subject part simultaneously with its required support structure and after the laser beam completes a layer the platform typically is vertically traversed downward a distance equal to the build layer thickness. After the platform is vertically traversed downward and prior to selectively curing the next layer a recoating device is typically traversed horizontally across the part that deposits a uniform layer of liquid polymer across the part. The recoating device ensures that trapped spaces within the part are filled with liquid resin which may be required for future build layers and is used to maintain a constant build layer thickness. The process repeats as each layer is built. Complex shaped parts are thus manufactured by repeating the layering process. Once complete the part is typically raised out of the liquid polymer the support structure is removed from the part and the part is cleaned and then post cured. The operator may however need to sand file or use some other finishing technique on the part in order to provide a specific surface finish to the structure which may include painting plating and or coating the surface.

Although SL technologies for complex functional parts and prototypes have greatly improved in recent years there is still a need to improve SL technologies for building functional electromechanical parts. There is a further need for achieving significant reductions in size mass and manufacturing cycle times of low voltage electrical systems. Most RP systems allow building cycle sequences to be interrupted thus opening the possibility of encapsulating electromechanical components within the model structure. For example some have demonstrated the feasibility of encapsulating sensors and actuators in metal and polymer structures using Shape Deposition Manufacturing SDM . Others have demonstrated systems for automatic dispensing of conductive thermally curable media such as DW inks for maskless patterning of electronics. Limitations in speed and feature size however have prevented this technology s acceptance in the microelectronics industry. Recently however there have been several breakthroughs in DW ink dispensing for military applications which dispense advanced metallic inks through a hollow tip precisely controlling the ink s flow and stopping points. Although there have been improvements in writing capabilities many SL resins are incompatible for example with the high temperatures required to anneal cure dry and or solidify DW inks. Thus any attempts at integrating DW technologies with SL technologies have not been successful.

What is desired is a system and method for automated deposition of fluid media during SL on SL created surfaces automated curing of the media and continued building without the need to recalibrate or intermediately wash or cure. What is desired therefore are improvements in part building technology and in particular improvements in the integration of curable media such as DW inks with SL technologies without contamination. Specifically there is a need for low cost efficient and easy to use SL processes that accommodate DW ink dispensing technology to fabricate for example complex 3D multi layered high density integrated and fully functional electromechanical systems. These electromechanical systems are more compact less expensive and more reliable than their conventional predecessors. Additionally by removing heavy cables redundancy can easily be designed into a structure where previously it could not be thus allowing significant size and weight savings for applications such as those in the aerospace and space industries. What is needed therefore is an integrated system capable of manufacturing fully functional electromechanical systems that are more compact less expensive and more reliable than their conventional counter parts.

The present invention provides for example rapid development of circuitry to manufacture more compact components that provide advantages such as weight savings self assembly components rapid manufacturing and micro circuitry for aerospace space homeland security national defense and a variety of other applications. The present invention also provides for example a system and method of integrating thermally curable media with SL without the need for intermediate washing curing and or drying. Thus the present invention could easily be converted to make complex 3D embedded circuitry for example without the addition of costly equipment.

The present invention overcomes the aforementioned limitations in an effective and efficient manner and provides for example a system and method of integrating stereolithography SL and fluid dispensing technology such as direct write DW . In accordance with the present invention single and multi material SL fabricated parts may be embedded with complex three dimensional 3D circuitry deposited by DW technology. The present invention also provides for increased micro fabrication and micro stereolithography without the need for part re registration. Moreover the present invention may cure the fluid using for example the same laser used in the SL machine an alternative laser other energy source or other curing means. Once the fluid is cured sufficiently the part may be re immersed in the resin without contamination and the SL building process can continue.

The present invention also provides an integrated rapid prototyping apparatus comprising one or more stereolithography apparatuses having one or more lasers adapted to cure a resin and one or more fluid dispensing apparatuses configured to communicate with the stereolithography apparatus and adapted to deposit fluid on the resin cured by the stereolithography apparatus.

The present invention further provides a method of integrated rapid prototyping comprising fabricating a first part layer using stereolithography apparatus and depositing fluid on the first part layer using a fluid dispensing apparatus with the capability of building complex 3D circuitry deposited by DW technology by using connector traces.

While the making and using of various embodiments of the present invention are discussed in detail below it should be appreciated that the present invention provides many applicable inventive concepts that can be embodied in a wide variety of specific contexts. The specific embodiments discussed herein are merely illustrative of specific ways to make and use the invention and do not delimit the scope of the invention.

Because the stereolithography SL and direct write DW technologies are integrated together the integrated system of the present invention depicted in can easily be retrofitted into existing SL systems. The integrated system comprises a preferred SL system with a platform and a vat adapted to vertically traverse along a Z traverse mechanism . SL system may include a platform that is optionally adapted to rotate about a horizontal axis for angled part and circuitry building. It should be understood by those skilled in the art that although depicts a single vat system a multiple vat system may also be employed. It should further be understood that although does not depict intermediate washing and or curing units a system which accommodates intermediate washing and or curing may also be employed.

Now referring to a DW system is preferably configured to the integrated system with for example a translation device or gantry . The gantry preferably has three directional stages gantry X stage gantry Y stage and gantry Z stage which provide for example fluid placement capability without intermediate calibration and or removal of the subject part. The fluid dispensing system supplies the fluid necessary to facilitate DW. The fluid dispensing system may be adapted to dispense a variety of fluids including for example inks conductive inks curable inks curable media conductive fluids electronic inks conductors insulators semi conductive materials magnetic materials spin materials piezoelectric materials opto electronic thermoelectric materials radio frequency materials ultraviolet curable resins controlled reaction materials precursor fluids metal organic liquids solutions suspensions sol gels nanoparticles colloidal fluids thermoplastics extrudable materials thermosets 2 part epoxy materials and any combination thereof.

As generally depicted in the gantry X stage facilitates X axis movement of the fluid dispensing system while the gantry Y stage and the gantry Z stage facilitates Y axis and Z axis movements respectively. The fluid dispensing and or other substance dispensing system depicted in preferably includes a pressurized fluid container configured with for example a start and stop valve mechanism to control the amount of fluid dispensed from the dispensing nozzle onto the subject part. It should be appreciated that virtually any fluid dispensing system for example non contact dispensing mechanisms non contact coaxial jet mechanisms direct contact dispensing mechanisms ink jet dispensing mechanisms pressurized nozzle dispensing mechanisms liquid droplet generators continuous ink dispensing mechanisms filamentary ink dispensing mechanisms extrusion devices wire feed mechanisms component placement mechanisms gear pumps air pressure pumps positive displacement pumps screw driven pumps syringe pumps fused deposition modeling nozzles mixing nozzles extrusion nozzles and any combination thereof could be integrated as described herein. As seen in the gantry configured with the fluid dispensing system is preferably also configured with a laser pin hole and sensor and a mechanical switch . It should be understood that although the present invention primarily describes fluid dispensing mechanisms the dispensing mechanism may also be adapted for automated placement of other tangible materials such as wires and electrical components.

The present invention provides an integrated system which ensures synchronized and accurate part building and circuit layout. In order to calibrate the SL system and fluid dispensing system the integrated system is preferably initialized and calibrated as depicted . As seen in one or more laser pin hole and sensors aid in X and Y axis calibration of the integrated system . For example a laser is directed to the laser pin hole and sensor as depicted in . When a maximum power is detected at the laser pin hole and sensor the laser should be located in the desired calibrated position of integrated system as depicted in . The mechanical switch on the other hand aids in Z axis calibration of gantry and fluid dispensing system as depicted in . Z axis calibration is preferably accomplished as depicted in by positioning the fluid dispensing system and specifically the mechanical switch in an initial position relative to the platform . Although the mechanical switch aids in accurately registering the laser with the disposition of the dispensing nozzle it is an optional step. It should be understood by those skilled in the art that there are numerous other methods to accomplish X Y and Z axis calibration for integrated system .

If the subject part requires circuitry the integrated system accommodates building circuitry without removing the subject part or requiring additional calibration. As depicted in the gantry is positioned to create the desired circuit over the subject part. The gantry is positioned by employing any or all of the three directional stages gantry X stage gantry Y stage and gantry Z stage as depicted in . The fluid dispensing system may then be lowered to a desired position relative to the subject part to begin the fluid deposition process generally depicted in . The fluid dispensing system is adapted build circuitry in any orientation including for example in the horizontal vertical or angled orientation. After fluid deposition is complete as depicted in the integrated system optionally returns the gantry to the initial position and preferably cures the fluid with laser the same laser used to perform SL or in some applications with an alternative laser . It should be understood however that other curing means may also be employed. After completing the fluid deposition process the integrated system levels the vat and may begin traditional SL part building on the subject part by optionally submerging the subject part into the resin and preferably swept with a recoating device. The vat is accordingly lowered as each build layer is complete as depicted in D and E. The integrated system thus provides an efficient system of integrating SL and DW technologies.

The integrated system additionally accommodates building for example multi layer circuitry as generally depicted in . The integrated system may create a multi layer circuit by dispensing conductive ink in such a manner as to provide continuous conductive path between the subject part s layers. For example the integrated system makes use of a connector trace which provides continuity of the circuit between the subject part s build layers as seen in . After curing the conductive ink with an alternative laser or other curing means as depicted in subject part building continues with or without swiping with for example a recoating blade not depicted . Examples of other curing means may include for example ultraviolet light sources particle bombarders chemical sprayers radiation impingers ink jets ovens fans pumps curing devices drying devices that incorporate convection conduction and or radiation heat transfer and any combinations thereof.

To build multilayer circuitry conductive ink is deposited in a continuous path between a first and second layer of the subject part. Thus a continuous multi layer circuit is created between the subject part s layers connected by a connector trace . It should be understood that the connector trace need not be positioned in a vertical fashion as depicted for example in . The connecter trace may be positioned in any fashion wherein the connector trace connects circuitry and provides a continuous electrical connection between different subject part layers.

It should be understood that there are a variety of materials which may be used for resin . For example hydrogels are curable fluid media and may be for example a natural polymer synthetic polymer or some combination thereof. Natural polymer hydrogels include polymers such as anionic polymers for example hyaluronic acid alginic acid pectin carrageenan chondroitin sulfate dextran sulfate cationic polymers for example chitosan and polylysine amphipathic polymers such as collagen gelatin carboxymethyl chitin and fibrin and neutral polymers for example dextran agarose and pullulan and their derivatives.

Synthetic polymer hydrogels on the other hand include for example polymers such as polyesters poly ethylene glycol poly lactic acid poly ethylene glycol poly ethylene glycol poly lactic co glycolic acid poly ethylene glycol poly ethylene glycol polycaprolactone poly ethylene glycol poly lactic acid poly ethylene glycol poly lactic acid poly hydroxyl butyrate poly propylene fumerate co ethylene glycol acrylate end groups and poly poly ethylene glycol poly butylene oxide terephthalate .

Synthetic polymer hydrogels may include for example other polymers such as poly ethylene glycol bis poly lactic acid acrylate poly ethylene glycol cyclodextrins poly ethylene glycol g poly acrylamide co Vamine polyacrylamide poly N isopropyl acrylamide co acrylic acid poly N isopropyl acrylamide co ethyl methacrylate poly vinyl acetate poly vinyl alcohol poly N vinyl pyrrolidone poly methyl methacrylate co hydroxyethyl methacrylate poly acrylonitrile co allyl sulfonate poly biscarboxy phenoxy phosphazene and poly glucosylethyl methacrylate sulfate .

Combinations of natural and synthetic polymer hydrogels may include polymers such as poly polyethylene glycol co peptides alginate g polyethylene oxide polypropylene oxide polyethylene oxide poly polylactic co glycolic acid co serine collagen acrylate alginate acrylate poly hydroxyethly methacyrlate g peptide poly hydroxyethyl methacyrlate Matrigel and hyraluronic acid g N isopropyl acrylamide .

Yet other examples of resins include for example 1 radically polymerizable organic compounds such as urethane meth acrylate oligester meth acrylate epoxy meth acrylate thiol compound ene compound and photosensitive polyimide 2 cationically polymerizable organic compounds such as an epoxy compound cyclic ether compound cyclic lactone compound cyclic acetal compound clycle thioesther compound spiro orthoester compound and vinyl ether compound 3 radically polymerizable organic compound and a catonically polymerizable organic compound and 4 radically polymerizable organic compound an ethylenically unsaturated monomer a polyether polyol compound and elastomer particles.

Moreover also in accordance with the present invention multi colored manufacturing is accomplished by mixing pigments paints dyes and or other color media into the conductive ink and or resin thereby facilitating the manufacture of multi colored prototypes models and circuitry. Similarly other materials may optionally be mixed into the conductive inks and or resin to alter the strength thermal mechanical optical electrical functional and or biofunctional properties thereby facilitating the manufacture of multi functional multi material multi colored multi element and or implantable prototypes models finished products and circuits. The present invention thus facilitates using SL and DW technology to aid in manufacturing of parts and circuitry in an endless number of materials colors and designs.

Thus the present invention thus provides for example a system and method of integrating fluid media dispensing technology such as DW technologies with RP technologies such as SL. The present invention is capable of efficiently building single and multi material SL fabricated parts with complex three dimensional embedded circuitry using DW without the need for part re registration.

Although a preferred system and method for integrating thermally curable media during stereolithography is discussed in detail herein it will be appreciated that the present invention provides many applicable inventive concepts that can be embodied in a wide variety of specific contexts. For example while the description has principally referenced curable ink deposition it is to be understood that the present invention may also be utilized for other curable media deposition such as thermally curable media deposition curable conductive material deposition ultraviolet curable resins or controlled reaction materials such as 2 part epoxies. The specific embodiments discussed herein are merely illustrative of specific ways to make and use the invention and do not delimit the scope of the invention. Those skilled in the art will recognize that various substitutions and modifications may be made to the invention without departing from the scope and spirit of the appended claims.

