---

title: Distributing live performances
abstract: An audio codec uses one or more access points to broadcast or unicast a performance to a mobile digital media device that is registered and therefore is authorized to receive the performance. Prior to receiving, the mobile digital media device is authenticated by replying to an RFID query from one or more access points. If the mobile digital media device is registered, a secure key is sent to the mobile digital media device. The mobile digital media device uses the secure key to decrypt music being broadcasted or unicasted to receive the distribution of the live performances in the music venue.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07693978&OS=07693978&RS=07693978
owner: EB Technologies, LLC
number: 07693978
owner_city: Seattle
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050719
---
The present invention relates generally to media distribution and more particularly to distributing live media such as music or lectures to registered members of the audience within a venue.

Country music is derived from or imitates the folk style of the southern U.S. or of the Western cowboy. Folk songs on which country music is based are traditional songs that are typically characterized by stanzaic form refrain and simplicity of melody. Blues are songs of lamentation usually characterized by 12 bar phrases and 3 line stanzas in which the words of the second line usually repeat those of the first as well as the continual occurrence of blue notes in melody and harmony. Rock often incorporates elements of country folk and blues to compose popular music usually played on electronically amplified instruments and characterized by a heavily accented beat and much repetition of simple phrases.

There are many music venues such as the gentle green slope of a city s park a sports stadium or a smoky bar in which music from these genres is performed live before an audience. Unlike a studio where quality audio recordings can be properly made often these live performances are recorded by a fan s tape recorder which bootleg recording is typically of poor condition and illegal. Even if these live performances were recorded by better instruments however they would typically not be immediately available for members of the audience to legally purchase and pick up. Often it takes days after a live performance for which members of the audience have ordered the music for a compact disc to arrive in the mail. However illustrates an instance where recordings of live performances can be made available after only 20 to 30 minutes to members of the audience.

While a live performance is given at the music venue one or more microphones placed at the music venue transmit the speech and music from the live performance to a truck or other facilities within proximity to the music venue . There are recording devices on the truck or other facilities to record the speech and music as picked up by the microphones. The speech and music are burned onto a compact disc which is an optical storage medium for digital data usually audio.

Today many people are downloading music in digital form to their computer over the Internet using popular Web sites such as iTunes from Apple Computer Inc. The major problem with the Internet is the difficulty of ensuring that only authorized individuals are allowed to download music. Without resolution to the problem of obtaining high quality media from live performances such as music that can be taken away as a memento of the experience users may resort to tape recording live performances without authorization and organizations may forgo digital media distribution causing demand for legal copies to diminish in the marketplace. Thus there is a need for a system method and computer readable medium for distributing live performances while avoiding or reducing the foregoing and other problems associated with existing systems.

In accordance with this invention a system and method for distributing music is provided. The system form of the invention includes a system for digitally distributing live performances which comprises a mobile digital media device capable of emitting radio frequency identification information and communicating over a wireless local area network. The system further comprises a live music distribution system for distributing live performances to the mobile digital media device over the wireless local area network when the presence of the mobile digital media device is detected by the emitted radio frequency identification information and the mobile digital media device is registered to receive the distribution of live performances at a venue. The live performances include music a lecture an audio drama or a speech. The live music distribution system includes a mixing board for processing sounds collected from the venue for optimizing the reproduction of sounds. The live music distribution system includes a music codec for transforming the sounds into a media format that is acceptable to the mobile digital media device. The live music distribution system includes a database for storing a registration of the mobile digital media device the registration allowing the mobile digital media device to receive the distribution of live performances at the venue.

In accordance with further aspects of this invention another system form of the invention includes a system for digitally distributing live performances. The system comprises means for storing live performances emitting radio frequency identification information and communicating over a wireless local area network. The system further comprises a means for distributing live performances to the means for storing live performances over the wireless local area network when the presence of the means for storing live performances is detected by the emitted radio frequency identification information and the means for storing live performances is registered to receive the distribution of live performances at a venue. Live performances include music or a lecture. The means for distributing live performances includes a means for processing sounds collected from the venue for optimizing the reproduction of sounds. The means for distributing live performances includes means for transforming the sounds into a media format that is acceptable to the mobile digital media device. The means for distributing live performances includes means for storing a registration of the mobile digital media device the registration allowing the mobile digital media device to receive the distribution of live performances at the venue.

In accordance with further aspects of this invention a method form of the invention includes a method for distributing live performances which comprises registering a mobile digital media device before a live performance at a venue. The act of registering includes interrogating the mobile digital media device for its radio frequency identification serial number. The method further includes detecting the presence of the mobile digital media device at the venue by detecting the emission of the radio frequency identification serial number of the mobile digital media device. The method also includes distributing the live performance to the mobile digital media device via a wireless local area network at the venue if the radio frequency identification serial number of the mobile digital media device matches and is registered by the act of registering. The act of registering optionally includes interrogating the mobile digital media device to determine a public key of the mobile digital media device for encryption. The act of registering includes inputting a wired equivalent privacy key for decryption of the distribution of the live performance. The act of detecting optionally includes encrypting a wired equivalent privacy key with a public key of the mobile digital media device and sending the encrypted wired equivalent privacy key to the mobile digital media device for decryption. The act of distributing includes distributing over a Web site when the mobile digital media device fails to receive the distribution of the live performance over the wireless local area network at the venue.

Various embodiments of the present invention provide an electronic retail system for the distribution of live performances to mobile digital media devices such as a cellular phone or an Apple iPod using suitable distribution technologies such as radio frequency identification RFID technology and wireless local area access protocol. Various embodiments of the present invention suitably allow the distribution of live performances automatically by subscription services pre purchase services or user triggered events such as a button click. A transaction between a member of the audience having a mobile digital media device and the music venue is possible using various embodiments of the present invention. Prior to the distribution of live performances to mobile digital media devices of members of the audience at a venue identities of certain members of the audience who are allowed to receive the distribution are authenticated by various embodiments of the present invention. This can be accomplished without the user interactions.

Prior to a live performance a member of the audience can enter into a service agreement at the time of purchasing the mobile digital media device or much later with a vendor at the venue to obtain the right to receive distribution of the particular live performance. The vendor registers the member of the audience in a sales database. The member of the audience enters the music venue to enjoy the live performance. During the performance music is picked up by microphones and is sent as media to the mixing board which processes the music to optimize its reproduction through loudspeakers at the music venue and for mobile digital media devices. The optimized music is sent to a music codec where the music is transformed into a desired format. In a hardware form the music codec can be a dedicated computing machine or a card residing in a computing machine. In a software form the music codec is a piece of software running on a computing machine such as a personal computer. One suitable example of the software form of the music codec includes converting a song on a CD into an MP3 media file. Preferably digital audio signal is sent to an audio PCI card on a computing machine such as a personal computer and the digital audio signal is broken into regions and is encoded using a suitable encoding software such as Windows Media Encoder. The music codec uses one or more access points to broadcast or unicast the music to a mobile digital media device that is registered and therefore is authorized to receive the music. Prior to receiving the mobile digital media device is authenticated by replying to an RFID query from one or more RFID transponders. The mobile digital media device is authenticated if it is registered with the sales database. If the mobile digital media device is registered a secure key is sent to the mobile digital media device. The mobile digital media device uses the secure key to decrypt music being broadcasted or unicasted to obtain the distribution of the live performance in the venue.

An exemplary electronic system as shown in shows that concertgoers approach a vendor to obtain pre purchase services or to sign up for subscription services for obtaining a distribution of live performances at a music venue . This can be obviated if the concertgoers have already executed a service agreement previously such as at the time the concertgoers purchase the mobile digital media device. The concertgoers may provide to the vendor their tickets as proof of their ability to gain entry to the music venue . If the concertgoers also desire to purchase the distribution of live performances at the music venue the concertgoers complete their financial transactions with the vendor to obtain the distribution of live performances. The concertgoers also can specify the data format in which the live performances are to be distributed to them.

The vendor can be a person or a machine in accordance with various embodiments of the present invention. When the vendor is embodied as a person preferably the vendor is available within proximity to the music venue where the concertgoers can walk up to the vendor to complete financial transactions to enable the concertgoers to receive the distribution of live performances. For example the concertgoers may provide cash or a credit card to the vendor as payment for the activation of the ability to receive a distribution of live performances within the music venue . When the vendor is embodied as a machine preferably the vendor is a kiosk or other computing device with user interface screens that enables the concertgoers to specify their desire to receive the distribution of live performances and to specify methods of payment for the distribution of live performances. When payment is duly received from the concertgoers the vendor registers the concertgoers with the live music distribution system . The concertgoers then join the audience to enjoy the live performance given at the music venue .

As shown at microphones not shown are placed throughout a music venue to transmit sounds generated on stage from the live performance occurring at the music venue . These sounds are sent to a mixing board for clarification optimization and amplification before they are reproduced by the loudspeakers at the music venue . The operator at the mixing board processes these sounds to create a stereo image for the audience. The operator may opt to master the sounds by performing dynamic control or equalization on the sounds to make it more friendly for both the music venue and the mobile digital media device . In various embodiments of the present invention the output coming from the mixing board is not only directed to the loudspeakers but the output is also directed to a music codec . In other words the microphones are used for both the loudspeakers in the venue but also for the recording process. Preferably the sound processing for the loudspeakers is separate from the sound processing for the mobile digital media device . As would be appreciated by one skilled in the art it is possible to have a completely different split of the microphone signals going to a separate console and processing for the recordings. Some embodiments of the present invention include a separate stereo feed coming from a console that is mixing for the loudspeakers but the dynamic control and equalization on that stereo signal is separate from the signals being sent to the loudspeakers.

The music codec may be configured as a card for insertion into a slot in a personal computer or it can be a standalone unit mountable on a rack. The music codec converts the output of the microphones into any suitable media formats as specified by the registration stored in a database . One suitable media format includes MPEG Audio Layer 3 MP3 a digital audio coding scheme used in distributing recorded music over the Internet. MP3 shrinks the size of an audio file by a factor of 10 to 12 without seriously degrading the quality CD recording level of the sound. MP3 files are given the file extension .mp3.

After the music codec has transformed the output of the mixing board into a media format suitable for a mobile digital media device of a registered member of the audience the digitized live performances are sent to one or more Wi Fi access points and RFID transponders where the digitized live performances are broadcast or unicast to one or more mobile digital media devices held by members of the audience at the music venue . Wi Fi is a wireless local area network protocol 802.11b as specified by the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers IEEE . This wireless local area network protocol allows secure high speed wireless network access and mobile access to a network infrastructure such as that at the music venue . Until the adoption of Wi Fi in order to obtain high speed network access to a local area network the networked client needed to be physically connected to the local area network with some type of wiring. RFID is a generic term for technologies that use radio waves to automatically identify mobile digital media devices in the music venue . There are several methods of identification but a preferred method is to store a serial number which identifies a particular mobile digital media device on a microchip.

It is preferred that prior to broadcast or unicast by Wi Fi access points and RFID transponders one or more Wi Fi access points and RFID transponders detect the presence of the mobile digital media device . This detection occurs when the mobile digital media device responds to a query of the RFID transponders . A sales database can be consulted by the RFID transponders to authenticate that the mobile digital media device is allowed to receive distribution of live performances at the music venue . The sales database preferably receives registration information from the concertgoers or the vendor prior to the live performance at the music venue . The sales database receives a unique identification of the mobile digital media device and verifies that the mobile digital media device is registered for receiving recordings of live performances at the music venue . It is preferred that the mobile digital media device has suitable wireless networking capability to receive media distribution from a distribution database via one or more Wi Fi access points at the music venue. One suitable wireless networking protocol that the mobile digital media device can comply with is IEEE 802.11b or 802.11g. Other suitable wireless networking protocols are possible.

Applications interact with the Wi Fi component the RFID component and the encrypt and authenticate component to receive a media download. The RFID component allows the mobile digital media device to uniquely identify itself externally and the RFID component additionally is capable of receiving Wi Fi networking security settings to ensure the safe receipt of media downloads. The security settings include the destination MAC address of the mobile digital media device Wi Fi SSID and Wi Fi encryption key such as WEP or WPA. The MAC address is part of a MAC frame of a wireless local area network protocol such as IEEE 802.11g which indicates among other things the destination address of the mobile digital media device which is allowed to receive frames of distribution of live media.

Digressing Although it is possible for a music venue in which the mobile digital media device operates has a wireless local area network it is likely that a third party service provider may need to bring into the music venue equipment necessary to distribute the music over the wireless local area network which has been configured to include several main components instances of mobile digital media device acting as stations wireless access points RFID transponders basic service sets and a distribution system. A basic service set is a wireless network consisting of a single wireless access point supporting one or more mobile digital media devices. The mobile digital media devices communicate through the access points or the RFID transponders. The access point provides connectivity to the wired local area network whereas the RFID transponders allow connectivity to the RFID component . The access points of multiple basic service sets are interconnected by the distribution system. This allows members of the audience to move about because the mobile digital media devices can move from one basic service set to another basic service set while maintaining communication.

It is preferred that various embodiments of the present invention use the infrastructure mode of the wireless local area network protocol. The infrastructure mode defines a service set identifier SSID also known as the wireless network name which identifies the wireless network. The SSID is a name configured on the wireless access point that identifies the wireless network. In infrastructure mode a mobile digital media device uses a wireless access point to access the resources of a traditionally wired network on which a sales database or a distribution database are coupled. Among the address information that is contained in the MAC frame is the BSS identifier or BSSID. The BSSID uniquely identifies each basic service set operating at a music venue. The BSSID is typically the MAC address of the access point used in various embodiments of the present invention. The WEP key is also known as a wired equivalent privacy key which provides data confidentiality services by encrypting the data sent between wireless nodes. In the MAC frame there is a field to indicate whether a WEP key is used and thereby a determination of whether encryption and authentication is used by the MAC frame. In other words a WEP key is used to provide data confidentiality services by encrypting the data sent between wireless nodes. Setting a WEP flag in the MAC header of the MAC frame indicates that a frame is encrypted with WEP encryption. WEP provides data integrity by including an integrity check value in the encrypted portion of the wireless frame. It is preferred that either the multicast global WEP key is used to protect multicast and broadcast traffic from a wireless access point to all of the mobile digital media devices or for a unicast session WEP key to protect unicast traffic between a mobile digital media device and a wireless access point.

An alternative to the WEP key is the Wi Fi protected access WPA standard which is interim until IEEE 802.11i is ratified. These standards can supplant the use of the WEP key to obtain alternative methods of data encryption and network authentication.

From terminal A the consumer goes to a music event and enters the venue with the mobile digital media device. See block . Next at block an RFID transponder within the venue queries the mobile digital media device. If the mobile digital media device is not powered up preferably the RFID chip within the device wakes the device for responding to the queries from the RFID transponder. The device responds to the query with its RFID identification and destination MAC address. See block . Next at block the RFID transponder sends the RFID identification to the sales database. The RFID transponder constantly monitors for RFID devices and it also actively listens for replies to its queries. A test is performed at decision block to determine whether the RFID identification in the sales database is valid. If the answer to the test at decision block is no in other words the RFID identification is not among the identifications of mobile digital media devices registered to receive a download of the live performance the method terminates execution and no further RFID communications with the mobile digital media device will occur. If the answer to the test at decision block is yes in other words the mobile digital media device is registered and it is authorized to receive a download of a live performance the method continues to another continuation terminal terminal A .

From terminal A the method forwards the destination MAC address to Wi Fi access points. See block . The Wi Fi access points store the destination MAC address of the mobile digital media device for subsequent communication. Next at block the RFID transponder sends a service set identifier SSID and a security key such as WEP or WPA among others to the mobile digital media device. The method then continues to block where the mobile digital media device uses the SSID and the security key to set Wi Fi security settings for Wi Fi communication. At decision block a test is performed to determine whether there were any errors in the RFID communication. If the answer to the test at decision block is yes the method loops back to block where the above identified processing steps are repeated. Otherwise if the answer to the test at decision block is no the method continues to another continuation terminal terminal A .

From terminal A the mobile digital media device begins network negotiation with Wi Fi access points including dynamic host configuration DHCP and domain name system DNS registration. See block . Next at block the method optionally initiates an authentication system being used. The sales database uses the RFID identification as a key to determine the billing option chosen by the consumer. A test is performed at decision block to determine whether the consumer has paid for the music distribution of the live performance. If the answer to the test at decision block is no the method proceeds to another continuation terminal terminal A . Otherwise if the answer to the test at decision block is yes the method proceeds to also another continuation terminal terminal A . The sales database communicates with the mobile digital media device through a centralized Web server. The Web server provides Web pages acting as a user interface for the consumer to interact with to confirm music selection or payment information. For example if the consumer has previously agreed to provide credit card information or monthly billing plan the sales database through the Web server presents a screen for the user to indicate that the consumer desires to download the music distribution for the particular live performance that is occurring at a venue.

From terminal A the method proceeds to a test performed at decision block to determine whether the billing option allows purchase by the consumer on a per show basis. If the answer is no to the test at decision block the method terminates execution. Otherwise if the answer to the test at decision block is yes at block a Web server pushes a form or other tag based pages to the consumer s mobile digital media device requesting a choice of paying by cash or by credit card. A test is performed at decision block to determine whether the consumer selected a cash payment. If the answer to the test at decision block is yes the method proceeds to another continuation terminal terminal A . If the answer to the test at decision block is no however the method proceeds to another continuation terminal terminal A .

From terminal A the Web server pushes a response in the form of a Web page asking the consumer to visit a vendor within proximity to the venue. See block . Next at block the vendor receives cash from the consumer and enters the RFID identification of the mobile digital media device of the consumer into the sales database so as to validate it for purchasing media of the particular show being performed at the venue. The method then continues to terminal A.

From terminal A the method proceeds to block where the Web server pushes a form created from a tag based language such as HTML or XML asking the consumer to enter credit card information. Sensitive financial information provided to various embodiments of the present invention can be securely communicated via suitable means of encryption. One suitable means includes secure socket layers SSL which is a protocol developed to ensure security and privacy in Internet communications. The method then continues to block where the sales database processes the credit card information and validates the purchase of the media for a particular show. The method then continues to terminal A.

From terminal A the method proceeds to block where the distribution database is updated with the RFID identification of the mobile digital media device to indicate that it can receive music distribution. Next at block the distribution database waits for the media to become available. In other words the distribution database waits until there are recorded media in the database for it to distribute to the mobile digital media device and then it distributes the media as the performance occurs. Performers and instruments on stage are captured by microphones. Microphone signals are sent to a mixing console where they are processed with equalization dynamic control and other effects to create a stereo signal. See block . At block the stereo signal is sent to loudspeakers in a recording system. The loudspeakers reproduce a sound for the members of the audience to enjoy at the venue. The recording system is one among a number of components for processing the stereo signal for distribution to the mobile digital media device. The stereo signal is mastered by the recording system with equalization and dynamic control at block . The method then proceeds to another continuation terminal terminal A .

From terminal A the method proceeds to block where the mastered stereo signal is converted to a digital signal. Next at block the digital signal is separated song by song into audio regions. The audio regions are encoded into a suitable compressed digital audio format. See block . Optionally at block digital rights management can be encoded into the compressed audio if used. At block the compressed audio songs are saved to the distribution database along with metadata e.g. ID3 tags . Some metadata includes the name of the song the artist the composer and so on. The method proceeds to block where the distribution database begins distributing the compressed audio songs to the mobile digital media device in the venue via one or more Wi Fi access points. The method continues at another continuation terminal terminal A .

From terminal A cyclic redundancy check CRC check sum is enabled. See block . At block the mobile digital media device receives the compressed audio songs the metadata and the CRC check sum. A test is performed at decision block to determine whether the CRC check sum matches. If the answer is yes to the test at decision block the method continues to another continuation terminal terminal A . If the answer to the test at decision block is no the method proceeds to block where the mobile digital media device discards the song for which the CRC check sum does not match. At block the problem is communicated with the distribution database and the distribution database marks songs that were not downloaded successfully. The method then continues to terminal A.

From terminal A the live performance is finished. See block . At block the distribution database sends the final check sum to the mobile digital media device. A test is performed at decision block to determine whether the final CRC check sum matches. If the answer is no to the test at decision block the problem is communicated to the distribution database and the distribution database marks that none of the songs were successfully downloaded to the mobile digital media device. See block . The consumer can subsequently go to a particular Web site for final media retrieval given the problem of downloading at the venue. The method then terminates execution. If the answer to the test at decision block is yes the method continues to block where the Wi Fi information such as SSID WEP or WPA key is removed and the connection to the wireless local area network is terminated. The method then terminates execution.

There are at least four layers of communication used by various embodiments of the present invention. The first layer includes RFID communication which initiates the distribution of live performance by validating a unique identifier connected with the mobile digital media device and negotiates initial Wi Fi security settings between the mobile digital media device and the music distribution system. The second layer is a Wi Fi communication layer to support subsequent data transport or downloading of songs or other media to the mobile digital media device. The Wi Fi communication occurs through TCP IP and radio frequency security measures such as using the Wi Fi SSID the WEP key or the WPA key. The third layer is entirely optional and is the authentication layer that could be based on a PKI model IP SEC for file encryption or digital signatures and so on. The fourth layer includes the application layer which provides a Web interface to the Web server for financial transactions and media streaming. The use of SSL ensures security for transport of data between the Web server the sales database the distribution database and the mobile digital media device such as financial information and credit card information.

While the preferred embodiment of the invention has been illustrated and described it will be appreciated that various changes can be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. For example a lecture is considered to be a live performance that can be distributed by various embodiments of the present invention. In other words the term live performance includes any public presentation in which audio can be recorded and distributed contemporaneously to a mobile digital media device via a wireless local area network.

