---

title: Service provisioning in a communications system
abstract: A service provisioning mediator entity in a communications system is provided with information defining a set of service provisioning triggering messages. In response to receiving a service provisioning triggering message including an identifier associated with a user from a further network entity involved in providing the service to the user, the service provisioning mediator entity triggers service provisioning in the communications system for the user. The service provisioning triggering message may be sent by a controlling network entity upon receiving from an information store a message indicating that a user attempting to register is not recognized. If the user is recognized, trigger information in the information store may be used for directed a session to a network entity configured to handle service provisioning triggering messages. As a further alternative, a user may request service provisioning by sending a service provisioning triggering message from a communication device.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09641624&OS=09641624&RS=09641624
owner: NOKIA SOLUTIONS AND NETWORKS OY
number: 09641624
owner_city: Espoo
owner_country: FI
publication_date: 20050811
---
The present invention relates in general to service provisioning in communications systems. The invention relates in particular but is not restricted to auto provisioning of services.

A communication system can be seen as a facility that enables communication sessions between two or more entities such as user equipment and or other nodes associated with the communication system. The communication may comprise for example communication of voice data multimedia and so on. Communication systems providing wireless communication for communications devices including various user equipment are known. An example of the wireless systems is the public land mobile network PLMN . Another example is the wireless local area network WLAN .

A PLMN is typically a cellular system wherein a base transceiver station BTS or similar access entity serves user equipment UE such as mobile stations MS via a wireless interface between these entities. The operation of the apparatus required for the communication can be controlled by one or several control entities. The various control entities may be interconnected. One or more gateway nodes may also be provided for connecting the cellular network to other networks such as to another cellular system or to a public switched telephone network PSTN and or other communication networks such as an IP Internet Protocol and or other packet switched data networks.

A cellular network can thus provide access to various services and applications provided by the cellular network or by entities or networks external to the cellular network. The same is true also for other wireless networks connected to further networks. There are proposals for architectures for providing services in an access network independent manner. As an example this means providing conference call facilities can be used by any communications device having certain defined capabilities and accessing the conference call facilities via any access network.

One proposal for providing services independently of the specific access network used by a communications device is the IP Multimedia Subsystem IMS defined in the 3rd Generation partnership project 3GPP specifications. The IMS services can be accessed via any access network providing IP connectivity. The General Packet Radio Service GRPS relating to the Global System for Mobile Communications GSM and the Universal Mobile Telecommunications System UMTS are two examples of an IP Connectivity Access Network ICAN for IMS.

The IMS as any communication system defines various entities for controlling service subscriptions and for providing services to users. In the IMS these entities are implemented as servers in a network. In order to be able to request for a service from a communication system a user typically needs to have a subscription to the service and needs to be registered in the system in a serving control entity. In the IMS information about the subscribers subscribers profiles is stored in a home subscriber server HSS and the serving control entity is a Serving Call Service Control Function S CSCF entity. A user may register to the serving control entity via an access entity of the communication system. As mentioned above the IMS is access network independent so it is sufficient that the access network provides IP connectivity.

In addition to the serving control entity the user may need to be associated with a proxy control entity. In the IMS the proxy control entity is the P CSCF. The proxy entity is assigned to an area within which the user has roamed. For a more general case when a user accesses the network through an arbitrary type of access network it can be assumed that the access network assigns a proxy control entity for controlling the accessed services from that network point of view e.g. for bandwidth management.

In the IMS a call state control function CSCF entity may provide functions such as serving call state control S CSCF proxy call state control P CSCF and interrogating call state control I CSCF . Control functions may also be provided by entities such as a home subscriber server HSS and various application servers.

The communication between the user equipment communications device and elements of a communication network is typically based on an appropriate communication protocol or on a set of appropriate communication protocols. A communication system furthermore typically operates in accordance with a given standard or specification which sets out what the various elements of the system are permitted to do and how that should be achieved. Communication protocols and or parameters which shall be used for a given connection may also be defined. In other words a specific set of rules on which the communication can be based needs to be defined to enable communication by means of the system.

A communications protocol typically defines messages or message sequences relating to various actions and also default actions if for example a requested action cannot be carried out. A protocol typically has also various specified time limits for receiving responses to sent messages. If a response is delayed the protocol typically does not function properly. There may be need to send a message relating to a certain action repetitiously. In a worst case the requested action is not carried out at all.

One of the control protocols used in the IMS is the Session Initiation Protocol SIP . SIP is a protocol specified in the Request for Comments RFC 3261 supplied to the Internet Engineering Task Force IETF . In connection with the IMS the session initiation protocol is used for example for registering to the S CSCF and for setting up sessions. It shall be appreciated that the term session used in this document refers to any communication a user may have such as to a call data e.g. web browsing or multimedia communication and so on. Regarding the delays in receiving a response to a certain SIP message in connection with the IMS a registration to a S CSCF may fail or a requested session may not be established.

For enabling end to end SIP connectivity in IMS a variety of different registries need to be provisioned to contain consistent data for example for routing and authentication purposes. Provisioning refers in this context typically to submitting user profile information defining access to services and settings for the service into information stores registers .

Provisioning is traditionally done through provisioning mediators who provision sets of new or existing customers subscribers into a network. In traditional flow through provisioning the mediators usually do not care if the subscription is really used in the network. The registers may therefore contain irrelevant information and provisioning of services that are not going to be used may cause unnecessary use of resources.

An alternative approach to traditional provisioning of services is autoprovisioning. Autoprovisioning usually means that registries containing user profile information are provisioned when a service session is being set up for the first time. In other words autoprovisioning is typically done when a session controller plane does not either recognise end user or profile information is not found in relevant registers.

At least one problem relating to autoprovisioning is that the provisioning mediators do not currently have access to user traffic neither do they handle the session controller logic. Therefore the provisioning mediators cannot participate in figuring out when auto provisioning is actually needed. Session controller plane elements are typically separate from the management plane and therefore the session control plane elements do not participate in management plane traffic.

It shall be appreciated that although the above discussed problems relate to the IMS similar disadvantages may be associated with other systems as well and thus the description is not limited to these examples.

It is an aim of embodiments of the present invention to address one or more of the problems discussed above.

A first aspect of the invention relates to a method for provisioning services in a communications system said method comprising

A second aspect of the invention relates to a service provisioning mediator entity for a communications system comprising

A third aspect of the invention relates to a communications system comprising at least a service provisioning mediator entity and at least one further network entity involved in providing services to at least one user said service provisioning mediator entity comprising

A fourth aspect of the invention relates to a method for handling registration messages in a controlling network entity said method comprising

A fifth aspect of the invention relates to a device for handling registration messages in a communications system configured to

A seventh aspect of the invention relates to a method for directing sessions in a communication system said method comprising

An eighth aspect of the invention relates to an information store configured to store user information for a plurality of users said user information relating to an identifier associated with a user and comprising at least trigger information wherein said trigger information relating to at least one user defines that a session is directed to a network entity configured to handle service provisioning triggering messages.

A tenth aspect of the invention relates to a method for requesting service provisioning in a communications device comprising

A twelfth aspect of the invention relates to a communications system comprising at least a communications device and a service provisioning mediator entity said communications device configured to

A thirteenth aspect of the invention relates to a method for handling establishment of a packet data connection said method comprising

A fourteenth aspect of the invention relates to a network element for handling establishment of a packet data connection said network element configured to

In the following embodiments of the invention are discussed in detail with reference to the IP Multimedia Subsystem IMS but it is appreciated that embodiments of the invention may be applicable in other communications system having similar network elements and providing similar functionality as the IMS.

A user information store may also be provided for storing information associated with the subscription of the respective user. The user information store may locate in a server of the home network of the subscription. Such subscriber information store may be called by different terms in different communication systems and in the IMS the subscriber information store is called a Home Subscriber Server HSS . shows a home subscriber server HSS . The HSS can be queried by other function entities over the appropriate reference points e.g. during session set up procedures and later. The subscriber information may include information such as data required for authentication purposes e.g. registration identities of the subscriber or the user equipment authentication key and so on. The HSS can also be used for storing permanently subscriber profile information.

The session initiation protocol SIP is used for controlling sessions in the IMS. At least the following entities thus use SIP the communications device UE the controlling entity S CSCF and the proxying entity P CSCF. The SIP architecture contains for example a SIP client a SIP server a SIP proxy and a User Agent UA . A SIP client is any network element that sends SIP requests and receives SIP responses. A SIP server is a network element that receives SIP requests in order to service them and sends back SIP responses to those requests. A SIP proxy is an intermediary entity that acts as both a SIP server and a SIP client for the purpose of making requests on behalf of other SIP clients. A SIP proxy server primarily plays the role of routing. A User Agent is a logical entity that can act as both a user agent client UAC and user agent server UAS . A user agent client is a logical entity that creates a new request and then uses the client transaction state machinery to send it. The role of UAC lasts only for the duration of that transaction. In other words if a piece of software initiates a request it acts as a UAC for the duration of that transaction. If it receives a request later it assumes the role of a user agent server for the processing of that transaction.

Referring to the IMS the communications device using the IMS services acts in general as a SIP user agent. The proxy entity P CSCF acts in general as a SIP proxy but in some cases also as a SIP User Agent. The controlling entity S CSCF acts in general as a SIP proxy but has also some capabilities of a SIP registrar and accepts registering requests. A more detailed description of the capabilities of the communications device user equipment S CSCF and P CSCF can be found in the 3GPP specification TS 24.229 version 5.6.0 Release 5.

In the case of traditional service provisioning various information stores are updated before the user actually accesses the service to contain information relating to a user making a service subscription. For example the Home Subscriber Server and the Domain Name Server may be updated by management plane entities to contain information relating to the subscription.

Returning to autoprovisioning after designing and deploying the service it is possible to create a service package specification for autoprovisioning. This service package specification may be stored in a service package information store for example in a Service Catalogue . For example for autoprovisioning the IMS service an IMS service package is created and stored in a service package information store. This service package information store may contain also other service packages relating to services applications that can be autoprovisioned. A service management entity for example a Profile Manager may be provided for managing and monitoring autoprovisioned service subscriptions. An administrative person may for example via a specifically designed user interface have access to the Service Catalogue via the Profile Manager .

In the following description reference is made to a service provisioning mediator entity. A service provisioning mediator entity is not essential for autoprovisioning in a communications system but it provides a feasible way to handle autoprovisioning requests. In the service provisioning mediator entity is called a Profile Proxy . The features of the service provisioning mediator entity maybe implemented as part of a service management entity for example as part of the Profile Manager in .

When a new service has been deployed in the network the service provisioning mediator entity is typically informed about the new service. This way the service provisioning mediator entity knows which services can be provisioned in the communications system. It is possible that the service provisioning mediator entity is informed about new service for example periodically or in response to deploying a new service.

Embodiments of the invention relate to triggering service provisioning in a communications system in response to receiving in the service provisioning mediator entity a service provisioning triggering message from a network element involved in providing a service that is sending information forming a part of a service and or in providing a communications session to a user. Traditionally service provisioning has been triggered by management network entities. Some embodiments concentrate on IMS auto provisioning when network does not recognize end user at all for example because the HSS does not contain subscription information or subscription is only partly filled and completion of subscription is required. Further embodiments of the invention are applicable also for autoprovisioning any application server for a user.

Embodiments of the present invention bridge a gap between session controller and management planes. Earlier session control and management have been seen as entities separate from each other. Here a way to route for example SIP sessions to the service provisioning mediator entity the Profile Proxy in is introduced. The service provisioning mediator entity typically initiates autoprovisioning for example via the profile manager to all relevant registries and other network elements.

Referring to the actual service provisioning in a communications system may occur after the triggering by the Profile Proxy similarly as when services are provisioned by the management plane entities. For example the Profile Manager may update information in the Service Subscription store a HSS and or a Domain Name Server . The Profile Manager may typically at least when provisioning an application contact a Profile Server and the Profile Server in turn updates information in relevant application servers 

It is appreciated that although shows a number of network entities relating to service provisioning the Profile Proxy Profile Manager the Profile Server the functionality relating to these network entities may be supported in a communications system by a different configuration of network entities.

Embodiments of the invention reduce the need of static capacity of for example IMS network elements. Embodiments also realize the concept of active end user that helps the optimizing the capacity as well as pricing the services provided by the IMS elements. An active end user is an end user that actually uses the IMS network. Embodiments of the invention are compliant with the 3GPP standards of IMS. Furthermore embodiments of the invention may utilise many existing and new standards such as OSS J Operation Support System through Java initiative and therefore embodiments of the invention are also applicable for multi vendor environments.

As discussed in more detail below a first embodiment of the invention relates to provisioning access to the communications system. A second embodiment of the invention relates to provisioning access to services supported by the communications system for example access to various applications. A third embodiment relates to provisioning access to applications when a communications device detects need for the service provisioning.

It is therefore appreciated that the service provisioning triggering message may be sent from various network entities. Furthermore service provisioning triggering messages sent by different network entities may be different. The discussion below will provide some examples. As the Profile Proxy or another similar network entity may be responsible also for other functionality than triggering service provisioning there typically is need to define a set of service provisioning triggering messages. This way the Profile Proxy can easily detect need for service provisioning. The Profile Proxy may determine which service needs to be provisioned for example based on information included in the service provisioning triggering message e.g. an application to be provisioned is explicitly identified in the service provisioning message or based on the service provisioning message itself e.g. a forwarded registration message may indicate request to provision access to the communication system to which the user tried to register .

In accordance with the first embodiment when the control entity determines that the user is unrecognised the control entity instead of sending an error message to the user or otherwise terminating the session set up sends a service provisioning triggering message arrow for the user. Typically this service provisioning triggering message is sent to the Profile Proxy or to other similar service provisioning mediator entity in the communications system. The service provisioning triggering message may be a forwarded registration message or a message containing the registration message. Alternatively it may be a new message containing at least the identity associated with the user and information indicating that access to the communications system is to be provisioned for the user. In response to receiving the service provisioning triggering message the Profile Proxy causes the service relating to the received service provisioning triggering message to be provisioned. The Profile Proxy typically informs the control entity that it is temporarily not available. The Profile Proxy may also inform the communications device for example by sending a short message that service provisioning is in progress. The Profile Proxy may forward the service provisioning triggering message to the Profile Manager arrow . Alternatively the Profile Proxy may create a further message including at least information identifying the user and sending this further message to the Profile Manager . If the Profile Manager and the Profile Proxy are implemented in a single network entity the message may be replaced by a suitable internal procedure. The Profile Manager provisions the IMS service package to the network by sending proper information to various information stores and network elements. For example information about the user is sent arrow to the subscriber information store HSS . If the IMS service of the user involves some new domain names for example relevant information may be sent arrow to a Domain Name Server . Information in the Service Subscription Repository may also be updated arrow for example by storing a identity information of the user such as the public identity in IMS or authentication information relating to the user. Furthermore if the communications device should be provided with some configuration information or other relevant information this information can be sent arrow to the communications device via a terminal management server .

Some applications may be provisioned for the user in connection with autoprovisioning access to the communications system in a specific example access to the IMS . Provisioning of the applications may be done for example by the Profile Manager sending arrow relevant information about the user to a Profile Server . The Profile Server may then forward arrows relevant information about the user to various application servers or the servers may fetch or read information from the Profile Server . shows two application servers as examples.

It is appreciated that the service provisioning triggering message arrow sent by the control entity may be directly sent to the Profile Manager . In other words the Profile Manager may act as the service provisioning mediator entity.

It is appreciated that the very first registration message sent by the communications device may thus cause the communications system to provision access to the communications system for the user associated with the communications device in other words indicated in the registration message . When a next registration message is sent from the communications device the user information store contains information relating to the user. The user will be recognised and after a successful authentication if authentication is performed at this point allowed access to the communications system. Authentication is often not performed for a re registration but this depends on operator preferences.

An application in the communications device typically generates necessary parameters for accessing IMS. These parameters may include IMPU T IMPI and Home Domain network Name based on information stored in the identity module. Also information relating to IMS access point is generated. The IMPU parameter is an IP Multimedia Public User identity. Public identities are used as addresses in user to user communication in IP multimedia subsystem. The IMPI parameter is IP Multimedia Private Identity. Every IP multimedia core network subsystem user has a private user identity. The network operator allocates the private identity to a user and the identity is valid for the duration of the user s subscription.

In the example shown in the communications device UE and the GRPS network first perform a GPRS Attach procedure and establish a Packet Data Protocol PDP context. The communications device carries out the PDP context activation towards the default APN. A P CSCF Discovery procedure is carried out between the communications device and the GPRS network and after this procedure the communications device is able to contact the P CSCF in the visited network if the user is roaming by sending a SIP REGISTER message. This registration message contains the default autoprovisioning identities. The P CSCF finds the I CSCF for the user based on the identity information present in the registration message for example by making a DNS query to a DNS server. After knowing the I CSCF the P CSCF forwards the registration to the I CSCF in the home network of the user. The I CSCF requests information about the S CSCF relating to the user associated with the identity in the registration message from the HSS. The HSS responds with an error message indicating that the user is unknown as discussed above in connection with . Thereafter the I CSCF forwards the registration message to the Profile Proxy PP in or to another network entity responsible for triggering service provisioning. The PP in responds with an error message to the I CSCF which forwards the error message to the P CSCF. The P CSCF in turn forwards the error message to the communications device. The error message may indicate for example to retry the registration after a given time period. This way the application in the communications terminal may automatically try the registration again after the given time period. The provisioning of access to the IMS is carried out in the communications system in response to the PP receiving the registration message.

In step a registration message is received in the control entity. The registration message includes an identifier associated with a user. As a specific example the registration message may be a SIP registration message. In step a request message is sent from the control entity to an information store in the IMS to a HSS. The request message requests information indicating a controlling entity for the user from an information store. In the IMS the controlling entity is a S CSCF and the request message is typically a User Authorization Request UAR message. In step the control entity receives from the information store a response message indicating that the user is unrecognised. This message may be for example a User Authorization Answer UAA message from the HSS. When noticing that the user is not recognised the control entity sends a service provisioning triggering message relating the user to a further network entity for example to the Profile Proxy . The service provisioning triggering message may be for example a forwarded registering message or it may include the original registering message.

In the situation shown in a communications device has no settings for access to IMS. The user may have accessed IMS earlier but using another communications device. There may thus exist an IMS subscription for the user. If an IMS subscription exists suitable settings are sent to the communications device. If an IMS subscription does not exist the IMS is provisioned for the user. The Profile Manager in can distinguish between these cases.

As there are no IMS settings stored in the communications device the communications device requests establishment of a packet data connection to a default APN arrow . The request for establishing a packet data connection may be a PDP context activation request. The gateway entity detects the PDP context activation to the default APN and the gateway entity sends arrow to the Profile Proxy a service provisioning triggering message which in this case is an initial registration to IMS with default parameters. The Profile Proxy fetches from a GPRS session database information identifying the user based on the IP address in the initial registration message arrow . The information identifying the user may be for example the MSISDN number and or the IMSI. The gateway entity has stored information about the session in the database. The Profile Proxy also informs the gateway entity that is is temporarily unavailable arrow . The Profile Proxy forwards the service provisioning triggering message together with information identifying the user to the Profile Manager arrow . Alternatively as discussed above a new message including relevant information may be sent or the relevant information may be transmitted using a suitable internal procedure.

The Profile Manager provisions the IMS service if it notices that the user has no IMS service subscription. The Profile Manager may fetch more information from a terminal management database arrow . This fetched information may include user identity information information about the communications device information about service subscriptions and or information about which services including IMS the user may subscribe to. If the Profile Manager decides to provision the IMS service it updates information in the HSS accordingly arrow . IMS and GPRS parameters may be sent to the communications device by the Terminal Management Server arrow in response to a request sent by the Profile Manager arrow . The IMS and GPRS parameters may be sent for example as a short message in accordance with the Over the Air interface.

After receiving information indicating the serving control entity for the user the interrogating control entity routes the session to the serving control entity in a normal manner. The serving control entity in turn typically requests for authentication information. from the user information store and authenticates the user. Thereafter the serving control entity typically request arrow trigger information and possibly other user profile information from the user information store . The user information store sends the requested information arrow .

The trigger information stored in the user information store earlier on points in this second embodiment to a service provisioning mediator entity handling service provisioning triggering messages. This trigger information may have been stored to the user information store for example when the access to the communications service has been provisioned in accordance with the first embodiment of the invention or otherwise.

The serving control entity routes the session to the service provisioning mediator entity as indicated by the trigger information arrow . In the service provisioning mediator entity is as an example the Profile Proxy . In the IMS the session is typically routed using the IMS Service Control ISC interface.

The Profile proxy or other similar network entity notices the routed session. To provision an application or a set of applications a service package has been created earlier on. The service package indicates for example which application s should be provisioned for the user relating to the routed session. As shown in the Profile Proxy may instruct arrow the Profile Manager to carry out provisioning of the application s . The trigger information in the user information store is updated arrow in connection with service provisioning typically to point to one of the application servers . The Profile Manager may also instruct arrow a Profile Server to update information at relevant application servers arrow in in the application server

The method relates to operation of an information store in a communications system for example to a HSS in the IMS. In step information is stored for an identifier associated with a user. This information includes at least trigger information for directing a session of the user to an entity defined by the trigger information. In accordance with the second embodiment the trigger information defines a service provisioning mediator entity configured to handle service provisioning triggering messages. The information stored in the information store typically contains also information indicating a control entity for the user for example a S CSCF in the IMS.

In step the information store receives a request for sending trigger information relating to a user indicated in the request. In step the trigger information is sent arrow in . In step the trigger information is updated in connection with service provisioning for example as discussed in connection with above to define a control entity for the user for example a S CSCF in the IMS. After this information update the trigger information causes a session to be routed to the control entity in a normal manner.

The method relates to the operation of the control entity for example to the S CSCF in the IMS. In step the control entity requests trigger information relating to a user from the information store. In step the control entity receives the trigger information and in step the control entity sends in accordance with the trigger information a message relating to the user to a service provisioning mediator entity configured to handle service provisioning triggering messages. The service provisioning mediator entity handles this message sent by the control entity as a service provisioning triggering message. After step the service provisioning in the communications system is triggered and the service is provisioned.

The third embodiment of the invention overcomes for example the following problems relating to a situation where a subscriber A wishes to have a SIP based gaming session or any other application session with a subscriber B. The subscriber B s communication device may not be provided with the required capability for the gaming session. Furthermore it may be the case that the subscriber B cannot be charged with the gaming session as only A has been provisioned into a Gaming Server. Therefore the gaming session cannot be established between subscribers A and B. The problem here thus relates to provisioning an application to an unknown subscriber B automatically.

In this third embodiment the communications device of the subscriber B is configured to initiate the required auto provisioning settings with personalized values fetched from the communications device and typically also from a relating identity module. The auto provisioning settings may be fetched for example via Personal Information Management PIM Application Programming Interface API by listening the SIP traffic through a standard SIP API.

Triggering of the service auto provisioning and the initial start of auto provisioning can be implemented in the communications device very dynamically. Triggering may be based on MIDlet technology meaning that communications devices are provided with MIDlet application that implement both the SIP API and other standard APIs in order to recognise auto provisioning needs and send initial auto provisioning event with personalized values into a service provisioning mediator entity of operator s network.

At this point it is noticed that the relevant game application and correct settings are not found in the communications device . Therefore the session is not accepted by the communications device and it sends a NACK message to the application server arrow . The application server forwards the NACK message to the S CFCS arrow which in turn forwards the NACK message to the communications device arrow .

In the communications device a MIDlet Application or other suitable application listens to the SIP stack and in response to a NACK message uses a SIP API to trigger PIM API to get the users personal data from the device. The MIDlet application prompts the subscriber B if she wishes to be provisioned for the gaming application and into the gaming server . The Midlet application may also add an item into to do list for re establishing the game session when service provisioning is completed. From the communications device a contact for a service provisioning mediator entity Profile Proxy in is found. This information may have been preconfigured to the communications device

The MIDlet application resolves the SIPURI from the Invite message that was received mime type of the game application and sends a service provisioning triggering message arrow to the service provisioning meditor entity. The service provisioning triggering message may be for example a SOAP request.

The Profile Proxy sends a provisioning request into the Profile manager . The Profile Manager provisions the application server for the subscriber B arrow . The Profile Manager may also provide game application settings to the communications device for example via a Terminal Management Server arrows . Furthermore the Profile Manager may inform a Customer Care and Billing CCB system about provisioning this application to the subscriber B.

In the communications device the Midlet application may use the PIM API to prompt the item from the To Do list and establish a gaming session to Subscriber A via SIP API.

The third embodiment of the invention provides at least the following advantages. It is possible to provision an application for a subscriber B without having basically any information relating to the subscriber B in the network before the subscriber B requests service provisioning. Application sessions can be initiated with any person who does not have required settings and user data provisioned beforehand. No triggers need to be implemented on the network side and the service provisioning mediator entity provides support for handling the service provisioning triggering message sent by the subscriber B. Charging can be done also for parties that are unknown to the network when invited to the application session. Utilizing the Profile Proxy and the Profile Manager all registries can be provisioned to be in a consistent state and standard notifications can be sent to CCB systems for charging purposes. Furthermore authentication can be done via the MIDlet application in the communications device of the subscriber B.

It is appreciated that the first second and third embodiments of the present may be combined in any suitable manner. For example access to a communications system may be provided using the first embodiment. Provisioning of for example recently deployed applications to a group of users at the initiative of an operator whenever found necessary may be carried out using the second embodiment. In addition or alternatively the third embodiment may be used to provision specific applications when the user tries to access these applications.

It is appreciated that in the above description some features have been discussed in detail with some embodiments of the invention but it is clear that same details are applicable to other embodiments and combinations of the embodiments unless clearly in contrast with the above description.

It is also appreciated that the communications device may be any communications device capable of communicating with a communications system and having the necessary functionality for accessing and using services. Examples of communications devices are user equipment mobile telephones mobile stations personal digital assistants laptop computers and the like. Furthermore a communications device need not be a device directly used by human users.

A method in accordance with the invention may be implemented as a computer program containing program instructions for causing a computer to perform the method in question. A computer program may be embodied on a computer readable medium or stored in a computer memory.

Although preferred embodiments of the apparatus and method embodying the present invention have been illustrated in the accompanying drawings and described in the foregoing detailed description it will be understood that the invention is not limited to the embodiments disclosed but is capable of numerous rearrangements modifications and substitutions without departing from the spirit of the invention as set forth and defined by the following claims.

