---

title: Batch loading and self-registration of digital media files
abstract: Methods and apparatus for batch loading and self-registration of digital media files is provided. The system provides numerous methods of interfacing with a content outlet. The methods further include comparing attributes of content to be downloaded with attributes of content in a media database. The methods also includes providing restrictions based on a result of the comparing. The methods further include monetizing the methods between both retailers and right-holders using the system. Additionally, the method may include providing retail analysis, resolving disputes, and distributing royalty payments to rights-holders of content.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08117130&OS=08117130&RS=08117130
owner: Stragent, LLC
number: 08117130
owner_city: Longview
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051220
---
This present application claims priority to Aydar et. Al s Provisional Patent Application No. 60 638 009 entitled DIGITAL RIGHTS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE filed Dec. 20 2004 the contents of which is incorporated herein by reference. The present application is also a continuation in part of Fanning et al s patent application Ser. No. 10 547 171 filed on Jun. 20 2006 which application is a 35 U.S.C. 371 application of International Application No. PCT US2004 005517 filed Feb. 24 2004 designating the United States which in turn claims priority to Fanning et al s Provisional Patent Application No. 60 450 015 filed Feb. 25 2003 both of which are incorporated herein by reference.

The present application generally relates to the field of regulating access to content. The present application relates more specifically to regulating downloading and other machine reproductions of digitally stored memory contents based on the rights of the owners of the content.

Bootlegging surreptitious copying and other methods of acquiring content without compensating a rights holder for content is an old problem. From the advent of movable type and relatively easy printing through the introduction of photocopying technology has made copying and effectively stealing content easier and easier. The march of technology has recently caught audio and video content in its wake particularly with the rise of the Internet.

However this latest technology is based on digital representations of contents in memory which can also incorporate various forms of copy protection and can allow for monitoring of transactions. Peer to peer networks and centralized content outlets presently exist. Exemplary of peer to peer content outlets are Gnutella and Kazaa . Exemplary of centralized content outlets are iTunes Audible.com and the defunct Napster . Such content outlets provide access to a repository of content available typically as individual tracks of either audio songs for example or audiovisual visual movies for example works. Presently most content outlets may also be categorized as either authorized or unauthorized with authorized content outlets providing content under a license from rights holders and unauthorized content outlets providing unlicensed content. While some digital content may not require a license most content of interest to consumers exists under restrictions of copyright held by authors and performers or their assignees.

Many of the rights holders of digital content are assignees of performers. Examples of rights holders include media controllers such as studios record labels and media companies along with individual authors or performers. With current downloading technology and methodologies many of the copies of content made in the downloading process are not licensed and the rights holders are not compensated for these copies.

In addition to problems regarding unlicensed copies problems also arise with tracking the individual rights to each individual song or other type of content. Some rights holders have lost records of what content they hold rights to. Disputes over ownership between multiple potential rights holders over content commonly arise with these disputes consuming large amounts of resources to resolve. Further some rights holders have rights to vast amounts of content whereas other rights holders may be concerned with small amounts of content.

In addition to the burdens on the rights holder the above issues also place a substantial burden on retailers who must ascertain what the rights are who holds them and what is the correct amount of compensation for each individual piece of content.

Currently there is no solution that allows both retailers and rights holders a complete way to monitor and compensate for the sale of digital content.

The present invention is described and illustrated in conjunction with systems apparatuses and methods of varying scope. Various exemplary embodiments are described herein relating to a system database and interface that provide a plurality of exemplary processes and methods that manage digital content. Numerous exemplary methods are provided that relate to digital file identification and the management of the digital files by the rights holder. Various embodiments are also provided relating to interfaces and services that enable the rights holder to self register manage and monitor the commerce and disputes related to each file. Other embodiments include searching networks and providing a list of potentially owned files to a rights holder and a track listening service that allows tracks to be played for a rights holder so that rights to the track may be asserted. In addition to the aspects of the present invention described in this summary further aspects of the invention will become apparent by reference to the drawings and by reading the detailed description that follows.

A method and apparatus for regulating content is provided. In one embodiment the invention is a method that includes interfacing with a content outlet. The method further includes comparing attributes of content to be downloaded with attributes of content in a media database. The method also includes providing restrictions based on a result of the comparing. The method may further include monetizing the method and additionally distributing royalty payments to rights holders of content.

In an alternate embodiment the invention is a system that includes a database of content. The system also includes a rights holder interface for allowing a rights holder to assert rights and enter or download tracks into the system. The system further includes a content outlet interface. The system may further include a web crawler and a financial interface.

In another alternate embodiment the invention is a method that includes receiving a song selection. The method also includes comparing the song selection to records of a database of songs. The method further includes indicating results of the comparing. The method may also include monetizing the method. The method may further include providing restrictions to the song. The method may also include indicating the song is unclaimed. The method may further include prohibiting copying of the song.

In yet another alternate embodiment the invention is an apparatus that includes means for tracking content. The apparatus also includes means for interfacing between content users and the means for tracking content. The apparatus further includes means for interfacing between content rights holders and the means for tracking content.

In yet another alternate embodiment the invention is a method that includes receiving a song claim. The method also includes comparing the song claim to records of a database of songs. The method further includes indicating results of the comparing. The method may further include indicating a dispute exists. The method may also include resolving the dispute. The method may further include forwarding royalties.

In still another embodiment the invention is a method. The method includes crawling a network with an intelligent agent to find content. The method further includes evaluating the content. The method also includes transmitting a digital fingerprint of the content to a database of content. The method further includes storing the digital fingerprint of the content in the database of the content.

In still another embodiment the invention is a method that searches for content and provides a list to a rights holder of potentially owned files. The method may further include providing a track listening service that provides the ability to retrieve store and listen to selected and potentially owned files.

In still another embodiment the invention is a system that provides a dispute resolution services that enables collections of royalties while disputes are settled and a retail system that provides analysis of earnings and potential earnings based on commerce data.

Embodiments of the invention presented are exemplary and illustrative in nature rather than restrictive. The scope of the invention is determined by the appended claims.

The present invention is described and illustrated in conjunction with systems apparatuses and methods of varying scope. Various exemplary embodiments are described herein relating to a system a database and interfaces that provide a plurality of exemplary processes and methods that track and manage digital content stored in media files.

Numerous exemplary methods are provided that relate to digital file identification and the management of the digital files by the rights holder. Various other embodiments are also provided relating to interfaces and services that enable the rights holder to self register manage and monitor the commerce and disputes related to each file for both rights holders and retailers. Other embodiments include searching networks and providing a list of potentially owned files to a rights holder and a track listening service that allows tracks to be played for a rights holder so that rights to the track may be asserted. Further embodiments relate to financial analysis and collections and disbursement of royalties from the sale of content. In addition to the aspects of the present invention described further aspects of the invention will become apparent by reference to the drawings and by reading the detailed description that follows.

Note preferably the systems and methods described herein operate in a real time or near real time manner. For example a query may be sent by a content outlet to a database with a response from the database delivered with minimal delay based on results of the query. This may be achieved in part based on local caching of responses at the content outlet system. This may also be achieved through use of known database technology.

The apparatus and methods may be understood by reference to an embodiment of a system. illustrates an embodiment of a system for controlling access to content stored in media files. The system may be used to determine who holds rights to content identify content to be downloaded and restrict access to content based on preferences of the rights holder. Moreover the system allows for monetization of this process. System includes a database content outlets and a claim interface rights holders and and a crawler .

Database includes attributes related to content. For example a media file or item of content may have attributes for title author performer rights holders size length type of content digital fingerprint rights restrictions and other attributes as subsequently described. Moreover a piece of content may have an authorized copy of the content and the authorized copy may incorporate digital rights management or other restrictive parameters used to implement rights restrictions specified by rights holders.

Traditional retailers are content media file outlets which operate using licensed content and provide compensation to rights holders. Unauthorized peer to peer p2p networks are content outlets which provide content regardless of licensing status and without attempting to compensate rights holders. Authorized peer to peer p2p networks are downloading networks using peer to peer technology which use licensed content and provide compensation to rights holders. Note that not all of content outlets and all exist are in business or organized as a network for example at one time.

When a content outlet or is ready to provide a media file song or other content for download it may query database and determine if there are any restrictions on the content. If the content in question is identifiable in comparison to content for which attributes are stored in the database then other attributes of the content will provide information about restrictions on the content such as limited copying play only versions limited use versions for example . These restrictions may then be embedded with the content which is provided for download by the content outlet. Alternatively an authorized copy of content may be provided thereby embedding desired restrictions and preserving quality at a certain level.

Determining the restrictions on content requires determining who owns or has rights to the content the rights holders . Claim interface allows for access to the database by rights holders. Rights holders and may all use claim interface to assert ownership or other rights in content. Preferably rights holders provide content which they have rights in and that content may then be evaluated to determine attributes such as title type of content and digital fingerprint. Alternatively media files or content may be discovered on the Internet or other networks and rights holders may then use the claim interface to assert rights in the work embodied in the content so discovered. For example the crawler may be implemented to traverse links on the World Wide Web and thereby discover content which may then be evaluated by rights holders to determine whether anyone has a claim to ownership of the content.

Note in some embodiments claim interface is an API or application programming interface for example. The claim interface may operate in a variety of ways. For example it may be a graphical user interface allowing for entry of information about content such as attributes including author title performer for example. This information may be used to query database to determine if such a file or content is known to the database or it may be used to enter these attributes into the database . Alternatively the claim interface may be implemented for some form of bulk or batch data entry whereby a stream or file of data is provided to the claim interface related to numerous separate or related pieces of content either for query purposes or for data entry purposes for example. Moreover the claim interface may allow for entry of actual content into the database . Whether actual content or a digital fingerprint of the content or both is stored querying the database based on content may occur by comparing digital fingerprints.

On occasion rights holders and may assert multiple conflicting claims to a media file or content. Not all multiple claims will conflict. For example authorship and performance of a song may both provide copyright rights for a separate author and performer without an outright conflict. That the two rights holders disagree about how to handle content is not the same as a conflict where two entities purport to be the owner of an authorship copyright on a song. When the same rights are asserted by multiple parties some form of conflict resolution may be necessary. Royalties may be held in trust or the song or other content may be restricted from any copying. Alternatively ownership conflicts may be initially decided based on a reputation rating maintained by the claim interface with high reputation rankings assigned to reputable companies or companies having previously proven content ownership and low rankings assigned to those having asserted false claims or with little prior experience. Preferably an appeal process may be implemented to allow for human intervention after a determination based on reputation rankings occurs. For example a reputable label may assert claims to its catalog as it stood on a particular date. Another small label may assert claims to a set of songs within this catalog. The reputations may be such that the reputable label wins. However the small label may be able to show an assignment of rights to a human and thus prove its claims. Alternatively the small label may be acting improperly and thus correctly have its claims rejected.

In addition to the features provided by the system of relating to interfaces and services that enable the rights holder to self register manage and monitor the commerce and disputes related to each content file other embodiments include searching the p2p networks and providing a list of potentially owned files to a rights holder and a track listening service that allows tracks to be played for a rights holder so that rights to the track may be asserted. It is noted that the processes and interfaces subsequently described herein would be enable by the system of and would also be enabled by the systems described in and .

Various exemplary methods may be used to determine who is legitimately a rights holder to content. illustrates an embodiment of one method of determining rights holders of content. The method may be implemented in conjunction with a system such as that described with respect to or with an alternative systems as subsequently described. The method includes a series of modules for identifying media receiving claims to the media resolving disputed claims and registering the rights holder. Note that not all of these modules may be required for a working method as a useful method may be implemented using some subset of the modules described. At module the media file or content is identified. This may occur as a result of content submitted for identification by a content outlet content submitted as part of a claim by a rights holder or content discovered by a software process or agent which crawls a network. The identification of media files is described in further detail below.

At module claims to the content are asserted. Note that these modules may interact in a fashion other than linearly such that claims may be asserted well after content is identified and even after a rights holder has been identified. With a claim asserted information about the content will also be supplied such as author performer title digital fingerprint of content even an authorized copy of content.

If multiple claims are asserted at module disputes between claims are resolved. As mentioned with respect to this may involve reputation based resolution or may involve only human intervention. At module rights holder s to the content are registered along with their requirements of restrictions on copying the content. At this point access to the file content may be controlled based on rights asserted by the rights holders and royalties on the content may be distributed to the rights holders as copying occurs. Moreover changes in rights to the file content may be tracked allowing for assignments or expirations of copyrights should that ever be allowed . Note that not all of these modules may be required for a working method as a useful method may be implemented using some subset of the modules described. Also note that monetization of this method may occur such as through a fee for asserting claims or resolving disputes or through some form of subscription or periodic fee for example.

Whether the rights holders to content are clear or not some content may be provided by various methods. illustrates an exemplary embodiment of a method of providing media files and content. The method may be implemented in conjunction with a system such as that described with respect to or with alternative systems for example. The method includes receiving a request for media or content comparing media to contents of a database providing restrictions to the media collecting royalties and forwarding royalties. Again note that not all of these modules may be required for a working method as a useful method may be implemented using some subset of the modules described.

At module a request for media or content is received. This request may come from a content outlet for example which is attempting to satisfy requirements imposed by copyright law. At module the media or content is compared to records in a database to determine what the content is. Preferably a digital fingerprint or similar technology is used to identify the content such that digital fingerprints may be compared. Alternatively attributes such as title author and or performer for example may be compared. Moreover content may be compared bodily such that two digital files representing songs may be compared on a bitwise level for example. When a hit or a match is found the database may have information about copyright restrictions and rights holders who are due royalties.

At module any available restrictions are provided. This may be as simple as providing a message or set of parameters with the parameters embedded or otherwise including as digital rights management restrictions. Alternatively this may involve providing an authorized copy with embedded restrictions. As another alternative a rights holder may prohibit copying such that the content outlet must not perform the download.

At module royalties are collected. This may occur in the form of a payment from the content outlet to the operator of the database with records of the database used to account for such payments. Note that rather than processing a micropayment for each song or other piece of content periodic payments of many individual royalties may be made such as monthly payments for example . Moreover at module royalties are forwarded to rights holders. This may again involve a periodic payment based on multiple individual micropayments. Additionally royalties may be forwarded after deduction of a fee for handling the royalties either as a percentage or as some form of fixed fee. Likewise payments may be required for each request for media each successful request a match is found or each request resulting in a download for example. Other options for monetization may also be employed such as a subscription model for example.

Database is a database of content attributes related to content or both. It may be accessed through plugin interface or through retail interface . Retailer is a content outlet which accesses database through retail interface . Retailer may allow for download of music through its system for example and may query database to determine the status of songs to be downloaded. The query may be sent with attributes of the songs content or with the actual songs content. The return information from database may include an indication the content has not been claimed restrictions on the content an authorized copy of the content or an indication of prohibition of copying content. As illustrated retailer must handle these signals and properly format its queries for use with interface but otherwise directly queries database .

Alternatively retailer may be a content outlet which integrates into its software plugin . Plugin may be a local interface module which works with software used by retailer in either a previously specified or a customized manner. Retailer may query plugin about availability of content such as a song for download. Plugin may then pass the query to plugin interface which may then properly query database about the content in question. The response from database may then be interpreted or reformatted by plugin interface and plugin such that retailer may use the response in its processing. Generally the response would be the same as that provided to retailer in the above description. Note that plugin may perform relatively simple activities such as reformatting data or more complex activities such as determining a digital fingerprint for content provided by retail outlet .

Just as various methods of providing content may use various systems various methods of determining rights holders may use various systems. illustrates an exemplary embodiment of a system for determining rights holders of content. The system illustrated may be part of a larger system the portion illustrated is useful for working with rights holders. The system may allow for interaction between rights holders and a content database to register rights holders and resolve disputes. The system includes a database bulk claim interface claim interface and is designed to work with rights holders and among others .

Database is a content database such as database of . Database may include content attributes of content or both. Bulk claim interface is an interface that allows for submission of multiple or numerous claims such as submission of claims for performance copyright to a set of songs and the associated collections of those songs for example . Bulk claim interface may be restricted to access by rights holders known to submit multiple claims or may be provided for any rights holder willing to use a stream of information rather than a user interface. As an example rights holder may assert claims to all songs in a catalog it has just purchased from another rights holder by providing a file with information about all of the content in the catalog in question.

Alternatively for assertions of rights to only a few songs or pieces of content claim interface may be used. Claim interface may be a graphical user interface or other human interactive interface which an employee of a rights holder to an individual rights holder may use. For example rights holder may assert authorship copyright to his or her set of published songs which may be a small number for many authors using claim interface . One may expect that claim interface would allow for entry of all available attributes along with submission of a digital fingerprint or authorized copy of content.

For each interface results may come in the form of registration of the rights holder indication of a conflict with or without resolution indication of a match between the content registered and previously entered content such as found by a crawler or requested by a content outlet or some other result. In the case of the bulk claim interface these results may be provided as a file or stream of results sent to the rights holder or as information available for access by the rights holder at convenience of the user. In the case of claim interface these results may be provided graphically or in another manner intelligible to a user or may be available for lookup after periodic processing updates of the database occur. Note that the operations of this system may be monetized such that rights holders may pay to register claims to receive royalties or for some other form of service. Payment of royalties such as due to registration of a rights holder for an item of content are not illustrated in the figure but are subsequently described and may be understood as to occur either electronically or by means of mailing of checks to rights holders for example.

To track information related to content and rights holders various data structures may be used. illustrates an exemplary embodiment of a record of content in a database . The record in one embodiment is organized into a set of attributes which may be stored as name value pairs or code value pairs . Note that none of the attributes are necessarily mandatory. Attributes illustrated include title title of a song for example author author composer of a song for example performer performer of a song for example fingerprint digital fingerprint of a song in digital format for example length playing time of a song for example authorized copy copy to be provided when content is requested for example rights holder first rights holder associated with content for example and rights holder second rights holder associated with content for example .

Note that each of these attributes may also apply to a movie comedic performance document maybe not the performer in that case or other form of content in a media file. Also note that other attributes may be stored such as restrictions for DRM purposes or prohibitions on copies for example. Similarly other formats or relationships for the data in question may be utilized such as formats dictated by metadata in a database for example. Thus the data structure or record of is illustrative rather than restrictive in nature. also shows another embodiment of data stored in the system database.

Data structures of various types may be used with programs which are typically embodied in media or a medium. illustrates an exemplary embodiment of a medium or media which may in turn embody instructions which when executed by a processor may cause the processor to perform a method. A medium may be a single piece of media or a collection of media without materially changing the medium. In the embodiment illustrated in the medium includes a control module claim interfaces for rights holders outlet interfaces and a database interface. More specifically medium includes a control module bulk claim interface individual claim interface database interface plugin interface and retailer interface .

Bulk claim interface and individual claim interface are modules which implement the claim interface for rights holders. Rights holders with large numbers of claims to content or a steady stream of claims to content may use bulk claim interface to provide claim information. Rights holders with few claims or infrequent claims may use individual claim interface . Similarly plugin interface and retailer interface are modules which implement the interface with content outlets. Content outlets may include a plugin and thereby use plugin interface or not include a plugin and communicate directly with retailer interface .

Database interface interfaces with a database of content and rights holder information. Control module controls each of the other modules. Thus control module may process a request from a retailer through plugin interface or retailer interface by causing database interface to search for content within an associated database. Upon finding a match information from database interface may be directed back to either plugin interface or retailer interface and thereby to the content outlet originally submitting the request.

Similarly control module may receive a claim either through bulk claim interface or individual claim interface and direct that information through database interface to the associated database. Control module may manage resolution of conflicting claims based on feedback from database interface . Moreover control module may send information about royalty rates and download frequency through claim interfaces and to rights holders along with electronic payments of royalties. Note that control may also direct a crawler interface not shown which may be used to receive information about content and populate a database through database interface . Such a medium may be used in conjunction with various computer or machine embodiments.

The following description of is intended to provide an overview of computer hardware and other operating components suitable for performing the methods of the invention described above but is not intended to limit the applicable environments. Similarly the computer hardware and other operating components may be suitable as part of the apparatuses of the invention described above. The invention can be practiced with other computer system configurations including hand held devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention can also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network.

Access to the Internet is typically provided by Internet service providers ISP such as the ISPs and . Users on client systems such as client computer systems and obtain access to the Internet through the Internet service providers such as ISPs and . Access to the Internet allows users of the client computer systems to exchange information receive and send e mails and view documents such as documents which have been prepared in the HTML format. These documents are often provided by web servers such as web server which is considered to be on the Internet. Often these web servers are provided by the ISPs such as ISP although a computer system can be set up and connected to the Internet without that system also being an ISP.

The web server is typically at least one computer system which operates as a server computer system and is configured to operate with the protocols of the World Wide Web and is coupled to the Internet. Optionally the web server can be part of an ISP which provides access to the Internet for client systems. The web server is shown coupled to the server computer system which itself is coupled to web content which can be considered a form of a media database. While two computer systems and are shown in the web server system and the server computer system can be one computer system having different software components providing the web server functionality and the server functionality provided by the server computer system which will be described further below.

Client computer systems and can each with the appropriate web browsing software view HTML pages provided by the web server . The ISP provides Internet connectivity to the client computer system through the modem interface which can be considered part of the client computer system . The client computer system can be a personal computer system a network computer a Web TV system or other such computer system.

Similarly the ISP provides Internet connectivity for client systems and although as shown in the connections are not the same for these three computer systems. Client computer system is coupled through a modem interface while client computer systems and are part of a LAN. While shows the interfaces and as generically as a modem each of these interfaces can be an analog modem ISDN modem cable modem satellite transmission interface e.g. Direct PC or other interfaces for coupling a computer system to other computer systems.

Client computer systems and are coupled to a LAN through network interfaces and which can be Ethernet network or other network interfaces. The LAN is also coupled to a gateway computer system which can provide firewall and other Internet related services for the local area network. This gateway computer system is coupled to the ISP to provide Internet connectivity to the client computer systems and . The gateway computer system can be a conventional server computer system. Also the web server system can be a conventional server computer system.

Alternatively a server computer system can be directly coupled to the LAN through a network interface to provide files and other services to the clients without the need to connect to the Internet through the gateway system .

The computer system includes a processor which can be a conventional microprocessor such as an Intel Pentium microprocessor or Motorola Power PC microprocessor. Memory is coupled to the processor by a bus . Memory can be dynamic random access memory DRAM and can also include static RAM SRAM . The bus couples the processor to the memory also to non volatile storage to display controller and to the input output I O controller .

The display controller controls in the conventional manner a display on a display device which can be a cathode ray tube CRT or liquid crystal display LCD . The input output devices can include a keyboard disk drives printers a scanner and other input and output devices including a mouse or other pointing device. The display controller and the I O controller can be implemented with conventional well known technology. A digital image input device can be a digital camera which is coupled to an I O controller in order to allow images from the digital camera to be input into the computer system .

The non volatile storage is often a magnetic hard disk an optical disk or another form of storage for large amounts of data. Some of this data is often written by a direct memory access process into memory during execution of software in the computer system . One of skill in the art will immediately recognize that the terms machine readable medium or computer readable medium includes any type of storage device that is accessible by the processor and also encompasses a carrier wave that encodes a data signal.

The computer system is one example of many possible computer systems which have different architectures. For example personal computers based on an Intel microprocessor often have multiple buses one of which can be an input output I O bus for the peripherals and one that directly connects the processor and the memory often referred to as a memory bus . The buses are connected together through bridge components that perform any necessary translation due to differing bus protocols.

Network computers are another type of computer system that can be used with the present invention. Network computers do not usually include a hard disk or other mass storage and the executable programs are loaded from a network connection into the memory for execution by the processor . A Web TV system which is known in the art is also considered to be a computer system according to the present invention but it may lack some of the features shown in such as certain input or output devices. A typical computer system will usually include at least a processor memory and a bus coupling the memory to the processor.

In addition the computer system is controlled by operating system software which includes a file management system such as a disk operating system which is part of the operating system software. One example of an operating system software with its associated file management system software is the family of operating systems known as Windows from Microsoft Corporation of Redmond Wash. and their associated file management systems. Another example of an operating system software with its associated file management system software is the LINUX operating system and its associated file management system. The file management system is typically stored in the non volatile storage and causes the processor to execute the various acts required by the operating system to input and output data and to store data in memory including storing files on the non volatile storage .

Some portions of the detailed description are presented in terms of algorithms and symbolic representations of operations on data bits within a computer memory. These algorithmic descriptions and representations are the means used by those skilled in the data processing arts to most effectively convey the substance of their work to others skilled in the art. An algorithm is here and generally conceived to be a self consistent sequence of operations leading to a desired result. The operations are those requiring physical manipulations of physical quantities. Usually though not necessarily these quantities take the form of electrical or magnetic signals capable of being stored transferred combined compared and otherwise manipulated. It has proven convenient at times principally for reasons of common usage to refer to these signals as bits values elements symbols characters terms numbers or the like.

It should be borne in mind however that all of these and similar terms are to be associated with the appropriate physical quantities and are merely convenient labels applied to these quantities. Unless specifically stated otherwise as apparent from the following discussion it is appreciated that throughout the description discussions utilizing terms such as processing or computing or calculating or determining or displaying or the like refer to the action and processes of a computer system or similar electronic computing device that manipulates and transforms data represented as physical electronic quantities within the computer system s registers and memories into other data similarly represented as physical quantities within the computer system memories or registers or other such information storage transmission or display devices.

The present invention in some embodiments also relates to apparatus for performing the operations herein. This apparatus may be specially constructed for the required purposes or it may comprise a general purpose computer selectively activated or reconfigured by a computer program stored in the computer. Such a computer program may be stored in a computer readable storage medium such as but is not limited to any type of disk including floppy disks optical disks CD ROMS and magnetic optical disks read only memories ROMs random access memories RAMs EPROMs EEPROMs magnetic or optical cards or any type of media suitable for storing electronic instructions and each coupled to a computer system bus.

The algorithms and displays presented herein are not inherently related to any particular computer or other apparatus. Various general purpose systems may be used with programs in accordance with the teachings herein or it may prove convenient to construct more specialized apparatus to perform the required method steps. The required structure for a variety of these systems will appear from the description below. In addition the present invention is not described with reference to any particular programming language and various embodiments may thus be implemented using a variety of programming languages.

The systems described in are therefore capable of enabling the methods described herein regarding the identification and tracking of media files and enable the interface screens provided to both retailers and rights holders as subsequently described.

The database system of is another exemplary embodiment of a complete open online licensing and royalty distribution system for digital media. Such a database system in some embodiments provides a centralized clearinghouse for all digital media. The system may enable content owners to protect the content owner s intellectual property rights associated with the content. The system can also provide authentication services as well as tracking and reporting services associated with the management of the distribution of content.

In further detail the system includes a database that stores data related to rights holders distributors such as content retailers or outlets or for example and media files related to content such as attributes or actual content for example . As illustrated distributors and each use a plug in to interface with database thereby allowing for requests for permission to distribute content and responses including denial unconditional permission restricted permission known good copies or lack of data related to the content. Moreover the plug in may function to monetize content transactions allowing for use of the database as a clearinghouse for royalties for example.

Rights holders and each claim rights through usage module and set pricing or other restrictions through pricing module for example. Data from modules and may be some or all of the data stored or encoded in database . Accounting module provides an interface to database allowing for financial examination and control of database . Similarly reports module provides an interface to database allowing for production of visually perceptible presentations of data from database such as activity or commercial charts for example.

The exemplary system provides numerous methods that allow both users and rights holders to interact with the database . illustrates an exemplary process provided by the system . As described above the modules set forth in the processes described herein may be enacted in a parallel simultaneous or serial one at a time manner. In module the system determines licenses for digital media using multiple fingerprint technologies based on the type of media requested. In module it is determined in real time the licenses that are available to digital media distribution services based on the capability of the digital media distribution services to handle licensing restrictions. In module the system enables the filtering banning of certain media files on third party distributed systems. In module the system enacts trusted accounting for media file license requests with third party media distribution services. In module it is determined in real time the effects on income due to potential changes in licenses of online media. In module the system modifies the available licenses for media files in real time and causing the modified licenses to propagate to all participating media distribution services immediately. In module the system provides time based and limited licensing restrictions for digital media based on time of day promotional periods number of users who have the digital media file etc. that are only made available to online media distribution services when the restrictions for the licenses are met by a system. In module the system determines in real time the licenses that are available to digital media distribution services based on the consumer s country of origin. The processes in the above modules are further enhanced by the interfacing techniques of the present invention as shown in .

In addition to providing services to both users and rights holders the exemplary system provides additional methods to generate revenue. illustrates an exemplary method wherein the system collects income from a variety of sources. In module the system charges transaction fees for content deployed by distribution services. In module the system charges content owners for running the database and preventing piracy. In module the system licenses technology to music services for both free and pay music services. In module the system provides an authoring tool such as an interface for content creators to easily copyright and fingerprint their work online. In module the system provides services for creation of the copyright database to the content owners. In module the system charges for and enables new music services.

Regarding the new music services provided by the exemplary system shows another exemplary process . In module the system collects ongoing fees for administration of rights accounting. In module the system offers data mining reporting and custom analytics. In module the system audits rights compliances across music services. In module the system enables a consumer personal rights locker . In module the system provides an OEM music infrastructure Google of music searches and recommendations.

The system also provides another exemplary process to provide a centralized system for the following functions as shown in . In module the system allows copyright holders to offer licenses of their copyrighted intellectual property. In module the system allows copyright holders to request filtering for their content. In module the system allows online media distributors to get access in real time to the licenses offered by the copyright holders based on the capabilities of the particular service. In module the system handles real time licensing rights accounting. In module the system handles royalty collection. In module the system handles royalty distribution. In module the system allows online media distributors to determine in real time the licensing status or lack thereof of items of content.

The exemplary system may eliminate the barrier that prevents content from getting into the media distribution market. At the same time the system may allow the content industries to leverage the system to filter out in real time the content of illicit distribution services.

According to certain embodiments an apparatus is configured to accept in real time licensing information about digital media from copyright holders or from owners of licensing rights and allow third party media distribution services to select in real time the licenses for digital media that the media distribution services are interested in distributing. The apparatus in some embodiments may also be configured to process in real time license requests for digital media from online media distribution services and to account for in real time each license that is accessible. Further embodiments allow for real time financial analysis and real time overviews of a rights holders portfolio of media files.

Regarding the business perspective of the system monthly transaction reports are sent to accounting where invoices may be generated. Regarding the retailers and rights holders they may access the system through the use of interfaces such as transaction applications data export applications and a self registration interface . Rights holders may receive payments from accounting while retailers make payments to accounting .

Regarding the registration of digital files within the system ownership and metadata information are entered by the rights holders into the system . A batch import further loads content into a music warehouse for manual export of digital content . In addition to files being registered and fingerprinted by rights holders the fingerprinting infrastructure allows files uncovered in the p2p networks to be fingerprinted and entered into the database . In this embodiment a media file such as a song is stored in the music warehouse while the metadata file information that allows access to the song as shown in is stored in the database .

The system operates in real time or near real time. For example a query may be sent by a rights holder to the open copyright database with a response from the database delivered via the client access server with minimal delay based on results of the query. This may be achieved in part based on local caching of responses at the client access server . This may also be achieved through use of known database technology. The rights holders also have immediate access to the database through the use of numerous interfaces as subsequently described.

Database includes attributes and file information related to the content of the media file. For example a media file may have attributes for title author performer rights holders size length type of content digital fingerprint rights restrictions and other attributes. Moreover a file may have an authorized copy of the content and the authorized copy may incorporate digital rights management or other restrictive parameters used to implement rights restrictions specified by rights holders.

When a user on the p2p network requests a media file such as song or other content for download it may query database and determine restrictions on the content. If the content in question is identifiable in comparison to content for which attributes are stored in the database then other attributes of the content will provide information about restrictions on the content such as limited copying play only versions limited use versions for example . These restrictions may then be embedded with the content which is provided for download by the content outlet. Alternatively an authorized copy of content may be provided thereby embedding desired restrictions and preserving quality at a certain level. Using the fingerprinting infrastructure the system is also capable of fingerprinting and identifying unauthorized content outlet sources.

Determining the restrictions on content requires an identification of the file and determining who owns or has rights to the content the rights holders . The client access server provides interfaces and that allow access to the database by rights holders and retailers . Rights holders may all use the self registration interface to assert ownership or other rights in content. Preferably rights holders provide content which they have rights in and that content may then be evaluated to determine attributes such as title type of content and digital fingerprint. Alternatively content may be discovered on the Internet or other p2p networks and rights holders may then use the system interfaces to assert rights in the work embodied in the content so discovered. For example the crawler may be implemented to traverse links on the World Wide Web and thereby discover content which may then be evaluated by rights holders to determine whether anyone has a claim to ownership of the content.

Note in some embodiments the interfaces or applications and may be a variety of programmed interfaces that may operate in a variety of ways. For example it may be a graphical user interface allowing for entry of information about content such as attributes including author title performer for example. also provide exemplary interface screens provided by the system . Information entered through these interfaces may be used to query database to determine if such content is known to the database or it may be used to enter these attributes into the database . The system is also implemented for some form of bulk or batch data entry whereby a stream or file of data is provided to the interfaces related to numerous separate or related pieces of content either for query purposes or for data entry purposes for example. Moreover the interfaces also allow for entry of actual content into the database . Whether actual content or a digital fingerprint of the content or both is stored querying the database based on content may occur by comparing digital fingerprints.

Another feature of the system is the ability to handle and resolve situations where a plurality of rights holders may assert multiple conflicting claims of ownership to a single media file of content. Not all multiple claims will conflict. For example authorship and performance of a song may both provide copyright rights for a separate author and performer without an outright conflict. That the two rights holders disagree about how to handle content is not the same as a conflict where two entities purport to be the owner of an authorship copyright on a song. When the same rights are asserted by multiple parties some form of conflict resolution may be necessary. Royalties may be held in trust or the song or other content may be restricted from any copying. Alternatively ownership conflicts may be initially decided based on a reputation rating maintained by the claim interface with high reputation rankings assigned to reputable companies or companies having previously proven content ownership and low rankings assigned to those having asserted false claims or with little prior experience. Preferably an appeal process may be implemented to allow for human intervention after a determination based on reputation rankings occurs. For example a reputable label may assert claims to its catalog as it stood on a particular date. Another small label may assert claims to a set of songs within this catalog. The reputations may be such that the reputable label wins. However the small label may be able to show an assignment of rights to a human and thus prove its claims. Alternatively the small label may be acting improperly and thus correctly have its claims rejected. detail exemplary processes of rights and retail interactions with the system .

Further operations and features of the system are subsequently described referencing the processes and the interface screen shots provided by the system shown in . Each module or step in the processes described below would be enacted by the system of . Note that not all of these modules may be required for a working method as a useful method may be implemented using some subset of the modules described.

Each of the Overview Account Manager My Catalog All Works and Use Terms options may be enabled by clicking on the desired link. The overview page gives the rights holder real time information relating to the individually owned media files and the total files contained in the system. The account manager feature enables the financial analysis and information to be presented to the user. The my catalog feature allows access to the owned media files for interaction with the rights holder. The all works feature allows the rights holder to access and search all the registered works within the system. The use terms function provides interfaces for entering rules and terms of use for a media file for example. All these functions are described in more detail referencing the figures below.

The quick access menu offers the rights holder choices of features such as Power Match and viewing licensed and unlicensed works. These features provide the user with a means to monitor the state of media files and determine if income is being lost due to lost royalties from the sale of files which a rights holder may own. The features of the quick access menu are also subsequently described in greater detail.

Retailer information consists of rules or terms of sale for tracks and statistics regarding the retailers sales of tracks . System in formation is also stored within the database .

Note that each of these attributes may also apply to a movie comedic performance document maybe not the performer in that case or other form of content. Also note that other attributes may be stored such as restrictions for DRM purposes or prohibitions on copies for example. Similarly other formats or relationships for the data in question may be utilized such as formats dictated by metadata in a database for example. Thus the data structure or record of is illustrative rather than restrictive in nature.

From the foregoing it will be appreciated that specific embodiments of the invention have been described herein for purposes of illustration but that various modifications may be made without deviating from the spirit and scope of the invention. For example the disclosed methods and apparatuses have been described primarily in terms of use with songs while content of many different forms may be managed in the same manner. In some instances reference has been made to characteristics likely to be present in various or some embodiments but these characteristics are also not necessarily limiting on the spirit and scope of the invention. For example the above discussion refers to peer to peer networks and those skilled in the art will readily recognize that the present invention is equally applicable to any file sharing network. In the illustrations and description structures have been provided which may be formed or assembled in other ways within the spirit and scope of the invention.

In particular the separate modules of the various block diagrams represent functional modules of methods or apparatuses and are not necessarily indicative of physical or logical separations or of an order of operation inherent in the spirit and scope of the present invention. Similarly methods have been illustrated and described as linear processes but such methods may have operations reordered or implemented in parallel within the spirit and scope of the invention. Also additional methods of the present system may be comprised of multiple modules selected and enacted from the plurality of methods described above. Accordingly the invention is not limited except as by the appended claims.

