---

title: Solar blind ultraviolet communication system for unattended ground sensor network
abstract: The systems and methods described herein allow a user to communicate using a ground sensor network that is capable of both line-of-sight (LOS) and non-line-of-sight (NLOS) communication. In particular, the systems and methods herein described transmit and receive ultraviolet radiation having a wavelength within the solar blind region from a plurality of sensing nodes arranged both in a LOS network, which communicates via LOS communication, and in a NLOS network, which communicates via NLOS communication. The ultraviolet radiation is then transmitted from the plurality of sensing nodes to a remote receiver, via LOS communication.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07986883&OS=07986883&RS=07986883
owner: BAE Systems Information and Electronic Systems Integration Inc.
number: 07986883
owner_city: Nashua
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051025
---
This application claims rights under 35 USC 119 e from U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 621 766 filed Oct. 25 2004.

This invention was made with U.S. Government support under Contract No. DAAD19 01 C 0068 with the U.S. Army Research Laboratory and the U.S. Government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to unattended ground sensor systems and more particularly to the use of solar blind ultraviolet communication systems therein.

The primary functions associated with unattended ground sensor UGS networks are sensing processing and communicating. While the sensing elements are the basis for the network the value of the network is associated with the synergism of multiple sensors distributed sensing contributing to the generation of a surveillance picture which is much larger and of higher fidelity than can be provided by any single sensor. Therefore overall network requirements ultimately drive those associated with individual functions sensing processing and communicating . The evolving role of unattended ground sensors for military applications was reported in some detail in L. B. Stotts and D. D. Bryski Unattended ground sensor related technologies an Army perspective Vol. 4743 2002 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

Communication system requirements will vary considerably from network to network. In general a network communication system includes the means to communicate among sensing nodes and or a gateway node and a means of communication between the gateway node and an external terminal.

The present invention comprises a wireless inter nodal communication system which operates in the solar blind ultraviolet 200 nm 280 nm and is capable of providing covert non line of sight operation. The present invention also encompasses a method for providing inter nodal communications in an unattended ground sensor network comprising the steps of making use of line of sight ultra violet radiation with a wavelength within the solar blind region and in appropriate situations preferably employing wide field of view receivers and large transmitter cone angles.

Solar blind ultraviolet communication systems can provide short to medium range non line of sight and line of sight links which are covert and insensitive to meteorological conditions. Operation in the solar blind region provides zero background conditions and strong scattering interactions. Scattering provides the basis for transferring information when non line of sight conditions exist. Zero background conditions are a result of strong absorption of solar radiation in the upper atmosphere. These conditions make it possible to operate very sensitive wide field of view quantum noise limited photon counting receivers and provide communication systems that perform very differently than free space optical systems that operate in other spectral regions. These systems may be compact and require very low primary power for operation.

Non line of sight ultraviolet communication systems can provide reliable inter nodal communications for unattended ground sensor networks. This type of system is particularly attractive when non line of sight conditions exist between nodes covert operation is required and insensitivity to positioning and ground proximity are desired. Light emitting diode technology being developed under the DARPA SUVOS program represents an enabling technology for these systems. Small low power and low cost systems compatible with unattended ground sensor networks will be available as a result of this program. Data rates of hundreds of kbps with bit error rates BER of 10and inter nodal ranges of hundreds of meters are consistent with phenomenology and technology.

Line of sight ultraviolet communications systems also offer some unique characteristics for exfiltration of data from an unattended ground sensor network. The absence of background radiation makes it possible to operate with wide field of view receivers and large transmitter cone angles. This capability significantly reduces acquisition pointing tracking requirements that are traditionally associated with free space optical links. In addition strong forward aerosol scatter in the ultraviolet reduces dependence on meteorological conditions. The operational range of line of sight solar blind communication systems is on the order of kilometers. By selection of operating wavelength within the solar blind region performance can be optimized to provide reliable communications and at the same time provide covert operation. Data rates on the order of megabits per second are possible with line of sight systems.

Communications is a key element of unattended sensor networks. Communication systems are required for inter nodal communication and for transmission of information from a gateway to a higher level system. There are a number of communication system approaches under consideration for unattended ground sensors as is disclosed in Gary A. Shaw et al. NLOS UV Communication for Distributed Sensor Systems Vol 4126 2000 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. Each system offers advantages and disadvantages and must be considered with respect to specific network requirements. For those applications where non line of sight conditions do or may exist covert operation is required and insensitivity to transceiver orientation is important a non line of sight solar blind ultraviolet communication network may represent an optimum solution. These communication systems may be located at fixed ground sites as shown in or they may be utilized with mobile ground based or airborne networks. System requirements will vary considerably depending on network type and associated sensor technology.

Referring to a preferred embodiment of the sensor network of the present invention is used on terrain which is shown generally at which has a planer area and remote terrain features as mountains . This terrain is also characterized by vegetation as at trees and obscuring features as at building . The network shown generally at numeral includes a plurality of unattended sensing nodes as at nodes and . Each of these nodes includes a transmitter for transmitting ultra violet radiation with a wavelength within the solar blind region and a receiver for receiving ultra violet radiation with a wavelength within the solar blind region. Ultra violet radiation is transmitted in a cone angle of the receiver as at cones and . There is also a gateway node with a cone angle of transceiver which transmits ultra violet radiation with a wavelength within the solar blind region to remote receiver which may for example be positioned in an unmanned aerial vehicle UAV .

General inter nodal communication system parameters are shown in . While the ability to reliably transmit selected information over inter nodal distances is clearly the primary requirement for any communication system many other requirements will ultimately determine which systems approach represents an optimum solution for a given network. For unattended ground sensor UGS networks low power operation covertness and cost are major considerations.

Referring to it will be understood that inter nodal communication system parameters include the following data rate bit error rate energy efficiency size weight cost sensitivity to adverse meteorological conditions sensitivity to ground proximity sensitivity to emplacement mode LOS NLOS condition sensor communication capability jam resistance covertness and range .

Referring to the ultraviolet spectrum is divided into several regions as is disclosed in R. E. Huffman Chapter 2 Academic Press 1992 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. The region between 200 nm and 280 nm is referred to as the solar blind region. In this region radiation interacts strongly with atmospheric constituents molecules and aerosols resulting in some very unique properties. At wavelengths greater than 280 nm background radiation is significant and constraints associated with most optical systems apply. Below 200 nm absorption is so strong that propagation is severely limited and it is not feasible to operate within the atmosphere. The unique properties and the potential value of solar blind ultraviolet communication systems have been recognized for many years. A number of prototypes have been built and tested as disclosed in M. Geller and G. B. Johnson Non Line of Sight NLOS Covert UV Communication Link 1985 Boston Mass. October 1985 4 95 B. Charles B. et. al. An ultraviolet laser based communications system for short range tactical applications Vol. 2115 1994 J. J. Puschell High Data Rate Ultraviolet Communication System for the Tactical Battlefield 1990 s 1990 F. Martin Ultraviolet Light Fosters Covert Special Operations May 1990 G. A. Shaw A. M. Siegel and M. Nischan Demonstration System and Applications for Compact Wireless Ultraviolet Communications Vol. 5071 2003 the contents of all of which are incorporated herein by reference. While the potential was recognized propagation models and prototype systems developed and validated no viable applications emerged due to emitter limitations. In general available emitter characteristics size power consumption and cost were inconsistent with potential applications. This situation is changing rapidly as semiconductor emitters LEDs and Lasers being developed under the DARPA SUVOS Semiconductor Ultraviolet Optical Sources Program begin to emerge as is disclosed in http www.darpa.mil mto suvos W. H. Sun et. al. AlGaN based 280 nm light emitting diodes with continuous wave powers in excess of 105 mW 26 Jul. 2004 V. Adivarahan et al. 250 nm AlGaN light emitting diodes Vol. 85 No. 12 20 Sept. 2004 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. With the availability of these emitters solar blind ultraviolet communication systems are poised to satisfy inter nodal communication requirements for unattended ground sensors. This is especially true for those applications where non line of sight conditions do or may exist covert operation is required and insensitivity to sensor positioning is highly desirable.

The unique properties of the solar blind region are a result of strong interactions in the upper and lower atmospheres. In the upper atmosphere the ozone layer nominally 20 km altitude strongly absorbs solar radiation producing what is referred to as zero background conditions in the lower atmosphere. These conditions are the reason why this region is referred to as the solar blind region. Ground level solar irradiance as a function of wavelength is shown in . The sharp transition in background level from 300 nm to 280 nm is due to ozone absorption. In the lower atmosphere molecules and aerosols present in the medium communication channel strongly scatter and absorb radiation. Scattered radiation provides a basis for non line of sight communication and absorption provides the basis for covert operation.

The absence of background radiation zero background conditions makes it possible to design receivers with very unique properties. For most optical systems background radiation limits performance and leads to narrow field of view receivers with significant acquisition pointing tracking requirements and a strong dependence on meteorological conditions. In the solar blind ultraviolet the opposite is true. Sensitive quantum noise limited photon counting wide field of view receivers are possible and pointing requirements and dependence on meteorological conditions are minimal.

While zero background conditions makes it possible to operate very sensitive wide field of view receivers it is strong scattering that provides the means of transferring information from a transmitter to a receiver when non line of sight conditions exist. Scattering provides an indirect path from transmitter to receiver and involves the volume in which the communication system is immersed. This mode of operation may be thought of as a large number of tiny relay stations located in the transmitter receiver common volume where each station is located at a different point in space and each signal arrives at the receiver at a slightly different time. The volume in space that contributes to the temporal distribution of the received signal is determined by the communication system configuration. Three different configurations are shown in and .

Referring for example to the transmitter in node transmits ultra violet radiation at a wavelength within the solar blind region in a wide angle cone with longitudinal axis . Node is separated from another node by a distance R and the receiver receives ultra violet radiation in at a wavelength within the solar blind region in a wide angle cone with a vertical longitudinal axis . The cones and intersect in common volume . It will be appreciated that this arrangement has minimum sensor positioning requirements and unbounded common volume and the lowest band width as compared to the other arrangements shown in and . Referring to there is a node with a transmitter that transmits ultra violet radiation at a wavelength within the solar blind region in narrow angle cone that has a diagonal longitudinal axis . Node is separated from node by a distance R. Node has a receiver which receives ultra violet radiation at a wavelength within the solar blind region in a wide angle cone with a vertical longitudinal axis . Cone and cone intersect in common volume . It will be appreciated that in this arrangement there is maximum energy in the common volume a bounded common volume and high bandwidth. Referring to an arrangement is shown with node with a transmitter that transmits ultra violet radiation at a wavelength within the solar blind region in a narrow angle cone which has a diagonal central axis . Node is spaced from node by distance R and also has a receiver that receives ultra violet radiation at a wavelength within the solar blind region in a narrow angle cone with a central axis and which intersects cone in common volume . This arrangement results in a bounded common volume and maximum bandwidth. The temporal distribution temporal dispersion of the received signal is determined by transmitter receiver common volume. For a given system configuration transmitter cone angle and receiver field of view the width of the temporal distribution broadens with range and the bandwidth of the channel decreases. The magnitude of the received signal is determined by common volume photon density incident on the volume and characteristics number density size distribution and phase function of scattering particles within the volume. For the purposes of this disclosure a wide angle cone is considered to have an angle of between about 90 to about 180 and a narrow angle cone is considered to have an angle of about 30 or less.

The capacity maximum data rate of the communication system is determined by the temporal distribution of the received signal. This distribution summation of a large number of multi path signals represents the channel impulse response and is as mentioned above determined by transmitter receiver common volume characteristics. Where the common volume is bounded and relatively small as shown in the impulse response will be less than 100 ns and the channel capacity will be on the order of mbps. An experimental example of the temporal distribution for this case is shown in as described in F. Martin Ultraviolet Light Fosters Covert Special Operations Signal May 1990 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. Here the range was 1.2 km transmitted pulse width was 5 ns and the measured impulse response was 70 ns. Impulse response duration will depend on inter nodal separation transmitter and receiver elevation angles transmitter divergence and receiver field of view. Where the volume is unbounded the impulse response will be on the order of a 1000 ns and channel capacity will be on the order of hundreds of kbps. Therefore data rates from hundreds of kbps to several mbps are feasible for non line of sight ultraviolet communication systems.

Covertness low probability of detection or intercept is an important system parameter for unattended ground sensors. For solar blind ultraviolet communication systems atmospheric absorption provides the basis for covertness. Covertness is primarily due to absorption by ambient ozone O and molecular oxygen O and secondarily to system configuration geometry. The degree of covertness is a strong function of wavelength and is a factor in system design considerations. As wavelength decreases covertness increases. For wavelengths between 230 nm and 280 nm ozone is the dominant absorber. Below 230 nm molecular oxygen determines the degree of covertness. Since ozone is a variable atmospheric component and density can vary significantly this fact must be reflected in system design. Typical numbers will range between 25 ppb and 75 ppb parts per billion . The absorption cross section of ozone is shown in as disclosed in R. D. Hudson Critical Review of Ultraviolet Photoabsorption Cross Sections for Molecules of Astrophysical and Aeronomical Interest Vol. 9 No. 2 May 1971 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. It is truly a strong absorber with peak absorption at 255 nm. Transmission of ozone as a function of wavelength concentration and range is described by Equation 1. Oxygen is also a strong absorber. However it is a stable atmospheric component and operation in the oxygen region may be desirable for some applications. It should be noted that the mechanism responsible for covertness absorption also provides enhanced jam resistance and minimizes communication network susceptibility to interference from random ultraviolet sources and adjacent networks.

Unattended ground sensors may be emplaced in a number of ways. In general it is highly desirable to minimize any systems requirements associated with communication system attitude and ground proximity. Due to the use of wide field of view receivers and the means used to transfer information scattering from particles in the medium in which the system is immersed solar blind ultraviolet non line of sight systems are relatively insensitive to pointing requirements and are not sensitive to ground proximity as is the case with RF systems.

Unattended ground sensor networks must be capable of reliable performance over a wide range of operational and meteorological conditions. The variations in operational and meteorological conditions are a result of variations in the number density and size distribution of particles aerosols in the atmosphere. While the significant variations that can occur severely limit most optical systems non line of sight solar blind systems are relatively insensitive to these variations. This property is due to the fact that as meteorological or operational conditions degrade visual range decreases the number of scattering centers in the atmosphere increases. This effect leads to an increase in the magnitude of the received signal for a wide range of conditions.

Low power operation is another important parameter for unattended ground sensor communication systems. In general energy utilized by a communication system is determined by the energy required to transmit and receive information and the transmit receive duty cycle. Energy utilized to transmit information is a strong function of source efficiency and modulation technique employed to encode information. For solar blind communication systems where background noise is zero internal receiver noise is very low and photon counting techniques are employed transmit energy may be minimized by utilizing higher order digital communication techniques e.g. M ary PPM to minimize the transmit pulse rate for a given information data rate. For such systems energy pulse determines system performance characteristics. Ideally the transmit pulse would be an impulse and the bit interval would be determined by the impulse response of the channel. This is a unique property of solar blind communication systems and quite different from pulse communication systems which are receiver or background noise limited.

Light emitting diodes LEDs emerging from the SUVOS Semiconductor Ultraviolet Optical Sources program represent enabling technology for tactically viable short range non line of sight communication systems that operate in the solar blind spectral region. These devices make it possible to take advantage of the unique properties of the solar blind ultraviolet for unattended ground sensor communications applications. Solar blind ultraviolet communication systems are particularly well suited for those applications where non line of sight conditions may exist between network nodes covert operation is required and in sensitivity to ground proximity and communication system attitude are highly desirable. In this section a specific system configuration will be considered and trade offs based on LED performance characteristics will be presented. The characteristics of the system are presented in .

Referring to there is a transmitter with its associated cone which has a diagonal longitudinal axis . Receiver has an associated cone and a longitudinal axis . Cones and intersect in common area .

The UV non line of sight communication channel transfers information from the transmitter to the receiver by scattering from particles in the atmosphere as discussed in previous sections. This scattering process is lossy and introduces pulse broadening due to multi path effects. The magnitude of these effects depends on the system configuration. However system dependencies range meteorological conditions etc. are desirable and the ability zero background conditions to utilize sensitive photon counting receivers makes it possible to employ transmitters based on low energy sources such as LEDs to achieve low power operation consistent with unattended ground sensor requirements.

Zero background conditions and very low receiver dark noise characteristics make it possible to utilize photon counting receivers. This type receiver provides high sensitivity and stability. The receiver will be operating in the quantum noise limited regime where shot noise associated with the signal establishes system performance limits. Transmitted photons arrive at the receiver and are counted with some efficiency. Poisson statistics describe the counting process and are utilized to calculate probability of detection and bit error rates. The plots presented in show the probability of detection for signal and noise. These curves provide the basis for determining system bit error rates once the modulation scheme is selected. In addition they ultimately provide the basis for determining transmitter energy pulse requirements.

Using forward error correction FEC a channel error rate of 1e 3 can be corrected to better than 1e 7 with readily available Reed Solomon techniques that only require a few percent increase in transmission rate to accommodate the necessary redundancy and framing overhead. With a data rate of 20 kbps a 1e 7 BER is sufficiently error free to provide reliable service. Given the system requirements on received signal levels 7 counted photons per bit on average the transmitter requirements follow from an analysis of the channel loss.

Recent single and double scatter radiative transfer simulations for the system configuration shown in and operating with a 19.2 kbps data rate have shown that 7 uJ pulse is required for an inter nodal separation of 100 m with an uncorrected bit error rate BER of 1E 3. The impulse response was approximately 400 ns as shown in . These results closely agree with published results as shown in M. R. Luettgen J. H. Shapiro and D. M. Reilly Non line of sight single scatter propagation model Vol. 8 No. 12 December 1991 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. It was also shown that transmitted energy pulse requirements grew linearly not 1 R with range. A plot of energy pulse requirements as a function of range is show in .

SUVOS LEDs are ideal candidates to serve as transmitter UV energy sources. In their present state of maturity arrays of LEDs are needed to provide signal levels necessary for 100 meter communication ranges. Fortunately their development is such that orders of magnitude increases in performance have been witnessed in the past year. This speaks well to which shows a linear dependence of signal powers as a function of range. Considering the nearly exponential development rate of UV LEDs a wide variety of communications capabilities will be enabled once the performance threshold is exceeded.

To obtain the maximum energy per pulse some engineering tradeoffs may be made based on the characteristics of the UV LEDs. The two driving parameters of interest are the average power limit and peak power limit. Devices only capable of low peak powers are best operated at high duty cycles at their average power limit to maximize energy per pulse by maximizing pulse width. Devices which are capable of high peak powers can be operated at lower duty cycles and still obtain large pulse energies. shows plots of pulse power and energy for a 20 kbps data rate. Three plots are shown. The curve labeled RZ power shows the peak power as a function of pulse width for a return to zero on off keyed RZ OOK modulation format. Assuming half the data bits are zeros a 50 usec pulse has a peak power of 3 mW. As the pulse width is reduced by reducing the duty cycle the peak power may be increased while maintaining operation at the average power limit. The corresponding energy per pulse shown by the curve labeled RZ energy is constant and equal to the average power limit 1.5 mW divided by the pulse rate 10 kpps . At a low enough duty cycle the peak power limit is reached and the pulse energy is then a linear function of pulse width. If the pulse rate is reduced then longer pulse widths can be used at the peak power limit while not exceeding the average power limit. The result would be higher pulse energies. The curve labeled 16 PPM shows the case of 16 pulse position modulation which reduces the pulse rate to 5 kpps thus allowing peak power operation for twice the duration of RZ OOK and correspondingly twice the pulse energy of RZ energy .

Today s UV LEDs have ratios of peak power limit to average power limit in the range of 16 20. The inverse of this ratio sets the duty cycle at which the LED operation transitions from being average power limited to being peak power limited. A communication system can be designed to operate at both limits such that the maximum energy per pulse is achieved while the maximum bit rate is achieved. Utilizing high order PPM is a means of achieving this optimum. shows the statistics of three modulation formats with LED operating characteristics similar to that shown in . It is easy to see from the figure that 4 PPM has no energy per bit Eb advantage over OOK RZ however there is a significant realizable advantage to using 16 PPM. The energy per bit advantages grow with higher order formats such as 32 PPM 64 PPM etc. but with corresponding increases in signal synchronization complexity and increased demands on the LED s ratio of peak to average power limits.

The unique properties of the solar blind ultraviolet spectral region provide a basis for covert non line of sight communication systems with highly desirable characteristics. This type system can provide reliable inter nodal communication for unattended ground sensor networks and is particularly attractive when non line of sight conditions do or may exist between network nodes covert and low power operation are required and insensitivity to positioning ground proximity and meteorological conditions are desired.

Small low power and low cost transceivers are becoming available as a result of the DARPA SUVOS program. Light emitting diodes LEDs being developed under this program are improving at a rapid rate and significant improvements in pulse energy efficiency and reliability are anticipated. Communication systems based on this technology will provide a non line of sight capability with data rates of hundreds of kbps and ranges of hundreds of meters.

While the present invention has been described in connection with the preferred embodiments of the various figures it is to be understood that other similar embodiments may be used or modifications and additions may be made to the described embodiment for performing the same function of the present invention without deviating therefrom. Therefore the present invention should not be limited to any single embodiment but rather construed in breadth and scope in accordance with the recitation of the appended claims.

