---

title: Current measurement apparatus
abstract: Apparatus and methods are provided for a system for measurement of a current in a conductor such that the conductor current may be momentarily directed to a current measurement element in order to maintain proper current without significantly increasing an amount of power dissipation attributable to the current measurement element or adding resistance to assist in current measurement. The apparatus and methods described herein are useful in superconducting circuits where it is necessary to monitor current carried by the superconducting elements while minimizing the effects of power dissipation attributable to the current measurement element.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07449877&OS=07449877&RS=07449877
owner: Reliance Electric Technologies LLC
number: 07449877
owner_city: Mayfield Heights
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050930
---
This invention was made with Government support under Contract DE FC36 93CH10580 awarded by the United States Department of Energy. The Government may have certain rights in the invention.

One of the chief features of superconducting wires is that they have extremely low in the case of high temperature superconductors or zero in the case of low temperature superconductors resistance and hence dissipate little if any power. In many applications where they are used it is necessary to monitor the current carried by the superconductor. The additional resistance and power dissipation associated with current sensing systems such as resistive current sensors tends to defeat some of the advantage of using superconducting wire. Apparatus and techniques are needed to measure current in a conductor such as a superconducting wire in a straight forward manner without introducing additional resistance and power dissipation.

The above mentioned problems are addressed by embodiments of the present invention and will be understood by reading and studying the following specification. In various embodiments apparatus and methods provide a system for measurement of a current in a conductor such that the conductor current may be momentarily directed to a current measurement element. These and other aspects embodiments advantages and features will become apparent from the following description and the referenced drawings.

In the following detailed description of the invention reference is made to the accompanying drawings which form a part hereof and in which are shown by way of illustration specific embodiments in which the invention may be practiced. These embodiments are described in sufficient detail to enable those skilled in the art to practice the present invention. Other embodiments may be utilized and structural logical and electrical changes may be made without departing from the scope of the invention. The various embodiments disclosed herein are not necessarily mutually exclusive as some embodiments can be combined with one or more other embodiments to form new embodiments. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense.

In an embodiment current in a conductor may be momentarily directed through a current measurement element to determine the amount of current in the conductor. Such a current measurement method may be used in a system where continuous current sensing is not required. In addition such a current measurement method may be used in a system where power dissipation in a current sensing element is of concern. For example in situations where it is necessary that the current sensing take place in a cryogenic environment it may be desirable to eliminate power dissipation in a current sensor. In an embodiment current in a superconducting element may be momentarily directed through a current measurement element to determine the amount of current in the superconducting element. The superconducting element may be but is not limited to a superconducting coil or a superconducting wire. The measured current may be compared against a threshold current level for operating the conductor. In an embodiment if the measured current is less than the threshold current a superconducting element may be charged to increase its current to a level above the threshold. In an embodiment a superconducting coil may be in a persistent current mode in which current is continually flowing in the superconducting coil without constant coupling to a power source.

Current measurement element may be realized in various configurations. Current measurement element may be a resistor. Measurement of the voltage across the resistor having a known resistance determines the current through the resistor. Current measurement element may be a semiconductor device configured to function as a resistor. Current measurement element is not limited to a resistor or a semiconductor device configured to function as a resistor but may be realized as other components or elements having known characteristics to provide a measure of the current through the component.

Switch may momentarily direct current from conductor to current measurement element . The switch may be realized as a semiconductor switch a relay other electronic and or electro mechanical switch or a device to selectively direct current to current measurement element . Semiconductor devices such as MOSFETS may be adapted as low resistance shunt switches especially when they are cooled to cryogenic temperatures such as for embodiments in which current sensing takes place at cryogenic temperatures. In addition semiconductor devices may be controlled in a straight forward manner. A semiconductor switch may include using a transistor arrangement in which one or more transistors may be turned on or off to momentarily provide a current path to current measurement element . A semiconductor switch may include a MOSFET or other FET type device. The semiconductor switch may include bipolar transistors arranged to momentarily provide a current path to current measurement element . A variety of devices and device arrangements may configured in various embodiments as a switch to momentarily provide a current path to current measurement element .

In an embodiment switch momentarily directs conductor current through current measurement element for a period of time such that this period of time is short with respect to the period of time for which current does not flow in current measurement element . By momentarily directing conductor current to current measurement element switch provides a short duty cycle for current measurement. In an embodiment switch may be opened for a time limited to the time necessary to measure the voltage across current measurement element .

In an embodiment conductor may be a superconducting coil where current measurement apparatus provides a current sense system that is in series with superconducting coil . This series configuration may couple to a power source or other means in which power is provided to superconducting coil . This coupling may provide constant current to superconducting coil . Switch having a small resistance relative to current measurement element dissipates less power than having current measurement element in series with superconducting coil . Thus once the current of superconducting coil is measured by directing the current through current measurement element switch may be closed to provide an effective short across current measurement element . In an embodiment switch may be opened for a time limited to the time necessary to measure the voltage across current measurement element .

In an embodiment conductor is a superconducting coil where current measurement apparatus includes a switch connected in parallel with current measurement element across which a voltage may be measured to determine the current in superconducting coil . Current measurement element may be a resistor or other component configured as a resistor. To reduce the power drain caused by current measurement element superconducting coil may be operated with switch in a normally closed position such as to effectively provide a short circuit across current measurement element in which essentially no current flows through current measurement element . This effective short circuit may be realized by a switch having a significantly small resistance compared with current measurement element . Power dissipation in switch having a small resistance will cause the current to decay in superconducting coil . Switch may be selected based on acceptable current decay rates for superconducting coil . When switch is momentarily opened current flows from superconducting coil through current measurement element which provides a voltage across current measurement element . This voltage may be measured to determine the current flow. Once the current is measured switch may be closed to once again provide an effective short across current measurement element . In an embodiment switch may be opened for a time limited to the time necessary to measure the voltage across current measurement element .

In an embodiment current measurement apparatus provides a current sense system that is in series with a superconducting coil . In conjunction with this configuration superconducting coil may operate in a persistent current mode. Current measurement apparatus may include a switch connected in parallel with a series combination of current measurement element and a switch . A voltage may be measured across current measurement element to determine the current in superconducting coil . Current measurement element may be a resistor or other component configured as a resistor. To reduce the current decay caused by current measurement element superconducting coil may operate with switch in a normally closed position such as to effectively provide a short circuit across the series combination of current measurement element and switch . In an embodiment switch may be open when switch is closed so that no current flows through current measurement element . Switch having a small resistance will cause the current to decay in superconducting coil . Switch may be selected based on acceptable current decay rates for superconducting coil . When switch is momentarily opened and switch is momentarily closed current flows from superconducting coil through current measurement element which provides a voltage. This voltage may be measured to determine the current flow. Once the current is measured switch may be closed and switch opened to once again eliminate current flow to current measurement element . In an embodiment switch may be closed to effectively generate the configuration of . With switch closed the effective short circuit provided by a closed switch may be realized by switch having a significantly small resistance compared with current measurement element . In an embodiment switch is opened and switch is closed for a time limited to the time necessary to measure the voltage across current measurement element .

In an embodiment system may include a superconducting coil in which a switch may be operated to place superconducting coil in a persistent current mode. With switch closed and switch open power supply may charge superconducting coil to a desired operating current level. In embodiment switch may be open while charging superconducting coil so that current sense apparatus will be active. With current sense apparatus active control unit may monitor the coil current. When the desired current level is achieved control unit may close switch to short superconducting coil for persistent current operation. Control unit may open switch to disconnect power supply . Alternatively control unit may shut off power supply in which case depending on the type of power supply switch may be eliminated from the configuration for system . Current will flow through the shorted loop with a time constant determined by the coil inductance and the net series resistance in the loop. Control unit may also close switch so that current sense apparatus does not dissipate energy. Control unit may periodically open switch so that current sense apparatus may provide a measure of the coil current.

At a point at which control unit determines that the coil current has dropped by a pre specified amount or has dropped below a threshold level control unit may open switch close switch or turn on power supply to couple power from power supply to superconducting coil and open switch to monitor the coil current. These switches remain in these states until the coil current is increased to the desired level. In an embodiment the threshold is set at 95 of a selected operating current for superconducting coil . The threshold may be set at other levels depending on the application. After the desired level for the coil current is achieved superconducting coil may be placed back in the persistent current mode as described above. Control unit may continue the cycle of periodically monitoring the coil current and recharging the current in superconducting coil .

In an embodiment system may be a system that uses current sensing apparatus to periodically measure the current in conductor in a manner similar to that discussed herein. In an embodiment system includes a superconducting coil configured as a direct current DC magnet. In an embodiment system includes a rotating machine. In an embodiment system includes a superconducting motor or generator. In an embodiment system is configured to use a current sensing scheme in which a very low resistance switch may momentarily direct current from conductor to current measurement element to determine the current of conductor . Current measurement element may effectively be out of the circuit in which current flows through conductor during times in which a current measurement is not being made.

Although specific embodiments have been illustrated and described herein it will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that any arrangement that is calculated to achieve the same purpose may be substituted for the specific embodiments shown. This application is intended to cover any adaptations or variations of embodiments of the present invention. It is to be understood that the above description is intended to be illustrative and not restrictive and that the phraseology or terminology employed herein is for the purpose of description and not of limitation. Combinations of the above embodiments and other embodiments will be apparent to those of skill in the art upon studying the above description.

