---

title: System for providing emergency medical care with real-time instructions and associated methods
abstract: A basic life support system (BLSS) includes a processing element and an output element, such as a display screen or an audio output element, for providing an individual with real-time instructions on providing emergency medical care to a patient until paramedics or other healthcare professionals arrive to take over care for the patient. The instructions may be provided as graphics, including animations, as text, audibly, or as a combination of visible and audible elements. The BLSS may be configured for providing emergency medical care to individuals who have suffered from ventricular fibrillation. Accordingly, the BLSS may also include a defibrillation apparatus, an air or oxygen supply, a respiratory interface, one or more sensors, or a combination thereof.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07774060&OS=07774060&RS=07774060
owner: Axon Medical, Inc.
number: 07774060
owner_city: Park City
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050620
---
This application is a continuation of PCT International Application No. PCT US2003 040834 filed Dec. 22 2003 designating the United States of America and published in English as PCT International Publication No. WO 2004 058351 A1 on Jul. 15 2004 which application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 435 907 filed Dec. 20 2002 the entire contents of each of which are hereby incorporated herein by this reference.

This invention was made with government support under Grant NAS 9 03047 awarded by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The government has certain rights to this invention.

The present invention relates to apparatus and systems for assisting responding individuals or responders in providing emergency medical care to others. In particular the present invention relates to emergency medical care apparatus and systems that provide graphic displays to instruct responders on the appropriate manner in which emergency medical care should be given. More specifically the present invention relates to apparatus and systems for instructing responders in real time on how to provide respiratory or cardiopulmonary resuscitation.

Sudden cardiac arrest resulting from heart attack or cardiac arrest or ventricular fibrillation VF a spontaneous mostly fatal interruption of normal heartbeat is a leading cause of death. Survival rates for VF are about 5 to 10 percent.

Sometimes the stricken individual or VF victim or patient will be fortunate enough to suffer from VF in proximity to someone who has received cardiopulmonary resuscitation CPR training. Nonetheless a large number of CPR trained individuals are not able to provide effective emergency care when an individual has suffered from VF. In this regard Brennan and Braslow found that 45 of 226 recent graduates of CPR training failed to open the airway prior to checking for respiration and that 50 of the recent graduates failed to adequately assess the patient s respiratory status. Failure in these critical CPR administration skills may contribute to poor survival rate following out of hospital VF.

Even when CPR has been properly administered to an individual who has suffered VF survival rates decrease by about 10 percent for every minute that goes by without a stricken individual receiving a defibrillation shock. In the United States it generally takes about six to twelve minutes for the average emergency medical services EMS team to arrive at the scene of a medical emergency.

Automatic external defibrillators AED can significantly increase successful outcomes following sudden cardiac arrest. Success rates rise from 3 to 70 when AEDs are used within 3 4 minutes of arrest with recent studies showing that up to 70 percent of VF victims survive when AEDs are accessible. Clearly early defibrillation is the key to saving lives.

Conventionally use of AEDs to treat VF has been limited to caregivers with some level of medical expertise including without limitation doctors nurses emergency medical technicians EMTs law enforcement personnel fire personnel security guards health club employees flight attendants lifeguards and office managers. The American Heart Association AHA estimates that in the U.S. nearly 120 000 of the approximately 300 000 people who die annually from sudden cardiac arrest could be saved with public access defibrillation. According to the AHA Public access defibrillation which places AEDs in the hands of trained laypersons has the potential to be the single greatest advance in the treatment of VF cardiac arrest since the development of CPR. Only recently however have public access AEDs become available.

In view of the foregoing the federal government of the U.S. has taken several measures to reduce the incidence of deaths that are attributable to out of hospital occurrences of VF. For example the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration OSHA has endorsed the placement of AEDs in the workplace the U.S. Congress has passed the Community Access to Early Defibrillation Act to provide funds for the purchase of defibrillators and the U.S. Congress has enacted the 1999 Cardiac Arrest Survival Act which mandates placement of defibrillators in all federal buildings.

Although efforts are being made to place AEDs in a variety of locations currently available AEDs are difficult for untrained or minimally trained individuals to use. For example members of the flight crew on the International Space Station ISS are only required to have 40 hours of emergency medical training. Upon discovering a patient in distress two members of the flight crew onboard the ISS are responsible for stabilizing the injured crew member until support can be provided by ground based flight surgeons. When the ISS is not in communication with ground based support the link with ground based flight surgeons is only useful about half of the time and is subject to blackout periods that last for about ten or fifteen minutes the crew is trained to use the Integrated Medical Group IMG Medical Checklist and follow a twenty four page Advanced Cardiac Life Support algorithm. This is a formidable task for crewmembers with only 40 hours of medical training.

Recent studies indicate that the treatment of a VF victim following the current National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA protocol would take too long primarily due to the lengthy text based instructions and difficulty in understanding such instructions in a high stress situation.

Accordingly there is a need for apparatus systems and methods for providing responders including untrained and minimally trained individuals with emergency medical care instructions including but not limited to administration of CPR and effective use of AED in real time.

The present invention includes apparatus and systems by which emergency medical treatment may be provided and for providing a responder with instructions on administering such emergency medical care.

In one embodiment an apparatus according to the present invention comprises a Basic Life Support System BLSS configured for use in treating VF patients. Such an apparatus includes among other things a power supply AED pads and at least one visual display element for providing graphic instructions on use of the AED pads. Additionally an apparatus according to the present invention may include an air or oxygen supply means for facilitating introduction of the air or oxygen into the lungs of the patient referred to herein as a respiratory interface one or more sensors e.g. for monitoring one or more of the patient s respiration blood oxygen level pulse heart etc. or a combination of any of the foregoing.

Graphic instructions according to the present invention are designed to optimize i.e. minimize the amount of time it takes a responder who is administering emergency medical care to correctly perform certain functions. In order to avoid confusing the responder the graphic instructions may provide accurate depictions of other components of the apparatus or system. The graphic instructions may be accompanied by or supplemented with text instructions audible instructions or alarms appropriately positioned symbols and the like.

Examples of the instructions that may be provided to guide a responder through CPR procedures and the use of an AED include providing graphic instructions on appropriate head tilt chin lift and jaw thrust to maintain a patent airway showing a responder how to place and seal a mask or other breathing element in communication with the patient s airway and how to provide air or oxygen to the lungs of the patient and illustrating proper placement and use of the AED pads.

An apparatus or system according to the present invention may also include one or more processing elements such as a central processing unit which may monitor the patient monitor operation of the apparatus or system or provide the responder with instructions which instructions may or may not be based on feedback provided by sensors of the apparatus or system the responder or another individual.

Apparatus for use in providing instructions and support in treating other medical emergencies are also within the scope of the present invention.

Other features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art through consideration of the ensuing description the accompanying drawings and the appended claims.

An exemplary embodiment of a BLSS that incorporates teachings of the present invention is shown in . BLSS includes a chassis which carries a power supply and other elements of BLSS as well as an enclosure within which the other elements of BLSS are contained. Examples of other elements that may be included in BLSS include without limitation an AED a respiratory interface e.g. the depicted mask a responder protection filter an air or oxygen supply and sensors for respiratory or cardiovascular support. Additionally the illustrated BLSS includes a processing element and a display screen in communication with processing element for conveying instructions with text and graphics as well as an input element for selecting from options provided on display screen and inputting other information. BLSS may also include an audio output element associated with processing element .

BLSS may also include any of a variety of other elements that are useful for providing functions that are well known in the art but for the sake of simplicity are not described in detail herein. For example BLSS may include blood pressure monitoring apparatus rebreathing apparatus or COabsorbers to optimize the efficiency with which BLSS uses oxygen rich gas.

As it may be desirable to impart BLSS with some degree of portability the overall system may consume a relatively small amount of power have a relatively low weight and be relatively inexpensive.

BLSS may be configured to identify the functions and proper use of the various components thereof include components which are simply and intuitively used by a responder and minimize the mental workload on a responder thereby preventing errors by the responder and aiding the responder in providing quality emergency medical care to a patient regardless of the responder s level of expertise in providing such care.

Power supply may comprise any type of power supply suitable for providing the power necessary to operate the various elements of BLSS. Power supply may be configured to be connected to a power source i.e. plugged in or include a battery to provide true portability.

Enclosure within which chassis and other elements of BLSS are contained includes a door by which ready access to the various elements of BLSS may be obtained. Door may be associated with a switch as known in the art to automatically provide power other elements of BLSS e.g. processing element AED sensors etc. as door is opened.

AED comprises a defibrillation apparatus of any suitable known type. Among other known components AED includes defibrillation pads or simply pads that are configured to contact the chest of a patient as known in the art and to electrically shock the patient also as known in the art.

Each of respiratory interface responder protection filter air or oxygen supply delivery component and sensors may also be referred to as a respiratory support apparatus as each of these elements is configured to support the provision of respiratory support to a patient.

Respiratory interface is configured to form an airtight seal with the mouth nose or both of a patient to establish reliable flow communication with the airway e.g. trachea and lungs of the patient. Respiratory interface may optionally include a pressure sensor which provides an indication of the amount of pressure applied to respiratory interface . Such a pressure sensor may communicate with processing element of BLSS or another processing element not shown which may in turn be configured to output information about the amount of pressure being applied to respiratory interface . Pressure sensors are particularly useful for use in warning a responder that too little or too much pressure is being applied to respiratory interface embodiments e.g. masks breathing tubes with protective covers etc. that cover a portion of the face and that require the responder to apply pressure to ensure that an adequate seal has been established and maintained.

The deadspace within mask may be configured to facilitate accurate etCOdetection and to optimize the amount of ventilation for each breath delivered to the patient e.g. about 30 mL or less . Mask may also be configured to minimize airway resistance so as to minimize the work of breathing required by both BLSS and the patient.

Mask may by way of example only comprise a continuous positive airway pressure CPAP mask of known type available from a variety of manufacturers including Respironics Inc. of Murraysville Pa.

Alternatively as shown in mask may comprise the mask portion of a bag valve mask BVM resuscitator a non bag BVM system a resuscitation mask e.g. the RONDEX PRM mask available from Rondex Products Inc. of Rockford Ill. which is designed for use by lifeguards public safety personnel and rescue personnel a low profile scavenger mask insert e.g. that available from Porter Instrument Company Inc. of Hatfield Pa. which contains a disposable insert and is often used for nitrous oxide delivery and monitoring respiration while scavenging volatile anesthetics and monitoring CO .

A good seal between mask and the face of a patient may be achieved and maintained by use of a suitable adhesive material.

Another example of a respiratory interface that may be included in a BLSS according to the present invention is the mouthpiece shown in . Mouthpiece which was originally designed to provide protection during mouth to mouth resuscitation includes a face shield . An adhesive may be applied to a surface of face shield and may be covered with a removable film until use of mouthpiece is required. The combination of face shield and adhesive thereon provides an easy to place patient interface which seals easily and well to the face of a patient. Face shield may be formed from a transparent or semi transparent material which facilitates visual monitoring of the status of the patient.

Air or oxygen supply may be included as a part of BLSS to increase the fraction of oxygen provided to and inspired by the patient. Air or oxygen supply may by way of nonlimiting example comprise a conventional oxygen cylinder. To prevent hypoxia which may lead to anaerobic metabolism and metabolic acidosis and can blunt the beneficial effects of chemical and electric therapy air or oxygen supply may comprise substantially pure oxygen or a gas mixture including higher than normal i.e. greater than about 20 oxygen. It is currently preferred that air or oxygen supply be portable such as a four inch tall oxygen cylinder which weighs 1.95 lbs. and can provide 33 L of oxygen at sea level atmospheric pressure which is equivalent to a 15 minute supply of oxygen at a delivery rate of about 2.2 L min. These cylinders are commercially available from Aeromedix.com LLC of Jackson Hole Wyo.

Optionally if air or oxygen supply is a gas tank it may be equipped with a fill meter of a known type. Fill meter indicates the amount of gases volume estimated duration etc. that remain within the gas tank. Such information may be displayed directly by fill meter by display screen e.g. by way of signals transmitted to and from processing element or by a combination thereof.

Communication between air or oxygen supply and respiratory interface may be established by known processes and with known apparatus referred to herein as delivery components . For example if respiratory interface comprises a BVM resuscitator delivery component may comprise the bag of the BVM resuscitator as well as inlets valves and flexible reservoir tubing deliver thereof which are collectively configured to deliver a relatively large tidal volume of oxygen enriched air to the patient when the bag of the BVM resuscitator is squeezed.

As another example in a non bag BVM system the lungs of a responder rather than a bag deliver a tidal volume of oxygen rich gases from air or oxygen supply to the patient through the mask i.e. respiratory interface thereof. Thus the valve of a non bag BVM system and tubing between air or oxygen supply and respiratory interface comprise a delivery component . Additionally the tubing of such a delivery component acts as a reservoir to increase the amount of oxygen delivered to the patient with each inspiratory breath.

With returned reference to responder protection filter may be included in BLSS when BLSS is configured to have the responder deliver air to the lungs of the patient e.g. by a somewhat protected version of mouth to mouth with respiratory interface being located between the mouth of the patient and the mouth of the responder . Responder protection filter may be positioned so as to prevent passage of pathogens between the patient and the responder e.g. within respiratory interface or at or near an end thereof and thereby providing some degree of protection to both the patient and the responder. Accordingly responder protection filter may comprise any filtration material or materials and optionally antimicrobial materials that are suitable for this purpose.

Sensor includes a portable electrocardiogram of a known type and accordingly is also referred to herein as electrocardiogram . Electrocardiogram includes electrodes which are configured to be secured at appropriate locations on the chest of a patient to monitor activity of the patient s heart as known in the art. In addition to monitoring the patient s heart electrocardiogram may monitor chest movements that are caused by respiration of the patient.

Sensors of BLSS which may more specifically comprise a gas analyzer e.g. a carbon dioxide or oxygen analyzer a flow meter and a pulse oximeter which measures the level of oxygen in the blood of the patient or blood oxygen saturation may monitor the respiratory activity of the patient whether the patient is adequately ventilated or both.

Additionally sensors may communicate data in the form of electronic signals directly or indirectly to processing element that in accordance with programming of processing element may be used to provide the responder with information about the status of patient and BLSS as well as guide the responder while emergency medical care in the form of respiratory or cardiovascular support is being provided to a patient.

By way of example only sensors may be used as known in the art to monitor the patient s airway resistance to monitor tidal volumes to detect spontaneous breathing to assess adequacy of alveolar ventilation and monitor COproduction VCO end tidal CO etCO concentrations. As a more specific example respiratory signals obtained with electrocardiogram may be used as known in the art to distinguish between efforts in ventilating the patient or spontaneous breathing by the patient and the actual volumes of respiratory gases that move into and out of the patient s lungs which may provide an indication of the effectiveness of the volumes of ventilatory gases that are provided to the patient e.g. an indication of whether any leaks or obstructions are present in the airway .

Accordingly upon receiving and evaluating signals from one or more of sensors processing element may respectively instruct the responder to check for obstructions in the airway and make sure the patient s airway is open advise the responder if mask leaks are present assess the effectiveness of chest compressions provided by the responder direct the responder to give breaths when needed assist the responder maintaining both an adequate breathing rate and large enough tidal volumes to maintain SaO and direct the responder on when CPR breaths are to be provided to the patient optimizing the trade offs between alveolar ventilation prevention of barotraumas and use of oxygen.

The respiratory monitor available from Respironics Inc. under the trademark COSMO PLUS is configured to monitor both carbon dioxide in the respiration of a patient as well as the flow of the patient s respiration. Accordingly the COSMO PLUS may be used as gas analyzer and flow meter with a respective gas sensor and flow sensor of a BLSS that incorporates teachings of the present invention to monitor airway pressure flow and mainstream COconcentration of the patient s respiration. Additionally the COSMO PLUS is configured to have a pulse oximeter operatively coupled thereto to facilitate monitoring of the oxygen saturation of the patient s arterial blood SaO . As various components of the COSMO PLUS communicate with and thus share data with one another a variety of blood and respiratory parameters including the presence of obstructions i.e. resistance and leaks in an airway may be calculated by a processing element of the COSMO PLUS Additionally at least one processing element of the COSMO PLUS and communication port associated therewith facilitate the communication of data embodied as electronic signals to another computer such as processing element of BLSS .

Of course BLSSs that include a gas analyzer a flow meter and pulse oximeter that are separate from one another are also within the scope of the present invention. Each of these components may comprise a known apparatus each of which is available from among a variety of sources Respironics Inc.

Cheaper alternatives with sufficient accuracy are also within the scope of the present invention. For example gas analyzer may comprise a so called colorimetric COsensor such as the sulfonephthalein based pH sensitive chemical sensor available from ICOR AB of Bromma Sweden. Such a gas analyzer includes an element which changes color when exposed to CO containing expiratory gases. For example a change in color from purple to yellow allows a rough estimation of the amount of COin a patient s respiration. The response is sufficiently rapid to allow breath to breath COmonitoring.

Thermistor sensors an example of which is shown in comprise an example of a simple and inexpensive flow meter . When placed at or near the nose or mouth thermistor sensors are capable of providing signals that are indicative of respiratory airflow. Although they are less quantitative than more expensive complex flow meters thermistor sensors may reliably detect spontaneous breathing during CPR. An exemplary thermistor type flow meter is available from S.L.P Scientific Laboratory Products Ltd. of Tel Aviv Israel and combines an oral thermistor and two nasal thermistors with a processor and display in a self contained low cost sensor strip. Such a device could by way of example only be mounted within a mask and automatically activated when mask is placed upon the face of a patient.

Another example of flow meter that may be used in a BLSS according to the present invention is a fiber optic humidity based respiratory monitor an example of which is shown in . Basically the tip of a thin optical fiber monitors the condensation and evaporation cycles that occur with respiration. Due to their small size they may be incorporated into any type of respiratory interface . Like thermistor type flow meters fiber optic humidity based respiratory monitors reliably detect breathing.

Pulse oximeter may comprise any suitable pulse oxymetry sensor and monitor. By way of example only when the COSMO PLUS is employed as a part of gas analyzer and flow meter pulse oximeter may comprise any of the pulse oximetry sensors available from Respironics Inc. that are compatible therewith.

Processing element of BLSS is configured to implement a treatment algorithm of the present invention. In so doing processing element may be configured e.g. by way of communication ports or other communication apparatus to communicate with other elements of BLSS including but not limited to sensors and . Processing element outputs instructions and optionally information to display screen providing ready access to such instructions by a responder. Additionally processing element may communicate with and control operation of AED flow of oxygen rich gases from air or oxygen supply or both.

Processing element may also be configured to maintain a record of use including data measured during use thereof instructions and alarms or warnings provided and the time at which each recorded event occurred. Additionally records of pertaining to maintenance activities such as recharging a battery of power supply refilling air or oxygen supply if air or oxygen supply comprises a tank replacement maintenance or cleaning of other elements of BLSS or the like may be recorded and maintained by processing element .

As a nonlimiting example processing element may comprise a central processing unit CPU of a known type. The CPU may comprise a single board CPU SBC such as the VIA EPIA Mini ITX SBC which has dimensions of about 17 cm 17 cm about 6.7 in. 6.7 in. available from VIA Technologies Inc. of Taipei Taiwan shown in . Additionally the CPU may include RS 232 and or Ethernet ports to acquire information from the patient sensors memory storage e.g. a hard drive unit or flash memory for storage of operating system e.g. the LINUX operating system and other software apparatus and drivers for outputting data including videos and graphics to display screen e.g. the ability to drive an LCD display with analog RGB output and SVGA graphics resolution hardware and or software for retrieving and executing graphics based animations and or true motion video a digitized sound processing unit for auditory messages or digitized speech and a power supply.

Display screen which operates under control of processing element in a manner known in the art may by way of example only be configured to present detailed computer graphics still animated etc. and instructions. As BLSS may be configured for use in a variety of environmental conditions display screen may be readily visible in most lighting conditions. Due to the desirable portability of BLSS display screen may have a relatively low weight small size and consume a minimal amount of power.

Exemplary devices that may be used as display screen include without limitation thin film transistor light emitting diode TFT LCD displays passive matrix STN LCD displays and organic light emitting diode OLED displays.

Input element may by way of example comprise a cursor pad touch pad roller ball keypad or keyboard or any other suitable known computer input device.

Audio output element may by way of example only comprise a speaker and associated hardware and software for driving the speaker.

One or more components of a BLSS according to the present invention may have a label or labels on the surface or an element thereof to facilitate proper positioning or use. Labels may comprise simple pictures or graphics. For example a mask may include printed fingers on an exterior surface thereof to indicate where the mask is to be held by a responder while the bag of a BVM system may include a printed hand thereon to indicate squeezing of the bag.

The programming by which processing element of BLSS operates may be configured to effect one or more of a variety of protocols for instructing a responder on the manner in which emergency medical care is to be provided to the patient. Instructions may be provided to the responder visually on display screen audible by way of audio output element or by a combination of visual and audio outputs.

The flow chart of depicts an exemplary protocol for administering emergency medical care to a patient suffering from VF while shows an exemplary process flow for one or more computer programs for operating processing element of BLSS . With continued reference to initially the responder is instructed to place pads of AED at the appropriate location on the chest of the patient and to activate and use AED . For patients in VF AED is likely to convert the rhythm effectively restoring adequate circulation and consciousness.

If the patient is not in VF or if AED is unsuccessful in converting the heart rhythm and restoring circulation to the patient then the responder will need instructions on providing resuscitation e.g. respiratory cardiopulmonary etc. . In this regard the responder is given instructions to open the patient s airway to assist the patient in breathing and optionally to perform chest compressions on the patient.

The patient s breathing may for example be assisted by placing respiratory interface in communication with the patient s airway. Oxygen flow and optionally monitoring may be automatically initiated when respiratory interface and sensors are removed from enclosure of BLSS or once these elements have been properly positioned. Alternatively the responder may be required to initiate oxygen flow and monitoring.

Information provided by use of sensors when transmitted to processing element will be evaluated by processing element in accordance with processing thereof and may be useful in prioritizing the steps in the CPR treatment or other emergency medical care protocol while leading the responder through the protocol. When information is gathered and evaluated by processing element the appropriate graphic instructions may be shown on display screen facilitating substantially real time provision of instructions to the responder. Processing element may cause such instructions to be provided visually in the form of graphic images or animations or text audibly in the form of voice commands or alarms or in any suitable combination of visual and audible instructions.

The programming by which processing element operates and thus provides instructions to a responder may be configured to provide a fixed set of instructions or to provide instructions in a tailored fashion depending upon various inputs automatic or manual . In providing a responder with instructions that are tailored to the monitored or observed conditions of the patient the programming of processing element may consider for example the amount of time before AED is used a predicted drop in the SaOof the patient over time monitored characteristics and the like. In both cases instructions may be ordered in such a manner as to provide the greatest benefits to the patient at the lowest cost in terms of e.g. physical harm probability of death etc. .

With reference to as well as with continued reference to an exemplary graphic display generated by programming of a processing element of a BLSS incorporating teachings of the present invention is shown. Graphic display may be modularized so that new instructions or changes in the protocol may be quickly represented to the responder by the appropriate additional or reorganized graphical instructions. For example as shown graphic display may include a virtual window for graphically providing a set of instructions to the responder. The graphics shown in virtual window may be animated.

A separate graphic representation may be provided in virtual window for each possible act in the emergency medical care administration process with programming of processing element causing a particular graphic representation to be displayed at an appropriate time during administration of emergency medical care. Each graphic representation is configured to provide the responder with simplified instructions on performing a certain task. Such instructions may emphasize salient features of the equipment and keywords to make the procedural steps easy to understand and simple to follow. One or more of the graphic representations may pause until processing element has received a particular feedback from a sensor or from the responder.

One example of a graphic representation according to the present invention shown in includes providing a responder with instructions on where and how to place pads of AED on the chest of the patient. Graphic or visual instructions may also be provided to instruct a responder on placement and use of sensors .

Another example of a graphic representation illustrated by includes instructions on providing a patient with an oxygen rich supply of gases. For example a responder may be shown how to initiate the flow of oxygen or an oxygen rich gas mixture from air or oxygen supply to secure respiratory interface to the patient to actuate delivery component if necessary to provide the oxygen or oxygen rich gas mixture to the patient and the frequency at which the oxygen or oxygen rich gas mixture should be supplied to the patient s lungs. To facilitate the responder s understanding of the instructions the graphic representation may accurately depict the specific elements included in BLSS . The graphic representation may automatically proceed from one act to the next e.g. when gas flow is detected when an adequate seal has been formed between respiratory interface and the airway of the patient etc. or may pause until processing element determines that the act has been completed the responder indicates that the act has been completed or a combination of such feedbacks.

With returned reference to graphic display may also include other boxes or regions. For example information about prior actions taken by the responder may be shown in a treatment tracking box . Treatment tracking box may be helpful to the responder by providing information which facilitates prompt back tracking in the event that it is necessary for the responder to repeat any portion of the process. Graphic display may also include a decision box which indicates to the responder a decision that he or she must make if any before further instructions may be given or to provide a location at which the responder may indicate whether he or she is ready to proceed. Additionally graphic display may include a diagnostic box within which information about the patient s status e.g. pulse SpO respiratory rate other respiration details etc. and other helpful information e.g. the estimated amount of time the supply of oxygen rich gas will last battery level etc. is displayed.

Of course in addition to or as an alternative to graphically providing instructions to a responder textual and audible instructions may be provided to the responder. When the instructions are primarily provided as graphic representations the supplemental use of labels audible instructions or alarms may provide redundancy which may be beneficial in optimizing the responder s confidence in his or her ability to follow the instructions that are provided by processing element of BLSS and thus in providing the patient with quality emergency medical care. In addition use of graphic representations are effective in noisy environments such as the 60 70 dB A background noise present on the ISS.

With returned reference to an example of use of BLSS is described. In providing emergency medical care to a VF victim with a BLSS such as BLSS a responder should place the electrodes or pads of AED at the appropriate locations on the chest of a patient then immediately perform CPR. It is typically desirable for a responder to follow the so called ABCs of CPR make sure the Airway is open assist Breathing and support Circulation with chest compressions. BLSS is configured to assist the responder in performing each of these tasks until the patient regains consciousness or paramedics arrive.

In an emergency situation in which BLSS is useful a responder may obtain access to BLSS and open an enclosure thereof. Upon opening enclosure pads of AED are immediately available for use power to BLSS is turned on processing element begins operating and display screen of BLSS becomes visible. Other elements of BLSS such as respiratory interface air or oxygen supply and sensors may also be made readily available to the responder.

The responder may initially be instructed to place pads of AED at the appropriate locations on the chest of the patient. Power may be provided to AED so as to shock the patient s heart either before or after positioning respiratory interface and sensors and activating air or oxygen supply and sensors .

Thereafter the instructional program may cause display screen to show the responder how to tilt the head and lift the chin of the patient in such a way as to align the airway and maintain an open airway as the patient is in a supine position. The responder will be subsequently instructed to place the respiratory interface so that proper communication with the airway of the patient is established and a proper seal is formed. If needed e.g. because sensors and are separate from respiratory interface the responder may be provided with instructions on placement of sensors . Respiratory interface as well as gas sensor and flow meter may then be placed in communication with the airway of a patient and pulse oximeter may be secured to an appropriate part of the patient s body.

Once activated gas sensor or flow sensor generate signals indicative of the status of the patient s respiration. A carbon dioxide type gas analyzer provides a measure of breathing rate while flow meter is useful for identifying leaks in respiratory interface and a pressure transducer could be used in a known manner to detect an obstructed airway or conduit. A visual alarm an audible alarm or automated speech may provide a warning if the patient s airway or a conduit is obstructed or a leak in the respiratory interface is detected. Exemplary alarms may for example provide an indication such as patient not breathing mask not sealed or airway obstructed. Such alarms may be accompanied by instructions on correcting the error.

Pulse oximeter when activated generates signals indicative of the level of oxygen saturation in arterial blood of the patient and of whether or not the patient has a pulse.

Electrocardiogram is useful for monitoring activity by the heart of the patient and movement of the chest of the patient.

As processing element receives signals from electrocardiogram gas sensor flow sensor and pulse oximeter it may under control of programming thereof make a determination of whether or not the patient is breathing or has a pulse and provide appropriate instructions to the responder.

Even if or when the patient is spontaneously breathing air or oxygen supply delivery components and respiratory interface may be used as known in the art depending of course upon the types of components used for each of these elements to provide the patient with an increased level of oxygen. Processing element again under control of programming thereof may cause display screen or audio element to instruct the responder on how and when to administer breaths to the patient.

When no pulse is detected by use of pulse oximeter and processing element or an electrocardiogram ECG or EKG waveform obtained by way of electrocardiogram and generated by processing element indicates to programming of processing element that chest compressions are necessary processing element may be caused to output instructions to display screen or audio element on shocking the patient s heart with AED compressing the patient s chest or a combination thereof. Graphic instructions for chest compressions can convey information from the American Heart Association s CPR guidelines. An indication of the effectiveness of chest compressions may be provided to processing element by gas analyzer . Following an evaluation of signals from gas analyzer further appropriate instructions may be provided by processing element to the responder through display screen or audio element .

If pulse oximeter detects a pulse or an ECG waveform obtained by use of electrocardiogram indicates that it is not necessary to administer a shock by AED as shocking the patient may injure the patient. Accordingly the programming by which processing element operates may prevent the responder from administering such a shock or terminate the ability of AED to provide the shock. Redundancy mechanisms may be built into BLSS or processing element thereof may be otherwise robustly programmed as known in the art to prevent the occurrence of false readings which might allow a responder to shock a spontaneously breathing patient or prevent a responder from shocking a patient whose heart has stopped beating.

By use of a BLSS according to the present invention it may be possible for a lay responder i.e. a responder without prior CPR or health care training to effectively treat a VF victim within about five minutes.

Administration of emergency medical care in this case CPR continues of course until paramedics or other qualified healthcare professionals arrive on the scene.

Use of a BLSS incorporating teachings of the present invention to provide an individual with instructions on treating a VF patient was compared with use of the instructions and components that are provided to members of the flight crew on the ISS.

Each group included twenty individuals comprising first year medical nursing and bioengineering students.

Each individual provided emergency medical care to a high fidelity patient simulator at the Center for Patient Simulation at the University of Utah under some of the conditions present on the ISS. The scenario to which each of the individuals was subjected had a high likelihood of occurrence and severe mission impact. Their task was to follow the standard ACLS protocol in providing care for an unconscious crewmember. The task consisted of removing an obstruction from the airway with a finger sweep placing a defibrillator and attaching electrodes of an electrocardiogram so the patient in atrial fibrillation could be monitored.

The quality of care provided by each group was assessed by analyzing the number of errors collectively committed by each group. The number of errors shown to the right of each decision or procedure in indicates the total number of errors made by each group with the leftmost number to the right of each decision or procedure representing errors by individuals of the second group and the rightmost number to the right of each decision or procedure representing errors by individuals of the first group. Notably 41 fewer errors were committed by the second group than by the first group.

To analyze error on a more detailed level a distinction was made between process errors and technical errors. A process error is defined as skipping steps in the protocol or answering incorrectly to yes no questions while a technical error is defined as an error in performing a task.

The first group which used the paper based protocol made process errors an average of 2.6 errors per individual. The second group which used the animated display made only 22 process errors a rate of 1.1 errors per individual. Thus process errors were significantly lower in the second group Chi 12.16 p

Mistakes that result in pursuing the wrong branch of the checklist protocol reduce the patient s likelihood of survival. An individual who has made one or more incorrect decisions must recognize the problem and recover by returning to one or more decision points at which mistakes were made. Typically human operators will continue to follow the wrong path because there is a tendency to discount counter evidence. As a result delays in effective treatment can be substantial.

The number of technical errors committed by both groups was almost equal with the first group which used the paper based protocol making 38 technical errors and the second group which used the graphical display making 36 technical errors.

Subjects in both groups made an average of 1.9 technical errors. Time to perform the technical tasks ranged from 1.1 to 4 minutes. Opening the airway and placing a mask were the most critical and the most time consuming tasks. Together they delayed placement of the AED by 5.6 minutes reducing the chance of survival by approximately 60 .

The amount of time it took each individual to complete the designated emergency medical care protocol was also evaluated to assess the effectiveness of a BLSS that incorporates teachings of the present invention.

In the first group which followed the instructions paper based NASA ALCS and apparatus that are provided for use by the flight crew of the ISS it took an average of 13.9 minutes standard deviation 2.9 minutes to remove an obstruction from the airway and stabilize the injured crewmember. 

Using the animated graphic display of a BLSS incorporating teachings of the present invention in the simulated ISS environment it took the second group of twenty volunteers an average of 10.7 minutes standard deviation 2.4 minutes to treat the same emergency as that treated by the first group. The three minute time difference t 3.8 p

In four of the five identified tasks the times required for correct completion of the task were faster when individuals used the animated graphical display i.e. those in the second group . An overall analysis of variance showed a significant main effect for tasks F 85.3 p

In addition to evaluating the differences between the performance of the first and second groups in terms of times for completing particular procedural tasks the manner in which performance differed as a function of the individual s level of expertise was evaluated. Based on an answer to a question about each individual s prior experience with CPR 10 point scale 1 for no experience 10 for a high level of experience the individuals were categorized as lay responders ratings from 1 to 5 or as expert responders ratings above 5 . The analyses revealed an affect of expertise on the time to perform procedural tasks F 4.475 p 0.041 . The mean times for both groups of experimental conditions and different levels of expertise are shown in the following TABLE.

It was also found that lay responders who used the animated graphical display were faster than the experts who used the paper protocol. This difference suggests that using the graphical display improves performance of lay responders to a level which is comparable to current expert performance. The result of the analysis showed that in both sets of conditions those with expertise in providing CPR performed better than lay responders suggesting that there was no negative transfer by providing instructions with the graphical display.

Although the foregoing description contains many specifics these should not be construed as limiting the scope of the present invention but merely as providing illustrations of some of the presently preferred embodiments. Similarly other embodiments may be devised without departing from the spirit or scope of the present invention. Features from different embodiments may be employed in combination. The scope of the invention is therefore indicated and limited only by the appended claims and their legal equivalents rather than by the foregoing description. All additions deletions and modifications to the invention as disclosed herein which fall within the meaning and scope of the claims are to be embraced thereby.

