---

title: Corner restraint for securing articles on a shipping and/or storage rack
abstract: A restraint, e.g. a corner restraint for packaging flat glass sheets, includes a first leg and a second leg joined at a vertex. Each of the legs have an outer surface having a first strap engaging position spaced from the vertex and a second strap engaging position at the vertex. The height of the first strap engaging position measure from an intermediate portion of the second surface between the first and second positions is greater than the height of the second strap engaging position. With this arrangement, the biasing force applied by a banding strap to the corner restraint reduces the biasing force applied to the vertex to reduce damage to corners of the flat glass sheets.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07431547&OS=07431547&RS=07431547
owner: PPG Industries Ohio, Inc.
number: 07431547
owner_city: Cleveland
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050518
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 955 777 filed on Sep. 19 2001 in the names of James R. Geary et al. entitled REUSABLE RESTRAINT FOR SECURING ARTICLES FOR SHIPPING AND OR STORAGE now U.S. Pat. No. 6 899 946 B2. This application claims the benefits of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 237 887 filed Oct. 4 2000. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 955 777 and U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 237 887 in their entirety are incorporated herein by reference.

This invention relates to a restraint e.g. a corner or edge restraint for securing and a method of using a restraint e.g. a corner or edge restraint to secure articles e.g. sheets in a container e.g. a shipping and or storage rack and more particularly to a corner restraint have outer surface contour and method of applying forces to the corner of packed sheets e.g. glass sheets to apply basing forces to the corner restraint at a position spaced from the vertex or corner of the restraint.

Frangible and non frangible articles such as flat glass sheets automotive transparencies architectural glass articles wood or metal sheets and the like are typically shipped in bulk to fabricators in racks. However as is appreciated by those skilled in the art other types of containers e.g. bins and flatbed railcars having vertical stanchions are also used. The individual glass sheets are secured in the racks to prevent or minimize transportation forces from moving or jostling the sheets during shipping. As is further appreciated by those skilled in the art the moving of the glass sheets can damage the sheets e.g. scratch the surfaces of adjacent sheets and or fracture the edges of the sheets.

In one commonly used method for shipping glass sheets the edges of individual glass sheets are supported on the base of a rack with the sheets maintained in a generally vertical position by a sloped supporting surface of a backwall mounted to the base. In one arrangement the sheets are secured on the rack as a unitized pack by plastic or steel banding straps and corner or edge restraints also referred to as lash bars . An example of one such system is described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 014 435. Although the use of corner restraints and banding straps to unitize packed individual glass sheets is acceptable the presently available corner restraints have limitations. More particularly in one arrangement a banding strap has its course around the backwall of the rack and around the glass sheets loaded or packed on the rack. The banding strap engages the corner restraints at each of the corners of the packed sheets farthermost from the backwall i.e. the front corners of the packed glass sheets.

In general the corner restraints have a pair of legs set at a 90 degrees angle to one another with one of the legs of the corner restraint contacting a side of the packed glass sheets and the other leg of the corner restraint contacting outer surface portion of the packed glass sheets. In those instances when the corner of the packed glass sheets is at an angle of less than 90 degrees and the pair of legs of the restraint are set at 90 degrees the corner restraint pivots about the corner of the packed glass sheets. Tightening the banding strap in both instances discussed above to unitize the pack of glass sheets biases the corner restraint against the packed sheets applying most of the pressure or force to the corners of the packed glass sheets which is one of the most susceptible areas for breakage.

As is now appreciated it would be advantageous to provide a corner or edge restraint that does not have the limitations of the presently available corner restraints i.e. corner restraints used in combination with banding straps that maintains articles e.g. individual packed glass sheets as a unitized pack in a rack while reducing the forces applied to the corners of the packed glass sheets.

The invention relates to restraint e.g. a corner restraint. In one non limiting embodiment of the invention the corner restraint includes a body having among other things a first surface and an opposite second surface. The second surface has a first strap engaging position spaced a first predetermined distance from one end of the restraint and a second strap engaging position spaced a second predetermined distance from the one end of the restraint. The first predetermined distance is less than the second predetermined distance and first strap engaging position has a height measured from a portion of the second surface between the first and second engaging positions defined as an intermediate position that is greater than a height of the second engaging position measured from the intermediate position.

In another non liming embodiment of the invention the first surface is a compressible resilient surface and the opposite second surface is an abrasion resistant surface.

In still another non limiting embodiment of the invention the second surface of the body includes a groove extending from the one end of restraint towards an opposing end of the restraint. The first and second strap engaging positions and the intermediate position are in the groove.

In a further non limiting embodiment of the invention the body of the restraint is a substantially L shaped body having a first leg and a second leg defining a vertex. The one end of the body is an end of the first leg spaced from the vertex and the second predetermined position is at the vertex.

In a still further non limiting embodiment of the invention the second leg includes the first surface and the second surface with the second surface of the second leg having a strap engaging position defined as the third strap engaging position spaced from the vertex. The third strap engaging position has a height measured from a portion of the second surface of the second leg between the third engaging position and the vertex defined as a second intermediate position that is greater than a height of the vertex measured from the second intermediate position.

Additional non limiting features of the invention include but are not limited to a the first surface of the first leg and the second leg being an outer surface of a first layer the second surface of the first and second leg being an outer surface of the second layer and the first and second layers are laminated together and b a strap retaining arrangement attached to the second layer between the first and third strap engaging positions.

The invention is also directed to the corner restraint to secure sheets on a rack. The rack includes a base and a backwall extending from the base to support the sheets in a generally vertical position with edges of the sheets on the base and major surfaces of the sheets supported by the backwall. A banding strap biases the sheets toward the backwall to provide a load of packed sheets on the rack. The first surface of the restraint engages one corners of the load and a portion of the banding strap passes over the second surface of the restraint to apply a force at least to the first strap engaging position and the vortex of the restraint.

The present invention also provides a restraint comprising a body comprising a first surface and an opposing second surface a first strap engaging position on the second surface and spaced a first predetermined distance from one end of the restraint and a second strap engaging position on the second surface and spaced a second predetermined distance from the one end of the restraint. The first and second strap engaging positions are configured such that a force applied by a banding strap to the second surface of the restraint when the banding strap engages the first and second strap engaging positions is greater along the first surface beneath the first strap engaging position than along the first surface beneath at the second strap engaging position.

In one non limiting embodiment of the invention the first surface of the restraint is a compressible resilient surface and the opposite second surface of the restraint is an abrasion resistant surface. The body is a substantially L shaped body comprising a first leg and a second leg defining a vertex. The one end of the body is an end of the first leg spaced from the vertex and the second predetermined position is at the vertex.

Still further the invention relates to a method of shipping articles e.g. flat glass sheets. One non limiting embodiment of the method includes the steps of placing a plurality of articles on a base of a shipping storage container such that the articles form a load having at least two opposing corners placing a restraint having an outer surface at each of the two opposed corners and placing a banding strap in contact with the outer surface of each of the restraints and selected portions of the container to secure the articles to the container such that the banding engages the outer surface of the restraints at the corners of the load. The course of the banding strap over at least one of the restraints is defined by a decrease in the distance between the load and the banding strap as the banding strap moves from one end of the restraints toward the adjacent corner of the load.

As used herein spatial or directional terms such as inner outer left right back front and the like relate to the invention as it is shown in the drawing figures. However it is to be understood that the invention can assume various alternative orientations and step sequences without departing from the inventive concepts disclosed herein. Accordingly such terms are not to be considered as limiting unless otherwise indicated. Further as used herein all numbers expressing dimensions quantities of ingredients physical characteristics and so forth used in the specification and claims are to be understood as being modified in all instances by the term about . Accordingly unless indicated to the contrary the numerical values set forth in the following specification and claims can vary depending upon the desired properties sought to be obtained by the present invention. At the very least and not as an attempt to limit the application of the doctrine of equivalents to the scope of the claims each numerical parameter should at least be construed in light of the number of reported significant digits and by applying ordinary rounding techniques. Moreover all ranges disclosed herein are to be understood to include the beginning and ending range values and to encompass any and all subranges subsumed therein. For example a range of 1 to 10 should be considered to specifically include any and all subranges between and inclusive of the minimum value of 1 and the maximum value of 10 e.g. 1 to 7.3 or 4.3 to 8.1 or 5.5 to 10. Also as used herein the terms polymer or polymeric include oligomers homopolymers and copolymers.

Before discussing non limiting embodiments of the restraint e.g. corner or edge restraint of the invention it is understood that the invention is not limited in its application to the details of the particular non limiting embodiments shown and discussed herein since the invention is capable of other embodiments. Further the terminology used herein to discuss the non limiting embodiments of the invention is for the purpose of description and is not of limitation.

Non limiting embodiments of the corner restraint of the invention will be described for securing flat four sided glass sheets on a shipping and or storage rack however as is appreciated by those skilled in the art the invention is not limited to flat glass sheets having four sides and the invention contemplates using the corner restraints of the invention to secure glass sheets of any shape size type or glass composition on a shipping and or storage rack. For example and not limited to the invention the peripheral edges of the sheets can be round or elliptical the glass sheets can be in the shape of three or more flat and or curved sides of equal or non equal length. The glass can be annealed tempered heat strengthened clear and or tinted soda lime silicate glass borosilicate glass or any type of refractory glass for example of the type disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 030 592 5 240 886 and 5 593 929. Still further one or both of the major surfaces of the glass sheets can have a coating e.g. but not limiting to the invention a self cleaning coating e.g. of the type disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 027 766 and or sold by PPG Industries Inc. under their trademark SunClean a hydrophobic coating of the type disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 523 162 and or sold by PPG Industries Inc. under the trademark AQUAPEL an electrically heatable coating or a solar control coating of the type used in the art e.g. of the types disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 364 685 which patents are hereby incorporated by reference.

Further and not limiting to the invention the sheets can be of any material e.g. and not limiting to the invention wood metal plastic glass and combinations thereof. The sheets can be monolithic sheets laminated sheets two or more sheets spaced by and joined to a spacer frame e.g. multiple glazed units and combinations thereof.

Still further non limiting embodiments of the invention contemplate using the corner restraints of the invention with any type of fastening system to secure any type of article e.g. furniture household appliances any type shape and or size of filled partially filled or empty receptacles on any type of shipping and or storage container e.g. any type or design of bin rack or railcar used to ship sheets and or articles mentioned above and or contemplated by the invention.

With reference to the portion or region of the outer surface of the first layer between the vertex and the end of the layer and the portion or region of the outer surface of the first layer between the vertex and the end of the first layer define an angle Z centered around the vertex . With particular reference to in one non limiting embodiment of the invention the angle Z is substantially equal to the angle subtended by edges of packed glass sheets and outermost surface of outermost glass sheet outer most sheet designated by the numbers and of the packed sheets . In this manner the vertex engages corner of the packed glass sheets with the region of the first surface of the first layer between the vertex and the end of the first layer engaging the underlying edges of the packed glass sheets and with the region of the first surface of the first layer between the vertex and the end of the first layer engaging the underlying outer surface of the outermost glass sheet of the packed sheets . Usually the angle Z is a 90 degree angle i.e. a right angle however non limiting embodiments of the invention contemplate the angle Z to be more or less than a right angle.

In the non limiting embodiment of the invention shown in the inner surface of the first layer of the restraint is continuous along the inner surface of the second layer with end of the first layer extending beyond end of the second layer and opposite end of the first layer extending beyond opposite end of the second layer . Further opposite sides of the first layer extend beyond opposite sides of the second layer . As is appreciated by those skilled in the art the ends and and sides of the first layer can terminate short of or be aligned with respective one of the ends and and sides of the second layer .

With reference to the portion or region of the outer surface of the first layer between the vertex and the end of the layer and the portion or region of the outer surface of the first layer between the vertex and the end of the first layer define an angle Z centered around the vertex . With particular reference to in one non limiting embodiment of the invention the angle Z is substantially equal to the angle subtended by edges of packed glass sheets and outermost surface of outermost glass sheet outer most sheet designated by the numbers and of the packed sheets . In this manner the vertex engages corner of the packed glass sheets with the region of the first surface of the first layer between the vertex and the end of the first layer engaging the underlying edges of the packed glass sheets and with the region of the first surface of the first layer between the vertex and the end of the first layer engaging the underlying outer surface of the outermost glass sheet of the packed sheets . Usually the angle Z is a 90 degree angle i.e. a right angle however non limiting embodiments of the invention contemplate the angle Z to be more or less than a right angle.

The outer surface of the second layer of each of the legs and of the corner restraint is contoured to provide a course or path for the banding strap to bias the leg or engaged by the banding strap leg shown engaged in against the outermost sheet of the packed glass sheets to more evenly distribute the force applied by the banding strap through the leg and or of the corner restraint to the packed sheets e.g. in between the corner of the packed sheets and the outer surface of the outermost glass sheet engaged by the leg of the corner restraint. More particularly and with reference to the outer surface of the second layer has a pair of spaced sidewalls adjacent the end of the second layer a pair of spaced sidewalls adjacent the end of the second layer and a pair of spaced sidewalls extending from the sidewalls over the vertex to the sidewalls to provide a groove clearly shown in having a base the base clearly shown in . The base of the groove is contoured to have a curved raised portion between the spaced sidewalls and the spaced sidewalls starting at or at a position spaced from the end and respectively of the second layer and terminating a predetermined distance from their respective end or . The base of the groove extends from the raised portion between the sidewalls over the vertex to the raised portion between the sidewalls .

In one non limiting embodiment of the invention the radius of the raised portions of the groove between the sidewalls and is less than the radius of the groove at the vertex . Further the distance between the raised portion between the sidewalls and the sidewalls and the inner surface of the outer layer is greater than the distance between the base of the groove and the inner surface of the outer layer at the vertex . In one non limiting embodiment of a restraint configured in a manner similar to that shown in the linear distance between the raised portion and the pin at vertex was 4 inches 12.16 cm the distance between the raised portion and portion of the inner surface of the outer layer directly under raised portion was 1 inch 2.54 cm the distance between the base of the groove at the vertex and the inner surface of the outer layer at vertex was 0.5 inch 1.27 cm and the linear distance between the raised portion of the groove and adjacent end or of the second layer was 1 inch 2.54 cm . As is appreciated the invention is not limited to having the raised portion of the groove between the sidewalls and the raised portion between the sidewalls equidistant from the vertex .

In the above non limiting embodiments of the invention the groove prevents the transportation forces from causing the corner restraint to slip from under the banding strap see . To maintain the banding strap in the groove for ease of applying the corner restraint to the packed sheets and not limiting to the invention an elongated member or pin is secured between the sidewalls at the vertex clearly shown in .

With reference to there is shown another non limiting embodiment of a corner restraint of the invention designed by the number . The corner restraint includes a first or inner layer and a second or outer layer . The first layer has a first or inner surface in facing relationship to inner surface of the second layer . Outer or second surface of the second layer has a raised curved portion at end portion and a curved raised portion at end portion of the second layer . Portion of the surface between the raised portions and and the vertex is relatively flat. The banding is maintained on the corner restraint by attachment member securely mounted on the surface of the second layer adjacent the end portion and or by an attachment member securely mounted on the surface adjacent the end portion . The attachment members and each have a longitudinal slot through which the banding strap passes. The slot is dimensioned such that the banding strap passes from the adjacent one of the curved raised portion or through the slot of the attachment or over the vertex without contacting inner walls of the slot of the attachments and when the corner restraint is secured to a corner of the packed sheets .

With reference to and not limiting to the invention there is shown a shipping storage rack of the type used in the art that can be used in the practice of the invention. The shipping rack includes a base and a backwall secured to the base . The backwall has a sloping surface to support the glass sheets in an almost vertical position e.g. about 5 degrees from the vertical. The base has a width and length greater than the width and length of the packed sheets on the rack to prevent the packed sheets from being contacted and damaged by equipment used during the loading unloading moving and or storage of the racks. The backwall has a height greater than the height of the stacked sheets to optionally provide for stacking the loaded racks on top of one another. As can be appreciated by those skilled in the art a pad or cushion not shown can be placed over the sloping surface of the backwall and on supporting surface of the base to provide a non abrasive surface to protect the surface and edges of the glass sheets from surface damage.

In one non limiting embodiment of the invention the banding strap shown in and has its course from around the left side of the backwall see along the left side of the loaded sheets see toward the left corner restraint in the groove of the corner restraint under the elongated member see across the outermost sheet in the groove and under the elongated member of the right corner restraint see out of the groove of the right corner restraint along the right side of the packed sheets around the right side of the backwall with the ends of the banding strap joined together e.g. but not limiting to the invention behind the backwall. Optionally a flat pad shown in phantom in can be secured under the banding strip between the right and left corner restraints . One or more banding straps and corner restraints of the invention or lash bars of the type used in the art not shown in for purposes of clarity can be provided around the top and the bottom of the packed glass sheets .

The discussion is now directed to the features of the corner restraint of the invention that provides for the distribution of the forces applied by the banding strap over a greater surface area maintains the corner restraint against the outer surface of the outermost sheet of the packed sheets and reduces the probability of breakage of the sheets at the corner of the packed sheets engaged by the corner restraint.

With reference to there is shown a prior art corner restraint having a first member joined to a second member at a vertex to provide the corner restraint with a generally L shape cross sectional configuration. Surface of the member of the corner restraint as shown in is biased against the edges of the sheets and surface of the member is biased against underlying portion of the outer surface of the outermost glass sheet by the banding strap . The banding strap applies compression forces to the glass sheets through the corner restraint . The corner restraint provides for the banding strap to bend around a small area of the corner restraint more particularly around the vertex to apply all or a majority of the force of the banding strap in one concentrated area namely the corner of the packed sheets which area is susceptible to breakage. Another limitation of the prior art corner restraints is the less than full surface contact between the surface of the corner restraint and the underlying surface of the outermost glass sheet when the edges of the packed glass sheets are not aligned as shown in phantom in for edges of the packed glass sheets . More particularly when the edges of the packed glass sheets are not aligned as shown for the edges in the banding strap around the vertex applies forces to the vertex of the corner restraint to pivot the corner restraint e.g. to move end of the member of the corner restraint in the direction of the arrow placing the corners of the packed glass sheets under compression force caused by the pivoting of the corner restraint and moving portions of the surface of the corner restraint away from the packed sheets.

With reference to the corner restraint a non limiting embodiment of the corner restraints of the invention has the banding strap passing over one of the raised portion e.g. and not limiting to the invention raised portion between the sidewalls see also and the base of the groove at the vertex to apply the tensioning forces of the banding strap to the portions of the glass sheet underlying the raised portion of the groove between the sidewalls . With this arrangement the surface of the leg of the corner restraint as shown in is biased against the surface of the outermost sheet to eliminate pivoting of the vertex of the corner restraint about the corner of the packed glass sheets . In addition and as is appreciated by those skilled in the art this arrangement provides for a more uniform distribution of the tensioning forces of the banding strap across the surface portion of the outermost sheet underlying the leg of the corner restraint of the invention.

The tensioning forces applied to the prior art corner restraint and to the corner restraint of the invention e.g. and not limiting to the invention the corner restraint shown in are equal however as can now be appreciated the tensioning forces applied by the banding strap to the prior art corner restraint are concentrated at the vertex and the underlying corner of the packed glass sheets whereas the tensioning forces applied by the banding strap to the corner restraint of the invention is distributed to the portion of the glass under the raised portion of the groove and the vertex of the corner restraint. More particularly the corner restraint of the invention provides the corner restraint with a wedge feature to distribute the tensioning forces of the banding strap which result in compression forces on the glass over a greater surface area and reduces the probability of the outermost sheet see breaking due to concentrated force from the banding strap.

Although not limiting to the invention the parameters to be considered include 1 the material of the first layer and of the second layer 2 the tension force applied by the banding strap 3 the actual distance between the raised portion of the groove between the sidewalls and the base of the groove at the vertex contacted by the banding strap 4 the radius of the raised portion of the groove between the sidewalls and the radius of the base of the groove at the vertex and 5 the difference between the height of the raised portions between the sidewalls and the height of the base of the groove at the vertex contacted by the banding strap. In the following discussion parameter 1 the material of the first layer and of the second layer and parameter 2 the tension force applied by the banding strap are considered to be constant. Maintaining parameters 4 and 5 constant increasing the distance between the raised portion of the groove between the sidewalls and the base of the groove at the vertex contacted by the banding strap distributes the force over a greater area of the outer surface of the outermost sheet and visa versa. Maintaining parameters 3 and 5 constant increasing the difference between the radius of the raised portions of the groove between the sidewalls and the radius of the base of the groove at the vertex increases the force applied by the raised portion between the sidewalls to the underlying portion of the glass sheets and visa versa. Maintaining the parameters 3 and 4 constant increasing the difference between the height of the raised portion of the groove between the sidewalls and the height of the base of the groove at the vertex contacted by the banding strap increases the force applied by the raised portion of the groove between the sidewalls to the underlying portion of the outermost glass sheet and decreases the force applied to the corner of the packed glass sheets . As can now be appreciated by selecting dimensions for the above discussed parameters in accordance to the invention a more even distribution of forces can be applied to the outer glass sheet of packed glass sheets while maintaining one of the legs of the corner restraint against the underlying surface of the outermost glass sheet of the packed glass sheets.

As can now be appreciated in the situation when the path or course of the branding strap is only over raised portion of the groove and the vertex e.g. as shown in the invention contemplates only one leg of the corner restraint having a raised portion. In the situation when the banding strap has it path over both legs of the corner restraint as shown in the invention contemplates a raised portion at both ends of the corner restraint or only at the end of the corner restraint contacting the outer surface of the outermost sheet of the packed glass sheets . In the practice of the invention although not limiting thereto it is recommended that both ends of the corner restraint have a raised portion to eliminate the need to orient the corner restraint before positioning it on the stacked glass sheets. Further the elongated member or pin see and the attachments and see were discussed to maintain the corner restraint on the banding strap the invention however is not limited thereto and any type of arrangement can be used to maintain the corner restraint on the banding strap or the banding strap on the corner restraint.

Although not limiting to the invention the second layer has hardness greater than that of the first layer . As used herein the term hardness refers to the ability of a material to resist penetration or abrasion. Non limiting examples of suitable materials for the second layer include but are not limited to metal wood polymeric materials or mixtures or laminates thereof. In one non limiting embodiment the second layer is polyurethane. When the material of the second layer is a foamed polymeric material the foamed polymeric material of the second layer preferably has a density greater than the density of the material of the first layer . The second layer should be sufficiently abrasion resistant to protect the first layer from damage or abrasion during shipping and or storage and to withstand contact by a fastening member such as the banding strap without the banding strap cutting through or severely damaging the second layer . As shown in the figures e.g. the second layer can be substantially continuous from the end to the end and preferably has a curved surface at the vertex rather than an apex to minimize damage to the banding strap and distribute the forces of the banding strap as discussed above.

In one non limiting embodiment of the invention the first layer is made at least partly of a flexible material e.g. a material that absorbs shock is compressible and is resilient i.e. returns substantially to its original shape and size after being compressed. Examples of materials suitable for the first layer include but are not limited to natural or synthetic elastic elastomeric or flexible materials such as cork rubber or polymeric materials such as but not limited to natural or synthetic polymers thermoplastic materials or thermoset materials. Suitable polymeric materials include ABS acrylonitrile butadiene styrene phenolic epoxy polyamides polybutene polybutadiene polycarbonate neoprene polyisoprene polyvinyl chloride polystyrene polypropylene polyurethane polyesters polyalkanes polyalkenes and polyethylene e.g. foamed polyethylene or mixtures or laminates thereof. All the polymeric materials can be provided with or without different additives such as but not limited to antioxidants UV stabilizers pigments cross linked agents and fillers. Although not liming to the invention the first layer preferably has a thickness sufficient to absorb shock or transportation forces during the shipment and handling of the rack having the articles thereon without the edges or corners of the articles on the rack rubbing or cutting through the first layer . In a non limiting embodiment of the invention the first layer is formed by foamed polyethylene having a density of 3 to 9 pounds per cubic foot 0.29 to 0.86 grams per cubic centimeter e.g. 6 pounds per cubic foot 0.58 grams per cubic centimeter . In another non limiting embodiment of the invention the second layer is formed by foamed polyurethane having a density of 20 to 40 pounds per cubic foot 1.92 to 3.84 grams per cubic centimeter e.g. 32 pounds 3.07 grams per cubic centimeter . As a general rule as the density of the material e.g. polyethylene forming the first layer increases the overall thickness of the first layer can be decreased. However the density of the polyethylene preferably is not below a density at which the polyethylene has insufficient shock absorbing qualities for the articles being secured on the shipping rack. For example the density of the polyethylene can generally be lower for metal articles than for frangible articles such as glass sheets.

In the instance where the vertex of the corner restraint provides for the inner surface of the second layer to be curved as showing in and the distance between the first and second surfaces of the first layer at the vertex should be sufficient to reduce the possibilities of the corners of the sheets cutting through the first layer at the vertex . In one non limiting embodiment of the invention the first layer had a minimum thickness at the vertex of 0.25 to 1 inch 0.64 to 2.54 cm e.g. 0.5 inch 1.27 cm . As can be appreciated the second surface of the first layer does not have to be curved and can be square.

In another non limiting embodiment of the invention and with reference to as needed the first leg and the second leg each have a length of 3 inches to 10 inches 7.62 cm to 25.4 cm e.g. 5 inches 12.7 cm and a thickness between the first surface and the second surface of the inner layer e.g. polyethylene of 0.25 inch to 3 inches 0.64 cm to 7.62 cm e.g. 1.25 inches 3.18 cm . In another non limiting embodiment of the invention the first surface of the first layer had a distance from the vortex to the ends and of the first layer of 4 inch 11.75 cm a distance between the sides of the first layer of 4 inches 10.16 cm and a thickness at the ends and of 1.5 inches 3.81 cm . The ends and of the second layer were spaced 1.25 inches 3.18 cm from the ends and respectively of the first layer and the sides of the second layer were spaced 0.25 inch 0.64 cm from the sides of the first layer .

As will be appreciated by one of ordinary skill in the art the non limiting embodiments of the restraint of the invention described above can be formed in many ways and the invention is not limited to the manner in which the restraint of the invention is formed. Without limiting the present invention the first and second layers can be molded or extruded. Furthermore the first layer and second layer can be separately formed and then laminated together such as through a conventional adhesive glue or by mechanical fastening arrangements including but not limited to Velcro or mechanical fasteners e.g. but limited to clamps pegs or screws extending into or through the layers . Alternatively the restraint of the invention can be formed by a conventional molding process in which the polymeric e.g. polyethylene material of the inner layer is contacted with the polymeric e.g. polyurethane material of the outer layer when the polyurethane material is warm e.g. greater than or equal to about 68 F. 20 C. to adhere or mold the two materials together to form the restraint . Alternatively the materials of the layers and can be the same material e.g. polyethylene with the inner layer having the same or a lower density than the outer layer .

The elongated member at the vertex to retain the banding strap can be mounted in the sidewalls at the time the second layer is formed or can be force through the sidewalls over the base of the groove after the second layer is formed.

In one non liming embodiment of the invention the outer layer was made of polyurethane. The sidewalls had a thickness of 0.5 inch 1.27 cm . The groove between the sidewalls had a width of a 1.5 inches 3.81 cm and a depth at the vertex of 0.75 inch 1.91 cm and was flush with the sidewalls at the beginning of the sidewalls and . The spaced walls and had a height of 1.5 inches 3.81 cm measured from the first surface of the second layer and a thickness of 0.25 inch 0.64 cm . The portion of the groove between the sidewalls and had a width of 1.25 inches 3.18 cm and a depth at the raised portion of the groove of inches 0.95 cm .

Shown in is another non limiting embodiment of a corner restraint of the invention designated by the number . The restraint is similar to the restraint described above and shown in but in this non limiting embodiment of the invention the inner or first layer is divided into two separate or distinct regions and with one region located on each leg and of second or outer layer . A groove is formed at the vertex of the restraint between the regions and as shown in . In the raised portions start at a position spaced from end of the second layer .

As can now be appreciated the corner restraints of the invention can be utilized with any type of restraining system using banding straps to secured articles e.g. but not limiting thereto glass sheets loaded in any type of container.

In addition to reducing the forces applied by the banding straps to the corners of the packed glass sheets the present invention also provides a corner that decreases the overall weight of the loaded container compared to utilizing conventional lash boards while maintaining the articles securely in place. Further the restraints of the invention can be stored or returned to the shipper.

It will be readily appreciated by those skilled in the art that modifications cam be made to the invention without departing from the concepts disclosed in the foregoing description. Accordingly the particular embodiments described in detail herein are illustrative only and are not limiting to the scope of the invention which is to be given the full breadth of the appended claims and any and all equivalents thereof.

