---

title: Methods and apparatus for work management and routing
abstract: Methods and apparatus for service-level based and/or skills-based assignment of a work item to one (or more) of a plurality of resources based on fitness, for example, of skills required by the former to those provided by the latter. Assignment takes into account the level of stress on the work item and/or resources, such that the number of resources fit for assignment varies as the level of stress varies. Systems according to the invention can be used, by way of example, to route a call or other request made by a customer to a service center. The requirements for processing the call (determined, for example, by an incoming call operator) are matched against the skill sets of available customer service agents, taking call and/or resource stress levels into account. For example, some implementations may match an incoming call having a low stress factor (e.g., a newly received call from a standard customer) to a smaller pool of agents with both required and desired skills, while assigning a call with a higher stress factor to a larger pool of agents with at least required skills. Other embodiments may match an incoming call having a low stress factor to the larger pool of agents having at least the required skills, while assigning a call with a higher stress factor (e.g., a call from a priority customer) to an agent from the smaller pool of agents who have both required and desired skills.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08335704&OS=08335704&RS=08335704
owner: Pegasystems Inc.
number: 08335704
owner_city: Cambridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050128
---
The invention pertains to digital data processing and more particularly to automated methods and apparatus for managing and routing work. The invention has application by way of non limiting example in call service centers and in other applications requiring routing and or assignment of tasks to resources.

Work can be thought of by way of non limiting example as consisting of individual work items that are subject to a workflow that solves a particular problem. A resource is a person system or a piece of equipment by way of further example that has a capacity for work. Intelligent routing assignment and or work management sometimes referred to below collectively as routing of work items to resources is a critically important problem in today s large and complex business environments.

Regardless of the specifics routing problems share the following characteristics there may be a large number of tasks e.g. many call service center customers waiting in queues for service workflows are often complex and may not be highly differentiated available resources typically vary greatly in level of skill and the more skilled or apt resources are typically scarce. The bottom line in many business applications at least is that customers expect fast efficient service so routing decisions have to be good and have to be made quickly. They also have to be effectively managed in light of evolving deadlines and circumstances.

Computer based systems for assigning work to resources are well known in the art. Such systems include discrete parts manufacturing scheduling systems batch process scheduling systems optimization systems for matching energy producers with consumers and call center workflow routers. Simple systems of this type consider one work item at a time they take the next work item from a queue search for a resource that is capable of performing the work and make the assignment.

The advantages of such a simple system are that it is easy to implement and that it makes fast decisions. The main drawback of such a system is that it can easily make bad decisions. The resource assigned in this simple way may be better utilized if it were assigned to a work item further back in the queue. Thus more sophisticated systems consider multiple work items at the same time. Assignments are made taking into account costs and capacities of resources so that the cheapest resources are used whenever possible. This results in significantly better decisions than those from the most simple system. However there are still problems that more sophisticated systems in the prior art do not properly address.

An object of this invention is to provide improved methods and systems for routing and or assigning items to resources.

A further object is to provide such methods and systems for managing a pool of assigned items to pursue continued optimizations.

A related object is to provide such methods and systems as facilitate the ongoing management e.g. reassignment of items as deadlines and other service levels are passed.

Another object of the invention is to provide such methods and apparatus for service level driven skills based routing.

Another more particular object of the invention is to provide such methods and systems as achieve optimal assignment of work items to resources.

Still another object of the invention is to provide such methods and systems as can be applied in a range of applications business related or otherwise.

Still other objects are to provide such methods and systems as can be implemented on a variety of platforms and without undue expense or resource consumption.

The foregoing are among the objects achieved by the invention which provides in one aspect improved methods and apparatus for skills based routing. These assign a work item to one or more of a plurality of resources based on fitness for example of skills required by the former to those provided by the latter. Assignment takes into account the level of stress on the work item and or resources such that the number of resources or size of the resource pool fit for assignment varies as the level of stress varies. Moreover as the level of stress changes for example increasing as a result of a missed goal deadline the work item can be evaluated for reassignment to other resources.

Systems according to the invention can be used by way of example to route a call or other request made by a customer to a service center. The requirements for processing the call determined for example by an incoming call operator are matched against the skill sets of available customer service agents taking call and or resource stress levels into account. In some embodiments of the invention the pool size may increase in size as stress levels go higher while in other embodiments it may get smaller.

For example some implementations may match an incoming call having a low stress factor e.g. a newly received call from a standard customer to a smaller pool of agents with both required and desired skills while assigning a call with a higher stress factor to a larger pool of agents with at least required skills. Other embodiments may match an incoming call having a low stress factor to the larger pool of agents having at least the required skills while assigning a call with a higher stress factor e.g. a call from a priority customer to an agent from the smaller pool of agents who have both required and desired skills.

To give a few examples a system according to the invention can assign a newly received technical support call from a native German speaking customer to the next available agent from a pool of service agents who also speak native German and who are expected to become available e.g. from handling prior calls within ten minutes. If the call is from a priority customer on the other hand the system can assign the call to a larger pool of service agents who are proficient in German though not necessarily native German speakers who are expected to become available more quickly. Alternatively the system can assign the priority customer s call to a smaller pool of agents who are proficient in German and who have particular expertise in the class of problem experienced by the caller. Still further alternatives provide for assignment of the priority customer s call out of band e.g. to a CEO vice president or other person or thing who though not intended to address the caller s problem directly can provide assurances that it will be handled expertly as quickly as possible and so forth.

Related aspects of the invention provide methods as described above in which at least selected resources are assigned skill levels indicating their respective proficiencies with respect to a given skill. Likewise resources can have skill preferences e.g. identifying skills the use of which is preferred e.g. by the resource himself herself or itself . Moreover work items can require skill levels.

One or more of the foregoing can be taken into account when the resources are evaluated for assignment to the work items. In the example above for example calls with low stress factors may be assigned to service agents who have the required proficiency at a given skill and who prefer or whom are preferred for handling the respective types of calls. Calls with high stress factors on the other hand may be assigned among a larger pool of service agents with sufficient proficiency at the requisite task e.g. regardless of whether they prefer or are preferred to handle the calls.

The invention provides in other aspects methods as described above in which work items are associated with both desired and required skills. By way of example a bilingual caller to a service center may have a question regarding detailed operation of a specific product. A skill required of an agent assigned to handling the call is knowledge of the product and basic proficiency in the language. A desired skill is native proficiency in the caller s language of choice.

Other aspects of the invention provide methods as described above in which the completion status of work items are taken into account as a stress factor in assigning resources. For example work items that will be completed by a first deadline e.g. a goal deadline can have lower stress factor. Those that will not be completed until a second deadline e.g. a due deadline a higher stress factor. And those that will not be completed until after the second deadline a still higher factor. Using a foreign language translation service as an example an incoming technical translation received early has a low stress factor and can be assigned to any available translator among the pool of those having appropriate language skills i.e. a required skill and technical background i.e. a preferred skill . A late arriving job on the other hand has a higher stress factor and may be assigned among a pool of translators simply having necessary language skills thereby insuring that the job will be completed by deadline.

Related aspects of the invention provide for reevaluation and assignment of work items e.g. as they approach and pass deadlines. Continuing the above example the translation job received from a client early can be deskilled i.e. reassigned among the larger pool simply having the required language skills e.g. if or as the first goal deadline is passed. Alternatively the job can be reassigned among a small pool of translators who have not only the required language skills and preferred technical skills but who also have a complimentary skill such as previous experience with client or in the specific technical field covered by the translation . Likewise if and as first or subsequent deadlines are passed the job can be assigned out of band e.g. to a CEO who can provide necessarily explanations and or facilitate execution of the job.

Further related aspects of the invention provide methods as described above in which resource utilization is taken into account in assigning resources to work items. These factors can be a measure of a utilization level of each of the plurality of resources with respect to its utilization capacity or capacities and can identify a complimentary stress level for each resource. For example resources in use at or below a maximum utilization capacity can have a lower stress factor. Those in use above that capacity but below an emergency capacity can have a higher stress factor. Resources in use above the emergency capacity can have a still higher stress factor. In the example above regular and or overtime hours can provide a basis for determining resource stress factors used in assigning translators to incoming jobs.

Further aspects of the invention provide methods as described above in which an optimization which utilizes a cost function based on a matrix of values of the respective fitnesses is used to assign each of a plurality of work items to one or more of a plurality of resources.

Still further aspects of the invention provide digital data processing and other systems operating in accord with the methods summarized above.

These and other aspects of the invention are evident in the drawings and in the description that follows.

The processing center can be any service provider or other person business or entity that utilizes work item routing or in the illustrated instance request routing . Non limiting examples include retailers mail order houses professional service providers counseling centers and help bureaus and so forth. A common characteristic among these is that they field one or more work items e.g. requests for processing by one or more resources e.g. service agents .

Illustrated customers represent any persons businesses entities or other sources of work items or in the illustrated instance requests or to which work items e.g. requests are attributable. In the case of a service provider such as a help bureau work items can be by way of non limiting examples requests from callers for assistance. In the case of a mail order house work items can be requests from customers for goods. In the case of a professional service provider work items can be requests from clients for services. Of course it will be appreciated that in any given embodiment customers may have access to the service center other than via the illustrated mediums.

Illustrated requests represent any work items requiring routing or assignment . In the illustrated embodiment these are requests that will be processed by employee agents . In other embodiments they can be other items of information requiring routing assignment to other resources of the processing center .

Agents represent any resources to which items can be routed and or assigned. In the illustrated embodiment these are employee agents of the service center . In other embodiments they may represent other persons businesses and or entities to which work items are assigned and or routed for processing.

Turning back to the drawing requests or other work items received by the processing center are initially processed by intake processing personnel and or apparatus . These can include call operators receptionists automated phone answering equipment web servers or otherwise. Intake processing comprises identifying evaluating and or augmenting incoming work items e.g. in the illustrated embodiment requests and the customers to which they are attributable. This also includes encoding the work items in a preferably common format for routing by a routing system described below.

By way of non limiting example intake processing at a retailer can include a combination of telephone operators customer order desk personnel and web site servers. Order requests received by each of these can be categorized and encoded as work items requiring fulfillment by warehouse and back office personnel .

Routing system represents digital data processing apparatus e.g. a workstation mainframe embedded processor or other processing device that routes and or assigns work items placed in routing queue s B to resources. The operation of the routing system is described below. Although the illustrated embodiment shows intake processing as being separate from routing system those skilled in the art will appreciate that intake processing may utilize or may itself include or be part of system e.g. as indicated by the double arrows connecting elements and .

The routing problem starts with a set of work items and a set of resources. The problem is to assign resources to work items in an optimal way subject to constraints based on detailed information about the resources and work items. Exactly what optimal means will vary greatly depending on the details of a particular application and can be expressed in a variety of ways as will be discussed. For example in some applications the most important priority may be to minimize the number of work items that are past due whereas in other applications efficient use of resources may be most important.

Work items appear to the router in one or more queues B the configuration of which can have an important effect on the kind or routing that can be done. The simplest case is a single queue where work items are processed one at a time in a first in first out FIFO sequence as shown .

In such a simple case the router A has relatively little information upon which to base decisions because it considers only the next work item not all the work items in the queue. The best it can do is dispatch the work item to the next available resource e.g. A that is capable of performing the work.

A more sophisticated system has parallel queues as shown in . In this situation the router A can consider the next work item from each of the queues B simultaneously. This allows for potentially significantly better resource assignment decisions. The best case is one where the router A has access to requirements information for as many work items as possible. For example if the router can consider the first n work items in each of the queues it can make the best decisions possible for all of those work items. By considering an entire set of work items at once and an entire set of resources at once the router will avoid the mistake of assigning a resource to the first work item when it may be better utilized for a subsequent work item. The criteria for making resource assignments are specified by rules shown in database . These rules match detailed information in the work items and resources and provide information about relative fitness of a match.

As mentioned previously the fitness of a particular resource assignment depends on detailed information about the corresponding work item and resource. The representation of this information will be discussed next. After this the details of the algorithms will be given.

In the illustrated embodiment a skill is represented as a pair of skill name a string and proficiency an integer . Examples of this representation e.g. useful in a assigning administrative tasks e.g. to a clerical services processing center are 

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that though the illustrated embodiment utilizes this simple pairing of a skill name expressed as a string and proficiency level expressed as an integer other embodiments may use alternate mechanisms as well. For example the skill could be implemented as a database record with multiple fields one of which is the skill name and one of which is the skill level. Skill level itself need not be limited to integers real numbers or enumerated set values could be used.

In the illustrated embodiment each resource e.g. agent has three sets of skills preferred skills secondary skills and tertiary skills. Preferred skills are the skills that are most consistent with the job function of the resource. Secondary and tertiary skills are ones the resource has possibly from previous job functions that are not part of the resource s current job function. For example the preferred skills for a manager would be managerial duties. Secondary skills might include skills normally associated with the manager s subordinates. Tertiary skills might be skills obtained from a previous job.

Note that in the illustrated embodiment the dimension of preferred secondary tertiary is orthogonal to that of skill level. Thus this representation allows for preferred skills that have lower skill levels than secondary skills even though this is unlikely in practice .

The preferred secondary tertiary dimension can be generalized to be an integer in order to allow for more than three levels of preference. A skill is then represented as a triple of name proficiency level and preference level. In the following discussion however the preferred secondary tertiary is used.

In the illustrated embodiment each work item has two sets of skills desired skills and required skills. For work items the skill level integer represents the minimum level needed. Either the desired skills or the required skills but not necessarily both have to be fulfilled by a resource assigned to this work item.

In the illustrated embodiment service level is represented within a work item as a triple of name absolute time and priority rating.

Service levels are concatenated into lists that are associated with work items. For example the three example service levels above might be sequenced together to express the service level requirements for a particular work item. Such a sequence can be thought of as the order for a work item. Note that the dramatic increase in priority rating represents escalation of the work item s urgency as it becomes past due. In addition to changing resource assignments as that urgency increases a system according to the invention can cause additional secondary work items related to the primary work item to be invoked and or cancelled.

Service level information in or derivable on behalf of a work item may be derived from rules from manual inputs or otherwise. Service level symbols or names e.g. Gold Service may be used to facilitate this. The rules may specify the information in a more convenient form than that shown above. For example rules can be used to specify relative times as well as absolute ones. Thus rules may specify an absolute date for the goal service level and cumulative offsets for subsequent service levels. Similarly rules may specify absolute or additive incremental values for the priority ratings. Rules may also specify arbitrary expressions for both time and priority rating components. This allows these values to become functions of any other variable in the system.

The illustrated router uses a routing algorithm to evaluate the fitness of individual work item resource assignments and to evaluate combinations of these assignments attempting to pick that combination which maximizes overall fitness. This functionality is represented in the drawings by evaluator module .

A resource assignment is the assignment of a particular resource to a particular work item. The fitness of a resource assignment is a measure e.g. numerical value or grade that is a function of skill information for the work item and resource. Thus an assignment that has a good match of skill required by a work item and provided by a resource will have a higher fitness level. This sort of skill matching is depicted in .

Fitness is also a function of the service level of the work item. For example let s assume the above described service level sequence goal deadline past deadline . Suppose that the required skills are language proficiency in French or German. The resource pool may include individuals with native language proficiency in one of these languages. Such individuals are a subset of all individuals with good proficiency in one of these languages. Finally there may be some resources that have a low but acceptable level of proficiency exchange students for example . The individuals with native language proficiency would include this proficiency in their preferred skills. Other individuals would include their proficiency in their secondary skills with an appropriate skill level.

Continuing this example suppose that the current time precedes the goal deadline. In this case resources that have preferred skills that match the work item s desired skills are given a high fitness. Thus the native French or German speakers would be considered but the other resources might not be even though they have a certain level of proficiency. Suppose now that the work item isn t completed and the current time now falls between the goal deadline and the due deadline. At this point more resources have to be considered so resources that have preferred or secondary skills matching the work item s desired or required skills are given a high fitness. Thus the non native French or German speakers would now be included in the pool of resources to consider.

Finally suppose that the work item is past due or it is estimated that the job will not be completed until it would be past due . At this point it might be best to apologize to the customer and defer the work item. To compensate the customer for the delay the deferred work item might be assigned to special resources by including skills that are not on the preferred list. For example the work item might be assigned to a manager who knows the customer personally and who happens to be extremely proficient in French.

The pool of resources available for assignment to any given work item may vary not only as a function of the stress of that item and or of the individual resources but also as a function of all pending work items and all available resources. Future work items and resources may factor in as well. This is captured in the cost function z discussed below which determines the optimal assignment of work items to resources.

Take for example embodiments that increase pool size as work item stress increases by making available resources with required skills as well as desired skills . In some such situations a larger pool of resources with skills matching the work item s required skills is not utilized until the work item falls past the goal and or due deadlines. However if the result of the cost function can be lowered by doing so then indeed the larger pool will be utilized even though the work item is not past due. This can happen for example in situations where assignment of predicted future work items as well as of existing work items that are not imminently due are considered during optimization.

Thus fitness is always a function of a resource and a work item. Specifically it is a function of the service level of the work item current priority and the skill information in the resource and work item. The fitness number approach allows for a declarative specification of the cost or optimality of a decision made by the routing algorithm. The cost value of a particular solution is the sum of the fitness of all the assignments of resources to work items. Note that this does not dictate a particular algorithm for routing it merely provides a cost evaluation function that allows the routing algorithm to evaluate the optimality of its decisions.

Fitness functions can be expressed using rules or tables. This allows for a very flexible way to specify escalation as in the above example.

Two very useful metrics for how the system is performing are deadline stress and resource stress. Deadline stress is defined as the percentage or other measure or characterization of work items that are past deadline. Resource stress is defined as the percentage or other measure or characterization of resources utilized.

Partitioning segmentation according to work item or resource characteristics is possible. This is just a filtered query of the overall set of work items or resources. Typically the characteristic being filtered is a desired or required skill of a work item or a preferred or secondary skill of a resource. For example the set of all work items requiring the Verbal French 3 skill would be such a filter. This allows for stress metrics for a particular restricted group partition of work items or resources.

Note that the stress metrics are just metrics they are typically not used for resource assignment decisions. Resource assignment decisions are made by the router based on the fitness ratings described above. The stress metrics give a good overview of what is going on in the system and thus are useful for higher level management decisions whether to allocate overtime hire temps etc. . The stress metrics can be stored so that they can be analyzed over time. This might reveal trends important for resource planning.

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that deadline stress and resource stress are but two factors that can be used in assessing system performance. Other embodiments of the invention may use these and or other assessments of system performance in evaluating a fitness of skills required by a work item and skills provided by a resource.

What does the system do when work items go past deadline One safety valve has already been mentioned above when a particular work item s service level reaches a certain priority usually associated with being past deadline the fitness ratings of potential resource assignments for that work item are adjusted so that a larger number of resources may be considered see previous discussion .

If this does not solve the problem the system goes into deadline stress. A problem formulation where a cost penalty for unassigned work items is subtracted from the overall value of the solution allows the router to account for this situation. Thus the routing algorithm strives to find solutions that minimize the number of un assigned work items. If the best solution has un assigned work items then the problem exists.

An enhancement to the problem formulation allows the system to not only indicate that there are un assigned work items but also to predict when they might be done. Here the routing algorithm assigns resources not just for the current time but over some finite time horizon. This capability to estimate when work items will be done allows the system to also estimate when resources will become available. Because such an algorithm schedules things in the future based on current assumptions and because these assumptions may change the schedule generated at any time may have to be adjusted in the future. This more sophisticated kind of router is better because the cost penalty is a function not only of the number of un assigned work items but also the extent to which they are late. This allows for more sophisticated trade off decisions between getting a job done earlier with a less than ideal resource vs. getting it done later with an ideal resource.

An alternate embodiment estimates when resources will become available for further assignment. This can be based on pre coded or past recorded information regarding each resource s schedule as well as on estimation of the time when each resource will complete a prior assignment. As above the routing algorithm takes these estimates into account when making new assignments.

This sort of trade off suggests an additional safety valve. Any work item can optionally have a secondary work item that may be performed as a delaying action when the work item is deadline stressed. For example it is often the case that a customer would prefer a scheduled interaction at some later time to waiting for a half hour in a queue. Thus the router has the option of assigning a resource to the secondary work item and leaving the primary work item un assigned or assigned to an imaginary resource in the case of certain routing algorithms . Whether this is actually done is up to the router which makes its decision based on the various cost trade offs. This process is depicted in .

The representation of the secondary work item includes all types of information that the primary work item has. For example the secondary work item has its own set of desired and required skills.

Problem formulation involves translating the information in the work items resources and associated rules into a form that allows for efficient solution by the routing algorithms. Many resource assignment algorithms require the problem data to be in a very specific format so correct problem formulation is crucial to good performance.

A general resource assignment problem can be stated mathematically as shown in the following way Let 1 if resource i is assigned to work item j 0 otherwise Eq. 1 and be the cost of assigning resource i to work item j

This sort of problem formulation is compatible with an important class of resource assignment algorithms. The algorithms are based on linear programming but are much more specialized for resource assignment and are therefore much faster than general linear programming at finding an optimal assignment solution. This class of algorithms includes the well known Hungarian algorithm for resource assignment.

The goal is thus to transform the previously described information residing in work items resources and associated rules into the mathematically precise formulation of Eqs. 1 3. The first step is to compute the resource assignment cost matrix the cvalues in Eq. 2 above. Such a matrix is depicted by way of example in . These costs are just the negative of the fitness ratings described above. Specifically for every potential resource assignment for every work item and then for every resource that may be assigned to that work item the fitness rating must be computed. As discussed above fitness is a function of work item and resource properties. This can be expressed as fitness workitem.service level workitem.desired skills workitem.required skills resource.preferred skills resource.secondary skills resource.tertiary skills Eq. 4

This sort of function may be expressed using a combination of data tables and rules. The rules access the data tables to compute the overall fitness. For example suppose that the fitness function calculator begins with a work item s desired skills. The calculator iterates over these skills calling the following function for each skill 

This function returns a number indicating how well the resource matches the skill. Thus if the resource does not have the skill at all this function would return 0. Otherwise it would return a number based on whether the skill is preferred secondary or tertiary in the resource and on the work item service level. Computation of this number could be based on a table as shown in .

The skillmatch numbers for all desired or required skills are multiplied together to get an overall fitness. Thus if any are 0 the overall fitness is 0 indicating that the resource does not provide all the skills needed by the work item.

After the overall fitness for each potential resource assignment has been computed the resource assignment cost matrix cvalues in Eq. 2 is known.

In addition to the fitness ratings it is useful to represent the notion of work item priority lateness customer importance and or risk in the cost function. This allows the routing algorithm to prioritize important work and to trigger secondary work flows when appropriate see previous discussion on safety valves . The key issue here is what to do when there are not enough resources to assign to all the work items. For the benefit of the routing algorithms it is useful to introduce the concept of a dummy resource an imaginary resource that represents no work for the work item. Assignment of such a resource results in a negative fitness rating a penalty. The penalty is proportional to the service level priority of the work item. Thus the resource assignment cost matrix includes potential resource assignments to dummy resources with associated negative fitness ratings or positive costs .

This representation can be extended to incorporate secondary workflows by simply adding the secondary work items to the resource assignment cost matrix right at the beginning. An additional constraint must be added that states that real non dummy resources cannot be assigned to both a primary work item and its associated secondary work item. This can be expressed mathematically as shown in Eq. 3.

An important point with this overall formulation is that although it represents the notion of work item lateness using work item priorities and service levels it does not explicitly predict when work items will get done. Such a prediction capability is possible to implement but this leads to a general scheduling problem over some finite time horizon. This is much more complex than a resource assignment problem. Thus the trick is to avoid turning this into a scheduling problem but to retain the ability to defer work items in an intelligent way.

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that though the illustrated embodiment utilizes the mathematical formulation given in Eqs. 1 3 other embodiments may use alternate mechanisms as well. For example fitness values returned by eq. 4 may be utilized by local dispatching algorithms that don t necessarily attempt to find a global optimal solution. Such algorithms may use simple heuristics combined with the fitness values to make fast simple decisions that are not necessarily globally optimal but are adequate for the application.

The fitness function methodology greatly simplifies the work of the routing algorithms. Consider the first queue configuration case where there is a single work item that must be assigned to one of a set of resoures. The fitness of each potential resource assignment is evaluated. The routing algorithm then just picks the resource assignment with the best fitness.

The problem is similar for the case when there is one resource and a set of work items that must be assigned. The decision here is which work item to assign to the resource next. As with the previous case each potential resource assignment is evaluated and the best one is chosen.

The simple algorithms are simple because they only make one resource assignment at a time. The situation becomes quite a bit more complicated when there are m resources and m work items to be assigned. Now there is a large combination of possible resource assignments. The first step is for every work item evaluate the fitness of every possible resource assignment. This results in an m n fitness matrix where m is the number of work items and n is the number of resources. The next step is to consider various combinations of resource assignments and pick the best one. Theoretically every such combination of resource assignments must be considered. The overall cost value is then the sum of all the fitness values in the combination as stated mathematically in Eq. 2.

Note that the problem can easily be extended to handle the case of more work items than resources or more resources than work items. Also work items needing more than one resource can be handled by breaking such work items into separate work items each requiring only one resource.

The exhaustive evaluation of all combinations of resource assignments would be prohibitively expensive for all but the smallest problems. Fortunately there are good algorithms that achieve the optimal solution but without exhaustive evaluation. One such algorithm that is particularly well suited for this sort of problem is called the Hungarian algorithm.

The Hungarian method as described for example in Kuhn The Hungarian Method For The Assignment Problem Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 2 1955 pp. 83 97 is analogous to the simplex method for general linear programming but is so specialized that there is very little resemblance. The Hungarian method is also much faster for assignment problems than the simplex method. The previously described problem formulation which results in a cost matrix and in Eqs. 1 3 provide a preferred input to the Hungarian method.

Thus although the formulation does not restrict the type of solution algorithm used it is suitable as input to an important well known class of optimization algorithms that solve assignment problems quickly and efficiently.

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that though the illustrated embodiment utilizes the Hungarian method other embodiments may use alternate mechanisms as well. For example a dispatching algorithm that combines heuristics with fitness values may be a viable alternative in many applications.

Depicted below is the equation for the primary secondary work item constraint which is used in problem formulation. Particularly for any primary work item j and associated secondary work item k 

Described above are methods and systems that achieve the desired objects. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that the illustrated embodiment is only one example of the invention and that others incorporating modifications thereto fall within the scope of the invention. Thus by way of non limiting example it will be appreciated that work items can require any variety of skills or their analogs in addition to or instead of those described above. Likewise resources can provide any variety of skills or their analogs. Moreover it will be appreciated that any variety of stress metrics can be utilized to reflect the stress of the system in addition to or in place of those described above. In view of these and other modifications what we claim is 

