---

title: Method for preventing or treating cardiac hypertrophy
abstract: A method for treating or preventing cardiac hypertrophy in a mammal, comprising manipulating levels of RBP, retinoids, or an affiliated signaling and regulatory pathway in the mammal. Preferably, the method comprises reducing or inhibiting the level of RBP or retinoids or their signaling pathway, or an affiliated signaling pathway, via a dietary, genetic, protein-based, or pharmacologic approach, or a combination thereof. Also disclosed are pharmaceutical composition suitable for the method.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07838561&OS=07838561&RS=07838561
owner: MCW Research Foundation, Inc.
number: 07838561
owner_city: Milwaukee
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050614
---
This application claims the priority of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 578 877 filed Jun. 14 2004 the disclosure of which is expressly incorporated by reference herein.

This invention was made with United States government support under a grant from the National Institutes of Health NIH Grant Number NIH HL61911. The United States has certain rights to this invention.

Cardiac hypertrophy is the heart s response to a variety of extrinsic and intrinsic stimuli that impose increased biomechanical stress. The increased workload on the heart and a progressive decrease in its pumping ability cause an increase in cardiomyocyte size enhanced protein synthesis and a higher organization of the sarcomere. Initially the increased workload that results from high blood pressure or loss of contractile tissue induces compensatory cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and thickening of the left ventricular wall thereby enhancing contractility and maintaining cardiac function. However over time the left ventricular chamber dilates systolic pump function deteriorates cardiomyocytes undergo apoptotic cell death and myocardial function progressively deteriorates.

While physiological cardiac hypertrophy may represent a positive adaptive response to increased workload pathological hypertrophy is a principal risk factor for the development of congestive heart failure and subsequent cardiac death. In fact congestive heart failure is a leading cause of death in industrialized nations.

It is recognized that in most instances hypertrophy is not a compensatory response to the change in mechanical load but rather is a maladaptive process. Accordingly modulation of myocardial growth without adversely affecting contractile function is increasingly recognized as a potentially auspicious approach in the prevention and treatment of heart failure.

Factors that underlie congestive heart failure include high blood pressure ischemic heart disease exposure to cardiotoxic compounds such as anthracycline antibiotics and genetic defects known to increase the risk of heart failure.

The stimuli inducing cardiac hypertrophy include various growth factors hormones and cytokines such as endothelin 1 angiotensin II insulin like growth factor 1 myotrophin and cardiotrophin 1. Mechanical stress is another important stimulus for cardiac hypertrophy. Mechanical stress is considered to be the trigger inducing a growth response in the overloaded myocardium. Furthermore mechanical stress induces the release of growth promoting factors such as angiotensin II endothelin 1 and transforming growth factor which provide a second line of growth induction.

By using an in vitro neonatal cardiomyocyte culture system it has been demonstrated that mechanical stretch induces signal transduction characterized by simultaneous activation of multiple second messenger pathways such as phospholipases C D and A2 protein kinase C PKC the JAK STAT pathway mitogen activated protein MAP kinase cascades and calcium calmodulin dependent protein phosphatase calcineurin pathway. Molecules in these pathways may be targets for therapies designed to prevent the progression of cardiac hypertrophy.

Signaling pathways related to cardiac hypertrophy have been reviewed in Frey and Olson 2003 Cardiac hypertrophy the good the bad and the ugly. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 65 45 79 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Vitamin A retinol and its natural and synthetic derivatives retinoids participate in a wide range of biological processes including vision neoplasia embryonic development normal reproductive function regulation of epithelial and hematopoietic cellular differentiation and cardiovascular development. Retinoic acid RA the active metabolite of vitamin A is the main signaling retinoid in the body. RA functions by binding to nuclear receptor proteins.

The present invention provides for a method for treating or preventing cardiac hypertrophy in a mammal especially in a human or a higher vertebrate such as birds. The method of the present invention may be used for the treatment of pathological hypertrophy chronic heart failure restrictive cardiomyopathies valvuloseptal disorders ischemic heart disease emphysema atherosclerosis amyloidosis viral myocarditis cardiac dilatation and genetic syndromes of dysfunctional heart action.

The method comprises reducing levels of retinol binding protein RBP or levels of retinoid in the mammal or inhibiting the function of RBP or retinoid in the mammal or inhibiting the function or activity of the retinoic acid RA signaling pathway or pathways that are regulated by retinoid signaling or related regulatory pathway.

In one embodiment a retinol structural antagonist or a retinoid receptor antagonist is administered to the mammal to block delivery of retinol by RBP to the heart of the mammal thereby reducing the progression or severity of pathological cardiac hypertrophy in the mammal. For example the binding of RBP with transthyretin TTR is inhibited or the expression of RBP or TTR or both is inhibited such as via a suitable antisense nucleic acid molecule or a suitable siRNA molecule. Alternatively the function of RBP or TTR or both is inhibited via a suitable antibody or a small molecule antagonist.

According to a preferred embodiment an effective amount of an retinoid antagonist such as N 4 hydroxyphenyl retinamide is administered to the mammal.

In another embodiment the expression or function of a retinoid receptor is inhibited for example by a suitable antisense nucleic acid molecule or a suitable siRNA molecule a suitable antibody or a small molecule antagonist. In a specific embodiment the retinoid receptor is an RAR e.g. RAR RAR or RAR or an RXR e.g. RXR RXR or RXR . For example the formation of an RXR RXR an RXR RAR or an RAR RAR dimer is inhibited.

The present invention also provides pharmaceutical compositions for the treatment of pathological hypertrophy chronic heart failure restrictive cardiomyopathies valvuloseptal disorders ischemic heart disease emphysema atherosclerosis amyloidosis viral myocarditis cardiac dilatation or genetic syndromes of dysfunctional heart action the pharmaceutical composition comprising an effective amount of a retinoid or a RAR receptor antagonist and a pharmaceutically acceptable excipient.

Prior to the instant invention it was generally accepted that retinoids had an anti hypertrophy effect. See e.g. Wendler et al. 2003 Increased fibronectin deposition in embryonic hearts of retinol binding protein null mice Circulation Res. 92 920 928 which is also incorporated herein by reference. Evidence in the scientific literature links deficiency of vitamin A or embryonic deletion of selected retinoid receptors to a variety of defects in cardiovascular development. In the post development period retinoids are believed to be required for the proper functioning of a number of organs skin lung liver neuronal and immune systems and have important regulatory activity in the cardiovascular system. In addition retinoids have been shown to have significant anti hypertrophic effects in neonatal cardiomyocytes. It was also observed that RA appears to have suppression effects on cyclic stretch induced cardiac hypertrophy.

The signaling mechanisms of the purported RA induced inhibitory effects on the hypertrophic process however have never been clear. Although numerous studies have focused on characterization of the intracellular signal transduction molecules that promote cardiac hypertrophy little work has focused on signaling pathways that might negatively regulate hypertrophy.

The present inventors surprisingly discovered that inhibition of retinoic acid RA signaling pathway or related signaling pathways reduce cardiac hypertrophy and is beneficial to cardiomyopathy patients. For example the levels of retinol binding protein RBP can be reduced or its function inhibited.

The levels of RBP retinoids and their affiliated signaling and regulatory pathways can be manipulated by dietary genetic protein based and pharmacologic approaches to impact the induction or repression of stress response pathways in heart or in tissues that influence stress responses of heart such as the vascular pulmonary renal hepatic or nervous system.

In one embodiment a retinol structural antagonist is used to block RBP s delivery of retinol to heart and thus reduce the progression and or severity of pathological cardiac hypertrophy.

In another embodiment a retinoid receptor antagonist is used to enhance the expression of mediators for physiological hypertrophy responses which would then support or improve myocardiocyte function in dilated cardiac failure.

In a further embodiment a peptide or small molecule that disrupts RBP interactions with transthyretin TTR is administered to a patient in need thereof thus blocking RBP TTR interaction and allowing free RBP to be lost more rapidly in kidney filtrate shortening its half life in the serum and reducing the delivery of retinol to the heart. This is used to slow or reverse the cardiomyofibril enlargement that occurs in hypertension diseases.

In yet another embodiment a retinoid antagonist is used that would enhance Serca 2a expression in the heart and facilitate calcium handling and sequestration within the cardiomyocyte or smooth muscle thus improving muscle relaxation and contractile efficacy in conditions of dysfunctional calcium handling.

The present invention provides treatment or ameliorative methods beneficial for numerous situations in which an improvement in cardiac function would be warranted including but not limited to pathological hypertrophy chronic heart failure restrictive cardiomyopathies valvuloseptal disorders ischemic heart disease emphysema atherosclerosis amyloidosis viral myocarditis cardiac dilatation and genetic syndromes of dysfunctional heart action. The method of the present invention also can be applied to situations where the heart is not the primary affected organ but in which the ability to improve heart function would be beneficial to the patient. These include renal failure fibrosis of liver or lungs and dysfunction of smooth muscle action. This discovery has numerous applications for affecting normal cardiovascular function and for treating adverse syndromes and conditions in which the impairment of cardiac function is a direct or indirect consequence of that syndrome or condition.

The present invention provides methods for directly targeting hypertrophic cardiomyopathy including but not limited to 1 hypertensive cardiomyopathy which is one of the most significant cardiomyopathies and associated damage from essential hypertension and arteriosclerosis 2 genetic forms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Many genetic loci are known to be associated with genetic cardiac disorders including at least eight specific genes with a total of 125 mutations as of 2001 beta myosin heavy chain troponin T troponin I alpha tropomyosin myosin binding protein C essential myosin light chain and regulated myosin light chain actin and syndromes with unknown genetic locus e.g. Wolff Parkinson White Syndrome 3 structural cardiomyopathies such as aortic stenosis including mitral valve abnormalities and 4 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with certain disease states such as hyperparathyroidism neurofibromatosis generalized lipodystrophy lentiginosis pheochromocytoma Friedrich s ataxia Noonan syndrome amyloid diseases glycogen storage disease III. The method of the present invention may also be used to prevent sudden death in competitive sports caused by cardiomyopathy.

In another preferred embodiment the method of the present invention may be used to achieve improved cardiovascular function which would be advantageous. The method may be used to treat or prevent dilated cardiomyopathy including those caused by genetic defects e.g. dystrophin gene viral bacterial or parasitic myocarditis ischemic cardiomyopathy autoimmune disorders e.g. Lupus by alcohol and other drug abuse by toxicants such as cobalt lithium lead drugs e.g. anthrocyclines antiretrovirals .

The method may be used to treat or prevent restrictive cardiomypathy including those of genetic origin e.g. amyloidosis caused by a defect of the transthyretin gene or caused by a disease such as diabetes Gaucher disease Hurler Disease hemochromatosis Fabry Disease glycogen storage disease III sarcoidosis endomyocardial fibrosis or cancer. The method may be used to treat or prevent restrictive cardiomypathy caused by cancer or by toxicants such as anthrocyclines or choroquine or by radiation.

The present invention contemplates that every element of the signaling pathway can be blocked or otherwise targeted to achieve the desired effect of inhibiting or preventing cardiac hypertrophy.

One target is the retinol binding protein RBP which is a small molecular weight protein 21 kDa that binds retinol and functions to transport retinol to the cell. RBP may act to transport other molecules whose identities are not currently known.

In another embodiment the method of present invention targets a larger protein molecule transthyretin TTR formerly called prealbumin . TTR forms a complex with RBP and prevents the loss of RBP through the renal glomeruli and stabilizes the binding of retinol to RBP.

Yet a further target is one of the retinoid receptors. Retinoic acid RA and its synthetic analogs retinoids function through activating two distinct classes of nuclear receptor proteins the retinoic acid receptors RARs Giguere et al. 1990 Mol. Cell. Biol. 10 2335 2340 whose encoded proteins bind both all trans RA atRA and 9 cis RA and the retinoid X receptors RXRs Mangelsdorf et al. 1992 Genes Dev. 6 329 344 that preferentially bind 9 cis RA. These retinoid receptors belong to the steroid thyroid hormone receptor super family Evans 1988 Science 240 889 895 and each class has three receptor subtypes RAR RAR and RAR and RXR RXR and RXR . A functional receptor capable of activating DNA transcription is either a homodimer RXR RXR or a heterodimer RAR RXR . These ligand activated retinoid receptors act as transcription factors which bind to RA response elements in the promoters enhancers of numerous target genes leading to transcriptional stimulation or repression.

One function of RXR is to act as an auxiliary receptor for several nuclear receptors including the RARs thyroid hormone receptors and vitamin D receptor. Heterodimers of RXR with these receptors form in solution Zhang et al. 1992a Nature 355 441 446 and bind selectively with high affinity to specific hormone response elements Hermann et al. 1992 Mol. Endocrinol. 6 1153 1162 . RXRs also function independently as homodimers Zhang et al. 1992b Nature 358 587 591 which form in the presence of the 9 cis isomer of all trans RA and have different response element specificities than the RAR RXR heterodimers Hermann et al. 1992 supra Zhang et al. 1992b supra . In contrast RARs bind both ligands with high affinity Heyman et al. 1992 Cell 68 397 406 .

Recently a truncation deletion mutant of the RAR receptor has been described which functions as a transdominant negative mutant hRXR 403 able to block normal retinoic acid induced transcriptional transactivation through both the RXR RAR heterodimer and the RXR homodimer pathways Damm et al. 1993 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90 2989 2993 .

RARs and RXRs are activated upon binding to an RA ligand. Enzymes that synthesize RA ligand from retinol include retinol dehydrogenase retinaldehyde dehydrogenase retinol reductases and cytochrome P450s. Enzymes that catabolize and remove RA include cytochrome P450 26A and 26B. It is known that these enzyme activities can be manipulated to control cellular RA levels e.g. via knockout RNAi small molecule drugs .

Transcriptional activity of retinoid receptors and related receptors are governed by histone acetylases HAac and histone deacetylases HDAc . HAc catalyzes the acetylation of histone proteins this blocks heterochromatin assembly and opens the promoter region revealing the retinoid response element RARE and permitting transcription. HDAc deacetylates the histone allowing chromatin winding and silencing retinoid receptor mediated transcription. These enzymes can be manipulated to control retinoid signaling.

Cytosolic proteins control the intracellular levels of retinol and RA affecting the ability of RA to be synthesized and then travel to the nucleus to mediate transcription by RAR and RXR. These proteins include cellular retinol binding proteins types CRBP I CRBP II CRBP III and cellular retinoic acid binding proteins CRABP I CRABP II . It is known that the levels and activities of these proteins can be manipulated to control retinoid and retinoid receptor signaling.

Some tissues notably the eye contain a cell surface receptor for RBP and this receptor can facilitate the cellular uptake of retinol from RBP. Manipulating the availability or activity of this receptor will allow the manipulation of retinoid signaling.

Signaling pathways whose receptors and their binding proteins that compete for transcriptional or other regulatory complexes that are shared with the RA receptors or signals may also be modulated to achieve similar effects of inhibiting cardiac hypertrophy. For example hormones such as vitamin D thyroid hormone 9 cis retinoic acid and the many ligands for the nuclear peroxisome proliferator activated receptors PPARs alpha beta and gamma directly compete with and overwhelm the retinoid RAR signaling pathways. Another known RAR antagonist is COUP TF which has no known ligand. It is known that too little retinoid RBP could allow other hormones specifically thyroid hormone vitamin D 9 cis retinoic acid and PPAR ligands to dominate when otherwise they would not if retinoid RBP was normal. These pathways can be activated to override retinoid signaling for instance by adding an agonist of those receptors e.g. thyroid hormone vitamin D PPAR ligands to preferentially activate those pathways and reduce retinoid signaling. Alternatively constitutively active versions of these other receptors are known to exist and can be used.

An alternate approach is to block the intestinal absorption of retinoids into the body or to block the packaging and transport of dietary retinoids into the lymph or bloodstream. For example by altering the activity of the retinoid esterases or carotenoid cleavage enzymes that convert dietary retinoids into forms that can be packaged and transported by lipoproteins or albumin. Alternatively an antibody or its fragment can be administered to selectively bind and sequester a retinoid such as retinoic acid or a small molecule transported by RBP.

Retinoids may also be sequestered in storage sites such as liver or adipose thus prevented from being released to the body. For example altering the activity of the retinoid esterases that convert retinol to its retinyl ester storage form in liver stellate cells or adipocytes.

Table 1 below lists some of the possible target human genetic loci and their sequence and annotation information as embodied in their Genbank database accession numbers. All information associated with the accession numbers including their DNA or RNA sequences is incorporated herein expressly by reference.

In one embodiment the present invention uses a retinoid receptor antagonist to inhibit the target protein or gene function. Retinoid receptor antagonists are a class of compounds that bind to retinoic acid receptors RARs or 9 cis retinoic acid receptors RXRs but do not activate the receptor s gene transcriptional activity. Table 2 lists some of the known RAR antagonists.

Several classes of retinoid antagonists are known to those skilled in the art. Classic retinoic acid receptor antagonists compete with the natural ligand all trans retinoic acid for the receptor s binding site and thus prevent transcriptional activation. Inverse agonists silence or significantly reduce RAR or RXR mediated gene transcription by recruiting co repressors to the receptor s gene transcriptional complex. A third class the retinoid related molecules RRM weakly bind the RARs and RXRs yet are potent biological effectors notably as pro apoptosis agents. RRMs include 4 hydroxyphenylretinamide AGN 193198 and CD437. Their mechanism of action is unclear.

In addition to compounds that directly bind and antagonize RAR action RAR can also be antagonized by RXR specific retinoids. These latter have the potential to antagonize RAR activity through binding competition that favors creation of RXR RXR homodimers over RAR RXR heterodimers Hembree et al. 1996 Retinoid X receptor specific retinoids inhibit the ability of retinoic acid receptor specific retinoids to increase the level of insulin like growth factor binding protein 3 in human ectocervical epithelial cells. Cancer Res. 56 1794 1799 .

Retinoid receptor antagonists were developed in part to address problems of toxicity in clinical uses of RA notably skin pathologies. The intent was to co deliver the RA agonist with antagonist X that would counter some of RA s side toxicities. None of these antagonists are known to have been tested clinically for this purpose.

Noteworthy retinoid antagonists include AGN 193109 a pan RAR antagonist that is perhaps the best characterized with respect to its in vivo and in vitro actions. It competes for retinoid receptor binding with half maximal activity in a 1 1 molar ratio with ligand and full repression at a 10 1 molar ratio. A second pan RAR antagonist AGN 194310 entered preclinical trials to obviate retinoid agonist toxicity Johnson et al. 1999b Synthesis and biological activity of high affinity retinoic acid receptor antagonists. Bioorg Med Chem 7 1321 1338 . A third compound 3a is an especially promising pan RAR antagonist with respect to potency Vuligonda et al. 1999 A new class of potent RAR antagonists dihydroanthracenyl benzochromenyl and benzothiochromenyl retinoids. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 9 743 748. 

An alternate approach is to utilize retinoid compounds that have narrow specificity for retinoid receptor binding. Such compounds would allow normal retinoid functions to continue for those processes using RARs or RXRs that are not targeted by the antagonist. There are noteworthy lead compounds in this category. As one example AGN 194301 selectively silences RAR dependent activities at a 0.1 1 molar ratio. Johnson et al. 1999a High affinity retinoic acid receptor antagonists analogs of AGN 193109. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 9 573 576. presents retinoid antagonists derived from AGN 193109 but none have the parent compound s potency. AGN 194431 is selective for RAR and RAR .

BMS 189453 has a complex profile with both antagonist and agonist action. Specifically it is an RAR and RAR antagonist and a weak RAR agonist it suppresses RAR dependent transcription at a ratio of 1000 1 Yang et al. 1999 Retinoic acid receptor antagonist BMS453 inhibits the growth of normal and malignant breast cells without activating RAR dependent gene expression. Breast Cancer Res Treat 56 277 291. In vitro it does not transactivate the RARs. However like other RA agonists it also represses AP 1 activity and therefore acts as a retinoid in this non transcriptional role Yang et al. 1999 supra . Thus this compound dissociates the trans activation from the AP1 repressive actions of retinoids. Its mixed agonist antagonist properties should be considered when evaluating the in vivo studies of this compound.

Many RAR receptors have undergone various stages of in vivo animal tests for their potential as targets for treatment. Some of these tests are reviewed below.

Cardiogenesis BMS 189453 was used as an RAR antagonist to suppress myocardiogenesis in the gastrulation stage zebrafish embryo. This demonstrated that myocardiogenesis requires RA signaling via its receptors Keegan et al. 2005 Retinoic acid signaling restricts the cardiac progenitor pool. Science 307 247 249 .

Epidermis Topical application of AGN 193109 0 1.44 7.2 36.0 mol kg day in mice counteracts the toxicity symptoms of retinoic acid TTNPB toxicity with respect to cutaneous irritation weight loss and mortality Standeven et al. 1996 Specific antagonist of retinoid toxicity in mice. Tox Appl Pharm 138 169 175 . This paper indicates that topical antagonist can counteract activities of systemic retinoid.

Epidermis A novel lead compound 3a from Allergan is described in Vuligonda et al. 1999 supra . It has potent antagonist actions against all three RARs pan RAR antagonist Kd 5 6 nM and is favorably comparable to AGN 193109. It has low toxicity in topical application of mice 3.6 nmol 25 g 1 2 against TTNPB .

Granulopoiesis Mice were treated orally with AGN 194310 0.5 mg kg day for 10 days for 10 days Walkley et al. 2002 Retinoic acid receptor antagonism in vivo expands the numbers of precursor cells during granulopoiesis. Leukemia 16 1763 1772 . This dose was sufficient to elevate the frequency of bone marrow granulocytic precursors showing a requirement for RAR signaling in granulocyte differentiation. Importantly mice did not show signs of ill health or abnormal pathology in this treatment.

Pregnancy In the pregnant mouse 1 mg kg AGN 193109 as a single oral dose was sufficient to antagonize retinoid specific events in craniofacial development Kochhar et al. 1998 The use of a retinoid receptor antagonist in a new model to study vitamin A dependent developmental events. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 42 601 608 . Later in development a single oral dose of 100 mg kg suppresses the hormone action of RA in skin. AGN 193109 readily crosses the placenta and can accumulate in the conceptus to affect RAR mediated gene transcription.

Arthritis in mouse and rat BMS 189453 ip 15 mg kg d delayed the onset severity and progression of inflammation and joint erosion in two independent models of autoimmune rheumatoid arthritis Beehler et al. 2003 Inhibition of disease progression by a novel retinoid antagonist in animal models of arthritis. J. Rheumatol. 30 355 363 . Overt toxicity or hypovitaminosis A was not observed in either study. Also BMS 189453 0.01 to 10 M suppresses gene expression of pro inflammatory collagenase in cultured rabbit HIG 82 synovial fibroblasts Beehler et al. 2003 supra . At 1 M it also inhibits mammary epithelial cell growth through effects not on RAR mediated transcription but through a distinct mechanism that involves TGF induction Yang et al. 2001 The retinoic acid receptor antagonist BMS453 inhibits normal breast cell growth by inducing active TGF and causing cell cycle arrest. Oncogene 20 8025 8035 .

Renal Disease Rats administered BMS 189453 20 mg kg day 7 days subcutaneous did not show toxicity with respect to altered eating or drinking posturing or behavior or weight loss Lehrke et al. 2002 Retinoid receptor specific agonists alleviate experimental glomerulonephritis. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 282 F741 F751 . In this study it acted as an agonist to reduce the progression of experimental glomerulonephritis. Recall it has joint antagonist agonist action. 

Testicular Toxicity It should be noted that BMS 189453 caused the atrophy and degeneration of testicular cells in rats 2 10 50 mg kg for 1 3 7 days and in rabbits 2 10 50 mg kg orally for 1 wk Schulze et al. 2001 BMS 189453 a novel retinoid receptor antagonist is a potent testicular toxin. Toxicol. Sci. 59 297 308 . This effect was highly selective because these doses were not overtly toxic. Overt toxicity was observed in rats given 240 mg kg daily for 30 days. However 30 days after ceasing treatment testicular atrophy was seen at even low doses 2 50 mg kg . The testis is a known target of retinol pro hormone RA and RA. It was not ascertained whether the toxicity was due to the compound s RAR antagonist properties or to its repression of AP 1 action. Testicular degeneration does occur at high RA intakes. The authors speculate the effects were due to BMS453 causing long term retinoid deficiency in the testes with depletion of its germ cells.

Chondrogenesis Repression of RAR signaling is required for chondrogenesis to proceed. Both AGN 194310 50 nM and AGN 194301 1 M overcome RA signaling and permit the differentiation of mouse limb bud chondrocytes with commensurate induction of Sox9 Weston et al. 2002 Requirement for RAR mediated gene repression in skeletal progenitor differentiation. J. Cell Biol. 158 39 51 . These effects were mimicked by transfection with a dominant negative RAR.

Bladder Carcinoma The retinoid related compounds 4 hydroxphenylretinamide AGN 193198 bind RAR and RXR weakly yet have potent bioactivity. AGN 193198 1 M potently induces growth arrest and apoptosis of bladder epithelial carcinoma lines Reitmair et al. 2005 Retinoid related molecule AGN193198 potently induces G2M arrest and apoptosis in bladder cancer cells. Int. J. Cancer DOI10.1002 ijc.20961 in press . The mechanism of action for these RRMs is unclear.

Epithelial Cancer AGN 193109 10 nM 100 nM suppresses retinoid mediated activities proliferation keratin RAR gene expression in cultures of the human cervical cancer cell line ECE16 1 Agarwal et al. 1996 AGN193109 is a highly effective antagonist of retinoid action in human ectocervical epithelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 271 12209 12212 . Against the potent RAR agonist TTNPB AGN 193109 showed half maximal suppression at a ratio of 1 1 and complete suppression of RAR activity at 10 1. AGN193109 did not have partial agonist activity in these studies. In regulating the gene expression of cultured normal human keratinocytes AGN 193109 acts as an inverse agonist to compete against retinoid at a ratio of 10 1 Thacher et al. 1999 Cell type and gene specific activity of the retinoid inverse agonist AGN 193109 divergent effects from agonist at retinoic acid receptor y in human keratinocytes. Cell Growth Diff 10 255 262 . Data in this study also suggest that the agonist inverse agonist and antagonist may induce different functional states of the retinoid receptor.

Prostate Carcinoma RAR antagonists caused the growth arrest and apoptosis of established prostate carcinoma cell lines indicating a possible chemotherapeutic action for these compounds Hammond et al. 2001 Antagonists of retinoic acid receptors RARs are potent growth inhibitors of prostate carcinoma cells. Br. J. Cancer 85 453 462 . The most potent was AGN 194310 which was 12 22 times more potent than all trans retinoic acid in inhibiting its action. Its ED50 was 16 34 nM. AGN 194310 also induced growth arrest and apoptosis in 14 primary cell cultures established from human prostate cancer patients Keedwell et al. 2004 An antagonist of retinoic acid receptors more effectively inhibits growth of human prostate cancer cells than normal prostate epithelium. Br. J. Cancer 91 580 588 with IC50s ranging from 200 to 800 nM. The transformed cells were more sensitive than were non transformed cells heightening their usefulness as chemotherapeutics.

Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia The antagonist BMS614 shows antagonism for RAR transactivation when at 100 fold molar excess to RA Gehin et al. 1999 Structural basis for engineering of retinoic acid receptor isotype selective agonists and antagonists. Chem. Biol. 6 519 529 and at best modestly against RAR and no antagonism against RAR . Of the BMS agonist antagonists 681 453 614 411 only 411 showed no activity in the acute promyelocytic leukemia assay in which RA triggers their differentiation Chen et al. 1996 Two distinct actions of retinoid receptor ligands. Nature 382 819 822 .

In another embodiment this invention provides neutralizing antibodies to inhibit the biological action of target protein or gene or to bind and sequester a specific retinoid or other molecule bound with RBP. Blocking peptides can also be used to interrupt retinoid action. See supra for one example. In another embodiment of the invention the antagonizing agents are antisense oligonucleotides. The antisense oligonucleotides preferably inhibit target expression by inhibiting translation of the target protein. In a further embodiment the antagonizing agent is small interfering RNAs siRNA also known as RNAi RNA interference nucleic acids . siRNA are double stranded RNA molecules typically 21 n.t. in length that are homologous to the target gene and interfere with the target gene s activity.

An antibody suitable for the present invention may be a polyclonal antibody. Preferably the antibody is a monoclonal antibody. The antibody may also be isoform specific. The monoclonal antibody or binding fragment thereof of the invention may be Fab fragments F ab 2 fragments Fab fragments F ab 2 fragments Fd fragments Fd fragments or Fv fragments. Domain antibodies dAbs for review see Holt et al. 2003 Trends in Biotechnology 21 484 490 are also suitable for the methods of the present invention.

Various methods of producing antibodies with a known antigen are well known to those ordinarily skilled in the art see for example Harlow and Lane 1988 Antibodies A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. see also WO 01 25437 . In particular suitable antibodies may be produced by chemical synthesis by intracellular immunization i.e. intrabody technology or preferably by recombinant expression techniques. Methods of producing antibodies may further include the hybridoma technology well known in the art.

In accordance with the present invention the antibodies or binding fragments thereof may be characterized as those which are capable of specific binding to a retinoid or other small molecule to a target protein or an antigenic fragment thereof preferably an epitope that is recognized by an antibody when the antibody is administered in vivo. Antibodies can be elicited in an animal host by immunization with a target protein derived immunogenic component or can be formed by in vitro immunization sensitization of immune cells. The antibodies can also be produced in recombinant systems in which the appropriate cell lines are transformed transfected infected or transduced with appropriate antibody encoding DNA. Alternatively the antibodies can be constructed by biochemical reconstitution of purified heavy and light chains.

The antibodies may be from humans or from animals other than humans preferably mammals such as rat mouse guinea pig rabbit goat sheep and pig or avian species such as chicken. Preferred are mouse monoclonal antibodies and antigen binding fragments or portions thereof. In addition chimeric antibodies and hybrid antibodies are embraced by the present invention. Techniques for the production of chimeric antibodies are described in e.g. Morrison et al. 1984 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81 6851 6855 Neuberger et al. 1984 Nature 312 604 608 and Takeda et al. 1985 Nature 314 452 454. For human therapeutic purposes humanized or more preferably human antibodies are used.

Further single chain antibodies are also suitable for the present invention e.g. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 476 786 and 5 132 405 to Huston Huston et al. 1988 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85 5879 5883 U.S. Pat. No. 4 946 778 to Ladner et al. Bird 1988 Science 242 423 426 and Ward et al. 1989 Nature 334 544 546 . Single chain antibodies are formed by linking the heavy and light immunoglobulin chain fragments of the Fv region via an amino acid bridge resulting in a single chain polypeptide. Univalent antibodies are also embraced by the present invention.

Many routes of delivery are known to the skilled artisan for delivery of anti target antibodies. For example direct injection may be suitable for delivering the antibody to the site of interest. It is also possible to utilize liposomes with antibodies in their membranes to specifically deliver the liposome to the area where target gene expression or function is to be inhibited. These liposomes can be produced such that they contain in addition to monoclonal antibody other therapeutic agents such as those described above which would then be released at the target site e.g. Wolff et al. 1984 Biochem. et Biophys. Acta 802 259 .

This invention also provides antisense nucleic acid molecules and compositions comprising such antisense molecules. The constitutive expression of antisense RNA in cells has been known to inhibit gene expression possibly via blockage of translation or prevention of splicing. Interference with splicing allows the use of intron sequences which should be less conserved and therefore result in greater specificity inhibiting expression of a gene product of one species but not its homologue in another species.

The term antisense component corresponds to an RNA sequence as well as a DNA sequence which is sufficiently complementary to a particular mRNA molecule for which the antisense RNA is specific to cause molecular hybridization between the antisense RNA and the mRNA such that translation of the mRNA is inhibited. Such hybridization can occur under in vivo conditions. This antisense molecule must have sufficient complementarity about 18 30 nucleotides in length to the target gene so that the antisense RNA can hybridize to the target gene or mRNA and inhibit target gene expression regardless of whether the action is at the level of splicing transcription or translation. The antisense components of the present invention may be hybridizable to any of several portions of the target cDNA including the coding sequence 3 or 5 untranslated regions or other intronic sequences or to target mRNA.

Antisense RNA is delivered to a cell by transformation or transfection via a vector including retroviral vectors and plasmids into which has been placed DNA encoding the antisense RNA with the appropriate regulatory sequences including a promoter to result in expression of the antisense RNA in a host cell. In one embodiment stable transfection and constitutive expression of vectors containing target cDNA fragments in the antisense orientation are achieved or such expression may be under the control of tissue or development specific promoters. Delivery can also be achieved by liposomes.

For in vivo therapy the currently preferred method is direct delivery of antisense oligonucleotides instead of stable transfection of an antisense cDNA fragment constructed into an expression vector. Antisense oligonucleotides having a size of 15 30 bases in length and with sequences hybridizable to any of several portions of the target cDNA including the coding sequence 3 or 5 untranslated regions or other intronic sequences or to target mRNA are preferred. Sequences for the antisense oligonucleotides to target are preferably selected as being the ones that have the most potent antisense effects. Factors that govern a target site for the antisense oligonucleotide sequence include the length of the oligonucleotide binding affinity and accessibility of the target sequence. Sequences may be screened in vitro for potency of their antisense activity by measuring inhibition of target protein translation and target related phenotype e.g. inhibition of cell proliferation in cells in culture. In general it is known that most regions of the RNA 5 and 3 untranslated regions AUG initiation coding splice junctions and introns can be targeted using antisense oligonucleotides.

The preferred target antisense oligonucleotides are those oligonucleotides which are stable have a high resistance to nucleases possess suitable pharmacokinetics to allow them to traffic to target tissue site at non toxic doses and have the ability to cross through plasma membranes.

Phosphorothioate antisense oligonucleotides may be used. Modifications of the phosphodiester linkage as well as of the heterocycle or the sugar may provide an increase in efficiency. Phophorothioate is used to modify the phosphodiester linkage. An N3 P5 phosphoramidate linkage has been described as stabilizing oligonucleotides to nucleases and increasing the binding to RNA. Peptide nucleic acid PNA linkage is a complete replacement of the ribose and phosphodiester backbone and is stable to nucleases increases the binding affinity to RNA and does not allow cleavage by RNAse H. Its basic structure is also amenable to modifications that may allow its optimization as an antisense component. With respect to modifications of the heterocycle certain heterocycle modifications have proven to augment antisense effects without interfering with RNAse H activity. An example of such modification is C 5 thiazole modification. Finally modification of the sugar may also be considered. 2 O propyl and 2 methoxyethoxy ribose modifications stabilize oligonucleotides to nucleases in cell culture and in vivo.

The delivery route will be the one that provides the best antisense effect as measured according to the criteria described above. In vitro and in vivo assays using antisense oligonucleotides have shown that delivery mediated by cationic liposomes by retroviral vectors and direct delivery are efficient. Another possible delivery mode is targeting using antibody to cell surface markers for the target cells. Antibody to target or to its receptor may serve this purpose.

Alternatively nucleic acid sequences which inhibit or interfere with gene expression e.g. siRNA ribozymes aptamers can be used to inhibit or interfere with the activity of RNA or DNA encoding a target protein.

siRNA technology relates to a process of sequence specific post transcriptional gene repression which can occur in eukaryotic cells. In general this process involves degradation of an mRNA of a particular sequence induced by double stranded RNA dsRNA that is homologous to that sequence. For example the expression of a long dsRNA corresponding to the sequence of a particular single stranded mRNA ss mRNA will labilize that message thereby interfering with expression of the corresponding gene. Accordingly any selected gene may be repressed by introducing a dsRNA which corresponds to all or a substantial part of the mRNA for that gene. It appears that when a long dsRNA is expressed it is initially processed by a ribonuclease III into shorter dsRNA oligonucleotides of as few as 21 to 22 base pairs in length. Accordingly siRNA may be effected by introduction or expression of relatively short homologous dsRNAs. Indeed the use of relatively short homologous dsRNAs may have certain advantages as discussed below.

Mammalian cells have at least two pathways that are affected by double stranded RNA dsRNA . In the siRNA sequence specific pathway the initiating dsRNA is first broken into short interfering si RNAs as described above. The siRNAs have sense and antisense strands of about 21 nucleotides that form approximately 19 nucleotide siRNAs with overhangs of two nucleotides at each 3 end. Short interfering RNAs are thought to provide the sequence information that allows a specific messenger RNA to be targeted for degradation. In contrast the nonspecific pathway is triggered by dsRNA of any sequence as long as it is at least about 30 base pairs in length.

The nonspecific effects occur because dsRNA activates two enzymes PKR which in its active form phosphorylates the translation initiation factor eIF2 to shut down all protein synthesis and 2 5 oligoadenylate synthetase 2 5 AS which synthesizes a molecule that activates RNase L a nonspecific enzyme that targets all mRNAs. The nonspecific pathway may represent a host response to stress or viral infection and in general the effects of the nonspecific pathway are preferably minimized. Significantly longer dsRNAs appear to be required to induce the nonspecific pathway and accordingly dsRNAs shorter than about 30 bases pairs are preferred to effect gene repression by RNAi see Hunter et al. 1975 J. Biol. Chem. 250 409 17 Manche et al. 1992 Mol. Cell. Biol. 12 5239 48 Minks et al. 1979 J. Biol. Chem. 254 10180 3 and Elbashir et al. 2001 Nature 411 494 8 . siRNA has proven to be an effective means of decreasing gene expression in a variety of cell types including HeLa cells NIH 3T3 cells COS cells 293 cells and BHK 21 cells and typically decreases expression of a gene to lower levels than that achieved using antisense techniques and indeed frequently eliminates expression entirely see Bass 2001 Nature 411 428 9 . In mammalian cells siRNAs are effective at concentrations that are several orders of magnitude below the concentrations typically used in antisense experiments Elbashir et al. 2001 Nature 411 494 8 .

The double stranded oligonucleotides used to effect RNAi are preferably less than 30 base pairs in length and more preferably comprise about 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 or 17 base pairs of ribonucleic acid. Optionally the dsRNA oligonucleotides may include 3 overhang ends. Exemplary 2 nucleotide 3 overhangs may be composed of ribonucleotide residues of any type and may even be composed of 2 deoxythymidine resides which lowers the cost of RNA synthesis and may enhance nuclease resistance of siRNAs in the cell culture medium and within transfected cells see Elbashi et al. 2001 Nature 411 494 8 .

Longer dsRNAs of 50 75 100 or even 500 base pairs or more may also be utilized in certain embodiments of the invention. Exemplary concentrations of dsRNAs for effecting RNAi are about 0.05 nM 0.1 nM 0.5 nM 1.0 nM 1.5 nM 25 nM or 100 nM although other concentrations may be utilized depending upon the nature of the cells treated the gene target and other factors readily discernable to the skilled artisan.

Exemplary dsRNAs may be synthesized chemically or produced in vitro or in vivo using appropriate expression vectors. Exemplary synthetic RNAs include 21 nucleotide RNAs chemically synthesized using methods known in the art. Synthetic oligonucleotides are preferably deprotected and gel purified using methods known in the art see e.g. Elbashir et al. 2001 Genes Dev. 15 188 200 . Longer RNAs may be transcribed from promoters such as T7 RNA polymerase promoters known in the art. A single RNA target placed in both possible orientations downstream of an in vitro promoter will transcribe both strands of the target to create a dsRNA oligonucleotide of the desired target sequence. Any of the above RNA species will be designed to include a portion of nucleic acid sequence represented in a target nucleic acid.

The specific sequence utilized in design of the oligonucleotides may be any contiguous sequence of nucleotides contained within the expressed gene message of the target. Programs and algorithms known in the art may be used to select appropriate target sequences. In addition optimal sequences may be selected utilizing programs designed to predict the secondary structure of a specified single stranded nucleic acid sequence and allowing selection of those sequences likely to occur in exposed single stranded regions of a folded mRNA. Methods and compositions for designing appropriate oligonucleotides may be found for example in U.S. Pat. No. 6 251 588 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

Although mRNAs are generally thought of as linear molecules containing the information for directing protein synthesis within the sequence of ribonucleotides most mRNAs have been shown to contain a number of secondary and tertiary structures. Secondary structural elements in RNA are formed largely by Watson Crick type interactions between different regions of the same RNA molecule. Important secondary structural elements include intramolecular double stranded regions hairpin loops bulges in duplex RNA and internal loops. Tertiary structural elements are formed when secondary structural elements come in contact with each other or with single stranded regions to produce a more complex three dimensional structure. A number of researchers have measured the binding energies of a large number of RNA duplex structures and have derived a set of rules which can be used to predict the secondary structure of RNA see e.g. Jaeger et al. 1989 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86 7706 and Turner et al. 1988 Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 17 167 . The rules are useful in identification of RNA structural elements and in particular for identifying single stranded RNA regions which may represent preferred segments of the mRNA to target for siRNA ribozyme or antisense technologies. Accordingly preferred segments of the mRNA target can be identified for design of the siRNA mediating dsRNA oligonucleotides as well as for design of appropriate ribozyme and hammerheadribozyme compositions of the invention see below .

The dsRNA oligonucleotides may be introduced into the cell by transfection with a heterologous target gene using carrier compositions such as liposomes which are known in the art e.g. Lipofectamine 2000 Life Technologies as described by the manufacturer for adherent cell lines. Transfection of dsRNA oligonucleotides for targeting endogenous genes may be carried out using Oligofectamine Life Technologies . Transfection efficiency may be checked using fluorescence microscopy for mammalian cell lines after co transfection of hGFP encoding pAD3 Kehlenback et al. 1998 J. Cell Biol. 141 863 74 . The effectiveness of the siRNA may be assessed by any of a number of assays following introduction of the dsRNAs. These include Western blot analysis using antibodies which recognize the target gene product following sufficient time for turnover of the endogenous pool after new protein synthesis is repressed reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and Northern blot analysis to determine the level of existing target mRNA.

Further compositions methods and applications of siRNA technology are provided in U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 278 039 5 723 750 and 5 244 805 which are incorporated herein by reference.

Ribozymes are enzymatic RNA molecules capable of catalyzing specific cleavage of RNA. For a review see Rossi 1994 Current Biology 4 469 471 . The mechanism of ribozyme action involves sequence specific hybridization of the ribozyme molecule to complementary target RNA followed by an endonucleolytic cleavage event. The composition of ribozyme molecules preferably includes one or more sequences complementary to a target mRNA and the well known catalytic sequence responsible for mRNA cleavage or a functionally equivalent sequence see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 093 246 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety . Ribozyme molecules designed to catalytically cleave target mRNA transcripts can also be used to prevent translation of subject target mRNAs.

While ribozymes that cleave mRNA at site specific recognition sequences can be used to destroy target mRNAs the use of hammerhead ribozymes is preferred. Hammerhead ribozymes cleave mRNAs at locations dictated by flanking regions that form complementary base pairs with the target mRNA. Preferably the target mRNA has the following sequence of two bases 5 UG 3 . The construction and production of hammerhead ribozymes is well known in the art and is described more fully in Haseloff and Gerlach 1988 Nature 334 585 591 and PCT Application. No. WO89 05852 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. Hammerhead ribozyme sequences can be embedded in a stable RNA such as a transfer RNA tRNA to increase cleavage efficiency in vivo Perriman et al. 1995 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92 6175 79 de Feyter and Gaudron Methods in Molecular Biology Vol. 74 Chapter 43 Expressing Ribozymes in Plants Edited by Turner P. C Humana Press Inc. Totowa N.J . In particular RNA polymerase III mediated expression of tRNA fusion ribozymes are well known in the art see Kawasaki et al. 1998 Nature 393 284 9 Kuwabara et al. 1998 Nature Biotechnol. 16 961 5 and Kuwabara et al. 1998 Mol. Cell 2 617 27 Koseki et al. 1999 J. Virol 73 1868 77 Kuwabara et al. 1999 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 1886 91 Tanabe et al. 2000 Nature 406 473 4 . There are typically a number of potential hammerhead ribozyme cleavage sites within a given target cDNA sequence. Preferably the ribozyme is engineered so that the cleavage recognition site is located near the 5 end of the target mRNA to increase efficiency and minimize the intracellular accumulation of non functional mRNA transcripts. Furthermore the use of any cleavage recognition site located in the target sequence encoding different portions of the target mRNA would allow the selective targeting of one or the other target genes.

Gene targeting ribozymes necessarily contain a hybridizing region complementary to two regions each of at least 5 and preferably each 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 or 20 contiguous nucleotides in length of a target mRNA. In addition ribozymes possess highly specific endoribonuclease activity which autocatalytically cleaves the target sense mRNA.

The ribozymes of the present invention also include RNA endoribonucleases Cech type ribozymes such as the one which occurs naturally in known as the IVS or L 19 IVS RNA and which has been extensively described in Zaug et al. 1984 Science 224 574 578 Zaug et al. 1986 Science 231 470 475 Zaug et al. 1986 Nature 324 429 433 published International patent application No. WO88 04300 and Been et al. 1986 Cell 47 207 216 . The Cech type ribozymes have an eight base pair active site which hybridizes to a target RNA sequence whereafter cleavage of the target RNA takes place. The invention encompasses those Cech type ribozymes which target eight base pair active site sequences that are present in a target gene or nucleic acid sequence.

Ribozymes can be composed of modified oligonucleotides e.g. for improved stability targeting etc. and should be delivered to cells which express the target gene in vivo. A preferred method of delivery involves using a DNA construct encoding the ribozyme under the control of a strong constitutive promoter so that transfected cells will produce sufficient quantities of the ribozyme to destroy endogenous target messages and inhibit translation. Because ribozymes unlike antisense molecules are catalytic a lower intracellular concentration is required for efficiency.

In certain embodiments a ribozyme may be designed by first identifying a sequence portion sufficient to cause effective knockdown by RNAi. The same sequence portion may then be incorporated into a ribozyme. In this aspect of the invention the gene targeting portions of the ribozyme or siRNA are substantially the same sequence of at least 5 and preferably 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 or 20 or more contiguous nucleotides of a target nucleic acid.

In a long target RNA chain significant numbers of target sites are not accessible to the ribozyme because they are hidden within secondary or tertiary structures Birikh et al. 1997 Eur. J. Biochem. 245 1 16 . To overcome the problem of target RNA accessibility computer generated predictions of secondary structure are typically used to identify targets that are most likely to be single stranded or have an open configuration see Jaeger et al. 1989 Methods Enzymol. 183 281 306 . Other approaches utilize a systematic approach to predicting secondary structure which involves assessing a huge number of candidate hybridizing oligonucleotides molecules see Milner et al. 1997 Nat. Biotechnol. 15 537 41 and Patzel and Sczakiel 1998 Nat. Biotechnol. 16 64 8 . Additionally U.S. Pat. No. 6 251 588 the contents of which are herein incorporated by reference describes methods for evaluating oligonucleotide probe sequences so as to predict the potential for hybridization to a target nucleic acid sequence. The method of the invention provides for the use of such methods to select preferred segments of a target mRNA sequence that are predicted to be single stranded and further for the opportunistic utilization of the same or substantially identical target mRNA sequence preferably comprising about 10 20 consecutive nucleotides of the target mRNA in the design of both the siRNA oligonucleotides and ribozymes of the invention.

Alternatively target gene expression can be reduced by targeting deoxyribonucleotide sequences complementary to the regulatory region of the gene i.e. the promoter and or enhancers to form triple helical structures that prevent transcription of the gene in target cells in the body. See generally Helene C. 1991 Anticancer Drug Des. 6 569 84 Helene C. et al. 1992 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 660 27 36 and Maher L. J. 1992 Bioassays 14 807 15 .

Nucleic acid molecules to be used in triple helix formation for the inhibition of transcription are preferably single stranded and composed of deoxyribonucleotides. The base composition of these oligonucleotides should promote triple helix formation via Hoogsteen base pairing rules which generally require sizable stretches of either purines or pyrimidines to be present on one strand of a duplex. Nucleotide sequences may be pyrimidine based which will result in TAT and CGC triplets across the three associated strands of the resulting triple helix. The pyrimidine rich molecules provide base complementarity to a purine rich region of a single strand of the duplex in a parallel orientation to that strand. In addition nucleic acid molecules may be chosen that are purine rich for example containing a stretch of G residues. These molecules will form a triple helix with a DNA duplex that is rich in GC pairs in which the majority of the purine residues are located on a single strand of the targeted duplex resulting in CGC triplets across the three strands in the triplex.

Alternatively the target sequences that can be targeted for triple helix formation may be increased by creating a so called switchback nucleic acid molecule. Switchback molecules are synthesized in an alternating 5 3 3 5 manner such that they base pair with first one strand of a duplex and then the other eliminating the necessity for a sizable stretch of either purines or pyrimidines to be present on one strand of a duplex.

A further aspect of the invention relates to the use of DNA enzymes to inhibit expression of target gene. DNA enzymes incorporate some of the mechanistic features of both antisense and ribozyme technologies. DNA enzymes are designed so that they recognize a particular target nucleic acid sequence much like an antisense oligonucleotide. They are however catalytic and specifically cleave the target nucleic acid.

There are currently two basic types of DNA enzymes both of which were identified by Santoro and Joyce see for example U.S. Pat. No. 6 110 462 . The 10 23 DNA enzyme comprises a loop structure which connect two arms. The two arms provide specificity by recognizing the particular target nucleic acid sequence while the loop structure provides catalytic function under physiological conditions.

Briefly to design an ideal DNA enzyme that specifically recognizes and cleaves a target nucleic acid one of skill in the art must first identify the unique target sequence. This can be done using the same approach as outlined for antisense oligonucleotides. Preferably the unique or substantially sequence is a G C rich of approximately 18 to 22 nucleotides. High G C content helps insure a stronger interaction between the DNA enzyme and the target sequence.

When synthesizing the DNA enzyme the specific antisense recognition sequence that will target the enzyme to the message is divided so that it comprises the two arms of the DNA enzyme and the DNA enzyme loop is placed between the two specific arms.

Methods of making and administering DNA enzymes can be found for example in U.S. Pat. No. 6 110 462. Similarly methods of delivery DNA ribozymes in vitro or in vivo are similar methods of delivery RNA ribozyme as outlined in detail above. Additionally one of skill in the art will recognize that like antisense oligonucleotide DNA enzymes can be optionally modified to improve stability and improve resistance to degradation.

The dosage ranges for the administration of the antagonists of the invention are those large enough to produce the desired effect. The dosage should not be so large as to cause adverse side effects such as unwanted cross reactions anaphylactic reactions and the like. Generally the dosage will vary with the age condition sex and extent of disease of the patient and can be determined by one of skill in the art. The dosage can be adjusted by the individual physician in the event of any complication.

The antagonists of the invention can be administered parenterally by injection or by gradual perfusion over time. The antagonists can be administered intravenously intraperitoneally intramuscularly subcutaneously intracavity or transdermally.

Another embodiment of the present invention relates to pharmaceutical compositions comprising one or more antagonists according to the invention together with a physiologically and or pharmaceutically acceptable carrier excipient or diluent. Physiologically acceptable carriers excipients or stabilizers are known to those skilled in the art see Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences 17th edition Ed. A. Osol Mack Publishing Company Easton Pa. 1985 . Acceptable carriers excipients or stabilizers are nontoxic to recipients at the dosages and concentrations employed and include buffers such as phosphate citrate and other organic acids hydrophobic oils derived from natural or synthetic sources antioxidants including ascorbic acid low molecular weight less than about 10 residues polypeptides proteins such as serum albumin gelatin or immunoglobulins hydrophilic polymers such as polyvinylpyrrolidone amino acids such as glycine glutamine asparagine arginine or lysine monosaccharides disaccharides and other carbohydrates including glucose mannose or dextrins chelating agents such as EDTA sugar alcohols such as mannitol or sorbitol salt forming counterions such as sodium and or nonionic surfactants such as Tween Pluronics or polyethylene glycol PEG .

In yet a further embodiment the present invention provides small molecule antagonists and methods for using them to reduce or silence retinoid signaling pathways. The design of small molecule antagonists are known to one skilled in the art. One example of antagonists is the class of compounds that suppress the function of RARs or RXRs through their direct binding to these proteins see e.g. Dawson and Zhang 2002 Discovery and design of retinoic acid receptor and retinoid X receptor class and subtype selective synthetic analogs of all trans retinoic acid and 9 cis retinoic acid Current Med. Chem. 9 623 637 and Zhang et al. 1995 Evidence for the involvement of retinoic acid receptor RAR alpha dependent signaling pathway in the induction of tissue transglutaminase and apoptosis by retinoids J. Biol. Chem. 270 6022 6029 . Another example is the retinoid neutral agonist compounds that reduce the activities of RAR RXR or related receptors Johnson et al. 1999 Retinoid X receptor RXR agonist induced activation of dominant negative RXR retinoic acid receptor alpha403 heterodimers is developmentally regulated during myeloid differentiation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19 3372 3382 . RAR and RXR signaling is regulated by histone acetylases and deacetylases. Their function can be interrupted by application of pharmaceutical agents that suppress HAc or activate HDAc for retinoid receptors.

Retinoid receptors require RA ligand to transduce signaling. Accordingly in another embodiment methods of the present invention manipulate levels of these ligands through effects on enzymes that synthesize or catabolize these ligands for a list of examples of such ligands see supra . Such compounds could also include citral disulfuram and others known to those skilled in the art. Another approach is to enhance the activity of enzymes that catabolize and remove RA such as Cyp26 members. A third approach is to manipulate the levels of intracellular proteins that bind retinol or retinoic acid to control their concentrations in the nucleus. A fourth approach is to administer a blocking antibody against ligands such as retinoic acid to reduce its activity within a tissue. For example antibodies to retinoic acid is known in the art see e.g. Twal Roze and Zile 1995 Anti retinoic acid monoclonal antibody localizes all trans retinoic acid in target cells and blocks normal development in early quail embryo. Dev. Biol. 168 225 234.

Because a major source of retinoid is dietary intake one method to lower RA levels is to reduce dietary retinoid intake through dietary manipulation. A second method is to block retinoid absorption in the gut. A third method is to administer an inhibitor of the enzyme that cleaves carotenoids to generate retinoid. A fourth method is to inhibit the esterases and other enzymes that convert retinoids into forms that can be transported from gut mucosa to the rest of the body.

Another major retinoid source is from body stores in liver adipose and other tissues the release from which is regulated by retinoid feedback. Antagonists of that feedback or of release of retinoid stores may be used to reduce retinoid levels in heart. Another method is to reduce the half life of circulating retinoid by enhancing the renal or hepatic disposal of the retinoid.

Mice that harbor a null mutation in RBP were used to study myocardial development. These animals at the embryonic stages show a transient impairment of myocardial development precocious differention of subepicardial cardiac myocytes increased numbers of mesenchymal cells in outflow tract and remarkably augmented fibronectin deposition in the cardiac jelly. At adult stages echocardiography shows progressive cardiovascular changes including increased left ventricular mass and wall thickness increased lumenal diameter and impaired cardiac relaxation suggestive of cardiac hypertrophy. However although classical clinical hypertrophy is highlighted by increased up regulation of embryonic cardiac genes the gene expression pattern of the RBP null mice showed a significant down regulation of the embryonic hypertrophy marker genes. Moreover the diameter of the cardiac myocytes was unchanged whereas in classical myocardial clinical hypertrophy the diameter of the cardiac myocytes is increased. These results indicate that in RBP null mice clinical hypertrophy is inhibited thereby suggesting that clinical hypertrophy may be inhibited by inhibiting transport of vitamin A. In other words although heart enlargement was observed RBP null mice showed a failure or significant attenuation of the heart to up regulate hypertrophy signals and a normalized diameter of cardiac myocytes features consistent with suppression of cardiac hypertrophy mechanisms.

At birth the heart weight of RBP null mice is normal. However by age 8 wks RBP null mice had significantly enlarged hearts. Hence the heart enlargement due to RBP loss is postnatal.

Echocardiography and direct physical measurement suggest enlarged left ventricle and statistically significant reduction in percent fractional shortening e.g. the heart doesn t relax fully . However pressure volume loop assessment of the RBP null hearts demonstrates that this is because the larger hearts achieve a larger stroke volume meaning that they can circulate more blood without working as hard. There is no indication of congestive heart failure. The bottom line contractile function is normal and perhaps enhanced in the RBP null hearts.

Detailed examination of RBP hearts finds no evidence for a pathological appearance. There is no necrosis or apoptosis no sign of fibrosis or amyloidosis and no inflammatory infiltrate. TGF beta2 transcript levels are normal. We conclude that the enlargement does not reflect restrictive cardiomyopathy. The histological condition of RBP null heart tissue is healthy.

The expression of cardiac hypertrophy markers was assessed to ascertain whether the heart enlargement reflects physiological or pathological hypertrophy. Two independent sets of mice were examined. Messenger RNA levels for hypertrophy markers were quantified by real time PCR and normalized to actin values are expressed as a percentage increase relative to age and gender matched wild type controls. Overall there is a significant reduction in the expression of those genes that participate in pathological hypertrophy skeletal actin is consistently and strongly suppressed atrial naturetic factor and myosin heavy chain are reduced in one group or the other. In contradistinction myosin heavy chain and Serca2a are elevated during physiological good hypertrophy such as exercise. MHC and less consistently Serca2a have elevated expression in the RBP null mice. Overall these findings indicate that the heart enlargement in RBP null mice is due to the induction of good hypertrophy responses whereas the age related progression of pathological hypertrophy progression is suppressed in the RBP null mice. In summary the RBP null mice have a desirable cardiac gene expression profile.

The above data indicate that RBP null mutation represents a healthier heart than that of wild type littermates. The age related progression of heart deterioration appeared to be arrested or delayed in the null mice. We tested this formally by subjecting mice to an overt cardiac stress placing a constricting band around the aorta. This is a classic model of pressure overload and results in activation of pathological hypertrophy responses heart enlargement and ultimately heart failure.

RBP null and wild type littermates at age 8 wks were subjected to aortic banding. Three weeks later mice were echocardiographed to confirm that the banding was successful. Mice were then killed and cardiac hypertrophy was quantified. Overall these data show that while wild type mice show the expected cardiac enlargement caused by aortic banding hearts of RBP null mice fail to further enlarge. In summary while banding of wild type mice caused the predicted pathological hypertrophy response banding of RBP null mice failed to activate the pathological hypertrophy pathways.

While not willing to be bound by any theory the present inventors believe that the responses of the RBP null mutant mice are due to their lower serum vitamin A levels 15 to 20 of control values and a subsequent reduction of retinoid mediated signaling in heart.

As shown in Table 3 above the hearts of mice deficient in RBP and retinoid signaling have a suppression of marker genes that are strongly correlated with pathogenic hypertrophy atrial natriuretic factor myosin heavy chain beta alpha skeletal actin and that these same hearts have an up regulation in expression of marker genes that are strongly correlated with physiological hypertrophy sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase 2a myosin heavy chain alpha . Therefore the modest hypertrophy in the RBP null mice reflects the activation of physiological good hypertrophy responses. In other words RBP deficiency and the resultant retinoid insufficiency caused by the loss of RBP activate physiological hypertrophy responses and suppress the pathological bad hypertrophy responses.

Furthermore in RBP null mice that had a severe pulmonary or circulatory problem their expression of the pathological hypertrophy markers is lower than would be expected Table 6 . Thus the loss of RBP and retinoid attenuates the progression of pathological hypertrophy such that the heart can function better than it might otherwise.

Table 7 shows additional evidence in RBP null mice that their hypertrophy involves physiological and not pathological hypertrophy responses. Left ventricular expression of 7 hypertrophy markers was assessed in otherwise normal 8 RBP wild type and 10 11 RBP null mutant mice at 10 12 months of age. This was performed using real time PCR and data were normalized to actin expression prior to analysis by genotype. These data include n 3 and significantly expand the previously disclosed data set presented as Group 1 in Table 3. Data in Table 7 demonstrate that mice that lack expression of RBP and thus were in a state of subclinical vitamin A deficiency exhibit a marked suppression of several genes known to be associated with the onset and progression of pathological hypertrophy MHC SkA MCIP . These mice also lacked the histological signs of such progression no fibrosis no infiltration no amyloidosis . These mice were aged 10 12 months and should have exhibited such markers due to age related reductions of cardiac function however they lack such an exhibition. Furthermore these mice had a trend toward increased expression of a marker known to be associated with good physiological hypertrophy responses MHC . A loss of RBP and retinoid signaling may be responsible for an uncoupling of certain signaling pathways that govern hypertrophy responses.

A reduction of retinoid dependent signaling improves cardiac function and attenuates hypertrophy responses in the presence of a cardiac stress. Specifically vitamin A insufficiency through dietary manipulation of vitamin A intake protects the heart from pathological hypertrophy.

Experimental Design. Genetically normal C57B1 6J mice both sexes were reared to dams fed a vitamin A deficient diet from gestational day 17 through birth and lactation. At postnatal day 18 mice were weaned and assigned to a vitamin A free diet or a diet containing 25 000 IU vitamin A as retinyl palmitate . This latter is an adequate intake for mouse. At 8 weeks of age half the mice were subjected to surgery in which a constrictive band was placed to encircle the aorta. At 11 wks of age all mice were killed. Serum and liver were collected for retinoid content. Heart weights left ventricular weights and tibia lengths were measured to document the severity of hypertrophy. Hearts were frozen for later molecular analysis.

Results. Male and female mice were analyzed separately due to a gender effect on heart size that was distinct from banding and dietary treatment effects. Results are presented in Table 8 as Left Ventricular Wt mg tibia length mm .

The above results showed that aortic banding by surgical constriction caused significant cardiac hypertrophy p

The results further demonstrate that dietary vitamin A deficiency caused cardiac enlargement in female mice as compared with VA sufficient females of identical age and genetic background p 0.012 . This observation replicates the observation in RBP null mutant mice and suggests that the RBP effect is attributed to vitamin A insufficiency. Cardiac enlargement was not observed in male VAD mice p 0.569 . The sex dichotomy likely reflects gender differences in vitamin A clearance as these males and females were littermates.

Importantly female mice reared on a vitamin A deficient diet are resistant to pressure overload induced cardiac hypertrophy as compared with vitamin A adequate mice p 0.137 . An attenuated hypertrophy response is seen in vitamin A deficient males p 0.018 for VAD banded vs. unbanded p 0.056 for VAD vs. VAS banded mice .

Hearts of 5 month old WT or RBP null mice were fixed in end stage diastole at a uniform state of contraction. Hearts were sectioned. Cardiomyocytes were visualized with antibody against skeletal actin their diameter was defined by staining with an antibody against laminin and nuclei were visualized by DAPI staining. Cross sectional diameter of skeletal actin positive cells was ascertained at the level of the nucleus using the method and criteria of Oh et al. 2001 Telomerase reverse transcriptase promotes cardiac muscle cell proliferation hypertrophy and survival. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 10308 10313. The cross sectional area per myocyte for RBP Wild type was 2336 174 compared to 2299 255 RBP null. The difference is not significant with a p 0.817.

The progression of pathological hypertrophy is associated with increased diameter of the cardiomyocyte this reflects their increased content of contractile protein. The lack of enhanced cardiomyocyte diameter in RBP null mice despite the increased size of their hearts offers further evidence that the mechanism does not involve the induction of pathological hypertrophy signals.

Five month old wild type or RBP null mice were subjected to intravenous insertion of a pressure impedance catheter into their left ventricle. Cardiac function was documented across the contraction cycle in anaesthetized mice and in the same animals with inotropic challenge.

Responses were measured and are shown in Table 9 expressed as the percentage of KO response relative to WT response p in parenthesis .

The above results show that measures of cardiac stress ESPVR EDPVR FS were largely indistinguishable between RBP WT and Null hearts both at rest and under contractile challenge. This indicates that the RBP null hearts are not failing and do not have increased stiffness or contractile impairment. In fact there is a trend toward improved function of the RBP null vs. WT hearts as reflected in their significant increase in Ved and trend to increased SV. Cardiac output was greater in the RBP null animals but this did not achieve significance. Overall the loss of RBP is not deleterious to heart function in that these hearts function normally to supranormally as compared with their WT counterparts.

Hearts of WT and RBP null littermates were collected and fixed at postnatal days 1 and 13. Cardiac sections were prepared and proliferating cardiomyocytes were visualized using antibody directed against acetylated phosphohistone H3. Cardiomyocyte identity was confirmed by counterstaining with sarcomeric actin. Approximately 1500 nuclei were sampled per heart and N 4 mice per genotype and age.

These results show that RBP null mutant hearts have enhanced numbers of proliferating cardiomyocytes at early postnatal days but not in older adults.

Fenretinide N 4 hydroxyphenyl retinamide 4HPR is a retinoid analog and is known to lower the concentrations of both vitamin A and retinol binding protein RBP in the bloodstream Formelli et al. 1989 Plasma retinol level reduction by the synthetic retinoid fenretinide a one year follow up study of breast cancer patients. Cancer Res 48 6149 6152 Dimitrov et al. 1990 Alteration of retinol binding protein concentrations by the synthetic retinoid fenretinide in healthy human subjects. Am J Clin Nutr 51 1082 1087 Peng et al. 1989 Pharmacokinetics of N 4 hydroxyphenyl retinamide and the effect of its oral administration on plasma retinol concentrations in cancer patients. Int. J. Cancer 43 22 26 . This creates symptoms of vitamin A insufficiency including impaired dark vision adaptation and epithelial keratosis Kaiser Kupfer et al. 1986 Abnormal retinal function associated with fenretinide a synthetic retinoid. Arch Ophthalmol 104 69 70 . Because of this side effect clinical practice is that patients abstain from fenretinide for several days each month to replete their serum vitamin A values.

Fenretinide has undergone extensive phase 2 and phase 3 clinical trials as a chemotherapeutic in diverse cancers of epithelial origin reviewed in Cobleigh 1993 Breast cancer and fenretinide an analogue of vitamin A. Leukemia 8 S59 S63 also see Moon et al. 1982 Influence of 15 retinoic acid amides on urinary bladder carcinogenesis in the mouse. Carcinogenesis 3 1469 1472 Moon et al. 1983 Inhibition of carcinogenesis by retinoids. Cancer Res. 43 2469S 2475S and its mechanism of action is not entirely understood. However it is well established that it binds to RBP displacing RBP from transthyretin TTR and dramatically increasing renal losses of RBP and vitamin A Holven et al. 1997 Secretion of N 4 hydroxyphenyl retinamide retinol binding protein from liver paranchymal cells evidence for reduced affinity of the complex for transthyretin. Int J Cancer 71 654 659 Malpeli et al. 1996 Retinoid binding to retinol binding protein and the interference with the interaction with transthyretin. Biochim Biophys Acta 1294 48 54 Sani et al. 1995 N 4 hydroxyphenyl retinamide interactions with retinoid binding proteins receptors. Carcinogen 16 2531 2534 . Fenretinide poorly trans activates the nuclear retinoid receptors Sani et al. 1995 .

In an embodiment fenretinide is administered to a patient in need thereof for treating and or preventing pathological cardiac hypertrophy and cardiac failure. Administration of fenretinide results in improved contractile function enhanced cardiomyocyte proliferation and suppression of pathological hypertrophy responses to challenges such as pressure overload. Fenretinide is supplied as an oil filled gelatin capsule and administered orally Conley et al. 2000 Pilot trial of the safety tolerability and retinoid levels of N 4 hydroxyphenyl retinamide in combination with tamoxifen in patients at high risk for developing invasive breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 18 275 283 . Alternatively it is incorporated into a liposome Takahashi et al. 2003 Effects on M5076 hepatic metastasis of retinoic acid and N 4 hydroxyphenyul retinamide fenretinide entrapped in SG liposomes. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 26 1060 1063 or into an immunoliposome that is targeted to the desired tissue such as heart Raffaghello et al. 2003 Immunoliposomal fenretinide a novel antitumoral drug for human neuroblastoma. 197 151 152 .

The foregoing description and examples have been set forth merely to illustrate the invention and are not intended to be limiting. Since modifications of the disclosed embodiments incorporating the spirit and substance of the invention may occur to persons skilled in the art the invention should be construed broadly to include all variations falling within the scope of the appended claims and equivalents thereof. All references cited hereinabove and or listed below are hereby expressly incorporated by reference.

