---

title: Method and apparatus for extending a telephone's capabilities
abstract: An application programming interface (API) enables a telephone to utilize the hardware resources of a computer that is connected to the telephone in a master/slave relationship that causes the computer to function in the manner of a peripheral to the telephone. Specifically, the telephone attached to the computer can utilize the relatively large memory capacity of the attached computer to store excess telephone-specific data and can utilize the relatively high sophistication of the processing capability of the connected computer to perform intensive data processing operations. The API allows the functionality of the telephone to be extended without requiring a telephony-equipped computer.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07042991&OS=07042991&RS=07042991
owner: Siemens Communications Inc.
number: 07042991
owner_city: Boca Raton
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050127
---
This application is a continuation of application Ser. No. 09 239 414 filed on Jan. 28 1999 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 862 347 of the same title.

The present invention relates generally to telecommunications and more particularly to the integration of telephones and computers.

Most telephone functions can now be performed by computing devices such as servers and or desktop personal computers PCs . Specifically the field of computer telephony has evolved such that a computer can emulate the functions of a telephone by for example answering an unattended telephone and taking messages. As another example the computer can emulate the functions of a traditional PBX by acting as an automatic call management and distribution center. Further a properly equipped computer can be used as a telephone substitute. To enable a computer to emulate the functions of a telephone a telephony application program interface TAPI residing within the computer is utilized to provide the interface between computer communications protocols and telephone network protocols. An example of a PC that is configured to perform computer telephony functions is shown in . The PC of is connected to a traditional telephone a public switched telephone network PSTN and optionally to a data network such as a LAN. As shown in the telephone is connected to the PSTN through the PC instead of being directly connected to the PSTN.

The PC of includes standard PC devices such as a processor memory and a data network input output I O device . The PC also includes a TAPI that controls the computer telephony functions performed by the PC and an I O device that connects the PC to both the telephone and the PSTN . In an arrangement such as in the telephone can operate as a conventional telephone with the computer I O device supplying a direct connection between the telephone and the PSTN. Alternatively the computer can be utilized as a telephone substitute if the computer is equipped with the appropriate microphone speaker and voice processing hardware and software. The telephone and computer can also be integrated to operate in conjunction with each other with the TAPI controlling computer telephony applications. For example the TAPI can be configured to answer incoming calls after a specific number of rings in a manner similar to a conventional answering machine or the TAPI can be configured to answer every incoming telephone call offering a caller a menu of options similar to an automated call distribution center. In the arrangement of the TAPI equipped PC supports the operation of the telephone with PSTN compatible functions.

A computer telephony equipped system which is a modification of the system of is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 799 068 entitled Smart Phone Integration with Computer System issued to Kikinis et al. hereinafter Kikinis . As shown in the PC of Kikinis is equipped with a TAPI that controls computer telephony functions. However in contrast to the system of the telephone in Kikinis is connected directly to a PBX and the PC is connected to the PBX through the telephone. Although the PC is connected to the telephone to support the telephone with computer telephony applications the telephone does not rely on the computer to perform any of its telephone specific operations.

As computer telephony technology has expanded so too has telephone technology. For example stand alone telephones exist that can answer and store messages provide menu options and perform automatic call distribution functions. Although telephones have expanded capabilities they are often limited by cost and or capacity of data that can be stored within the telephone or limited in the extent of data processing that can be performed by the telephone.

Thus computer telephony technology may provide the extended functionality desired for many telephone applications with the extended functionality being built around the computer as the interface point for all communications. However although computers and telephones often sit side by side on the desktop in most situations the telephones are unsupported by the computers and are still the primary interface point for communications. In view of this fact and in view of some of the limitations of conventional telephones what is needed is a cost effective and manageable way to extend the capability of a traditional telephone.

A method and an apparatus for extending the capability of a telephone involve connecting the telephone to a nearby computer such that the telephone can utilize the hardware resources of the computer. During telephone operations the computer functions in the same manner as a peripheral to the telephone responding to instructions received from a processor resident in the telephone. In a preferred embodiment the telephone receives incoming call data recognizes that at least a portion of the call data needs to be stored and determines whether to store the call data in memory located within the telephone or memory located within the computer. The telephone is also enabled to determine whether to process incoming call data within the telephone or utilize the computer s processing capability to execute at least a portion of the required tasks. By utilizing the relatively large memory capacity of the computer to store excess call related data such as voicemail messages and by utilizing the relatively high sophistication of the computer to perform intensive data processing functions such as voice recognition the capability of a telephone can be significantly extended.

In a preferred system a telephone is equipped with an application programming interface API that coordinates the transfer of data between the telephone and the attached computer. The telephone includes a processor memory and input output I O devices for connecting the telephone separately to a PSTN and to the computer. The API equipped telephone can perform telephone functions independently of the computer whether or not the computer is capable of computer telephony.

The computer attached to the telephone in the preferred system includes its own processor and memory. The computer processor is a conventional processor and the memory is conventional memory such as RAM and or hard disk memory. The computer includes an input output device that enables the telephone to be connected to the computer.

In one embodiment of the invention the telephone utilizes the relatively large memory capacity of the computer to store call related data. For example the PC memory can be utilized by the telephone to store overflow voicemail messages and or database information such as a telephone directory. The PC memory can be utilized by the telephone to archive old messages to store various voicemail greetings and or to store speed dial numbers. In one operation the API integrated into the telephone monitors the memory availability within the telephone and determines if and when call related data should be transferred from the telephone to the PC for storage. Specifically a stand alone telephone can manage a fixed amount of data in the form of voicemail messages and if the fixed amount of data is exceeded the excess data is automatically transferred to the PC memory in order to prevent the data from being lost.

In another embodiment the telephone utilizes the increased sophistication of processing capacity of the computer to handle processing intensive operations or processing overflow. For example a telephone may include menu options that allow a caller to select among a variety of operations. Under normal circumstances a telephone processor can handle the menu options operations but under high call traffic conditions the telephone performance may decline. To avoid performance problems the API is configured to sense when the telephone s processing capability is being stretched and to automatically utilize the processing capability of the PC to supplement the processing capability of the telephone. Other telephone functionality that may require extended processing capability include automatic call distribution voice activated functions and or security functions such as voice pattern recognition.

An advantage of the invention is that with a minimum of additional hardware the capability of a conventional desktop telephone can be extended by utilizing the relatively large storage and processing capability of a nearby personal computer. Another advantage of the invention is that the functionality of a telephone can be extended without requiring a computer that is capable of computer telephony functionality.

In the preferred embodiment the telephone is a stand alone digital and or analog telephone that can operate independently of the computer. The telephone is connected directly to a PSTN and includes its own internal processor and memory that allow the telephone to perform conventional telephone operations. The processor is preferably integrated into one or more application specific integrated circuits ASICs and the memory may include read only memory ROM and or random access memory RAM . The telephone includes an I O device that connects the telephone to the PSTN. Alternatively the telephone can be connected to a different telephone network such as a private network. The telephone also includes an API and an I O device that allow the telephone to interact with the PC in accordance with the invention. The telephone is preferably located in the same workspace as the computer with both the telephone and computer being utilized by the same person. For example the telephone and computer are located in the same office and typically on the same desktop.

In accordance with the invention the API enables the telephone to utilize the storage and or processing capability of the PC . The API preferably resides in the telephone and offers various programmable parameters that can be controlled through interaction with a telephone keypad or an alternative interface mechanism on the telephone such as a touchpad. The API includes software and hardware that coordinates communications protocols and controls the transfer of data between the telephone and the computer. The API does not provide computer telephony functionality rather the API enables the telephone to utilize hardware resources of the computer to extend the telephone s storage and processing capability.

Enabling the telephone to utilize the relatively large memory capacity of the PC significantly expands the memory capability of the telephone. In a preferred embodiment the PC memory is utilized by the telephone as overflow memory. For example the PC memory can be utilized by the telephone to store overflow voicemail messages and or database information such as telephone directories. The PC memory can also be utilized by the telephone to archive old messages store various voicemail greetings and or store speed dial numbers.

In one operation the telephone receives call related data from the PSTN and recognizes that some of the call related data needs to be stored for future recall. The API integrated into the telephone determines whether the call related data should be stored within the telephone memory or the computer memory. To make the determination the API monitors the memory availability within the telephone and compares the availability to a pre established availability threshold. Upon reaching the pre established availability threshold the API directs additional incoming or outgoing call related data to be transferred from the telephone to the PC for storage. For example a stand alone telephone can store a fixed amount of data in the form of call parameters caller ID call status etc. and voice mail messages. If the fixed amount of data is exceeded the excess data can be automatically transferred to the PC memory for storage thereby preventing the data from being lost and extending the capability of the telephone.

In another operation call related data that is stored in the PC memory from the telephone is accessed through the telephone either manually or automatically. For example a user can direct the telephone to scroll through a series of saved voicemail messages that reside within the PC memory. Alternatively the voicemail messages can be automatically accessed from memory of the PC by the telephone and displayed on a telephone display in a manner in which it is transparent to the user that the data were stored within the computer.

Enabling the telephone to utilize the processor capacity of the PC greatly expands the processing capability of the telephone. In a preferred embodiment the API determines whether or not to utilize the processing capability of the computer. The API typically utilizes the PC processor to perform more intensive processing or to provide overflow processing capability during periods of high call traffic. For example the telephone may include menu options that allow a caller to select among a variety of operations. Under normal circumstances the telephone processor can handle the menu options operation but when call traffic is high the telephone performance may decline. To avoid performance problems the API can be configured to sense when the telephone s processing capability may be exceeded and then automatically utilize the processing capability of the PC to simultaneously perform excess processing. Other telephone functionality that may require extended processing capability includes automatic call distribution voice activated functions and security functions such as voice pattern recognition. As with the storage function the API can be configured to automatically utilize the PC s processing capability to for example ensure that performance problems are avoided.

In the preferred embodiment the data connection between the telephone and the PC is a physical connection. For example standard 9 or 25 pin serial cable or RS 232 or RS 485 compatible connections may be utilized. In an alternative embodiment a wireless connection utilizing for example radio frequency or infrared energy may be used to transmit data between the telephone and the computer.

Although the API is described as residing within the telephone the API can be configured to reside within the PC or in both the PC and the telephone. In a preferred embodiment the utilization of the PC s resources is transparent to a user of the telephone. However in another embodiment the telephone indicates when the resources of the PC are being utilized or need to be utilized. For example if the PC is turned off and the telephone requires additional storage space the telephone will prompt a user to turn on the computer. The API can be configured to function with analog telephones and analog telephone networks as well as with digital telephones and digital telephone networks.

