---

title: Acoustic liner with bypass cooling
abstract: An acoustic liner  includes a remote panel , a proximate panel  transversely spaced from the remote panel and a resonator chamber residing between the panels. Perforations  penetrate the proximate panel in registration with the resonator chamber . A neck  with an inlet  recessed from the proximate panel establishes communication between the chamber and a fluid stream G flowing past the proximate panel. A bypass coolant passage  guides coolant through the perforations without guiding it through the resonator chamber.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07311175&OS=07311175&RS=07311175
owner: United Technologies Corporation
number: 07311175
owner_city: Hartford
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050810
---
This invention was made under U.S. Government Contract F33657 99 D 2051. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

This application includes subject matter in common with co pending concurrently filed application Ser. No. 11 200 563 entitled Architecture for an Acoustic Liner both applications being assigned to or under obligation of assignment to United Technologies Corporation.

This invention relates to noise attenuating acoustic liners and particularly to a liner having simple cost effective features for attenuating low frequency noise and or in which coolant bypasses the liner s acoustic resonator chambers to improve the durability of the liner without impairing its noise attenuating properties.

Acoustic liners are used in fluid handling ducts to attenuate undesirable noise associated with a stream of fluid flowing through the duct. Examples of such ducts include the inlet and exhaust system ducts of gas turbine aircraft engines. A typical acoustic liner includes a back sheet and a face sheet spaced from the back sheet to define an inter sheet compartment. The liner is positioned along the duct wall with the face sheet extending approximately parallel to the direction of fluid flow through the duct. The inter sheet compartment serves as a resonator chamber for attenuating noise. Walls may extend between the sheets to subdivide the compartment into multiple smaller resonator chambers. A set of holes or necks perforates the face sheet to establish communication between the chamber or chambers and the fluid stream. One well known relationship that describes the noise frequency that a resonator will attenuate is 2 where c is the local speed of sound Ais the cross sectional area of the neck leading to a chamber or the aggregate area of multiple necks leading to a chamber Vis the volume of the chamber and Lis the length of the neck. In a typical turbine engine acoustic liner the face sheet is made of sheet stock. Accordingly Lis the thickness of the sheet.

When the acoustic liner is used in a hot environment for example to line an afterburner duct it may be desirable to cool the liner to extend its useful life. Cooling may be accomplished by supplying coolant usually relatively cool air to the resonator chambers and allowing the coolant to flow through the chambers and discharge through the resonator necks. However at the flow rates typically required for satisfactory cooling the coolant discharging through the resonator necks degrades the liner s acoustic admittance which is a measure of its ability to admit acoustic disturbances into the resonator chambers.

Even if cooling is not required it may be necessary to tune a resonator chamber to attenuate low frequency noise. A resonator can be tuned to a low frequency by increasing Vor Lor by decreasing A. For aircraft engine applications increasing Vmay not be an option due to space constraints. Decreasing Aalso may not always be an option. This is partly because decreasing Areduces the overall porosity of the liner which directly diminishes the acoustic admittance. Moreover if the liner is cooled the resonator necks also serve as coolant passages to cool the face sheet. Decreasing the size or quantity of the resonator necks coolant passages could therefore compromise the durability of the liner. Accordingly increasing Lmay be the most viable option for tuning a resonator chamber to attenuate low frequency noise.

One embodiment of the acoustic liner described herein includes a remote panel a proximate panel transversely spaced from the remote panel and a resonator chamber residing between the panels. Perforations penetrate the proximate panel in registration with the resonator chamber. A neck with an inlet recessed from the proximate panel establishes communication between the chamber and a fluid stream flowing past the proximate panel. A bypass coolant passage guides coolant to the perforations without guiding it through the resonator chamber or the neck.

Another embodiment of the acoustic liner includes a remote panel a perforated proximate panel transversely spaced from the remote panel and one or more partitions spanning across the space between the panels. At least one baffle cooperates with the partitions to define a resonator chamber and an associated neck for establishing communication between the resonator chamber and a fluid stream flowing past the proximate panel.

The foregoing and other features of the various embodiments of the acoustic liner will become more apparent from the following detailed description and the accompanying drawings.

The acoustic liner includes a proximate panel circumscribing a duct centerline and a remote panel radially spaced from the proximate panel and also circumscribing the centerline to define an inter panel annulus. The proximate and remote panels are also referred to as a face sheet and a back sheet respectively. Endwalls join the panels together at their axial extremities. Stiffeners which extend circumferentially 360 degrees are attached to the panels and span radially across the inter panel space. The stiffeners act as partitions that cooperate with the panels to define inter panel compartments . During engine operation a stream of hot gases G flows axially through the duct. The proximate panel is relatively hot due to its proximity to the hot gas stream. The remote panel is relatively cold due to its remoteness from the hot gas stream.

Compartments include a baffle . The baffle of is formed of two opposing sheet metal pieces . Each piece extends circumferentially 360 degrees or may be made of individual segments secured together to extend 360 degrees. Each piece has an axially extending leg in contact with one of the partitions and a radially extending leg . The axially extending legs define a baffle base while the radially extending legs define a resonator neck having a length L. The neck has an inlet and an outlet . The inlet is radially recessed by a recess distance R from the proximate panel so that the baffle base the proximate panel and two axially neighboring partitions define a coolant plenum . The baffle also cooperates with the neighboring partitions to define a resonator chamber . Because the baffle extends 360 degrees the neck is a circumferentially continuous slot. The neck has a circumferential dimension a and an axial dimension b both measured at the radial location of the inlet . In the liner of the circumferential dimension exceeds the axial dimension. The proximate panel also includes the perforations in registration with the compartments . Perforations form a perforation array of high enough porosity that the neck not the perforations influence the noise frequency that the chamber responds to. Because the length L of neck significantly exceeds the length t of necks chamber responds to lower frequencies while chamber responds to higher frequencies.

A bypass cooling system is provided to guide coolant to the perforations without requiring that the coolant first pass through the resonator chamber or neck . The bypass cooling system includes radially extending bypass coolant passages alongside the chamber and the coolant plenum . Each passage is defined by a passage wall cooperating with a partition . The passage may be circumferentially continuous as shown in or may be circumferentially segmented into multiple sub passages. A coolant intake comprising one or more openings in the remote panel admits coolant to the passage. A coolant outlet adjacent to the coolant plenum discharges the coolant into the plenum. The coolant then flows through the perforations to cool the proximate panel. Because the coolant bypasses the chamber and neck and because the high porosity array of perforations have little or no effect on the acoustic admittance of chamber the flow of coolant does not adversely affect the noise attenuating properties of the chamber . If necessary optional coolant admission holes may penetrate the remote panel to supply additional coolant to chamber . Although the flow of this additional coolant through the resonator neck would degrade the acoustic admittance the effect will be less severe than if all the coolant flowed through the chamber and neck.

Although the foregoing discussion describes the bypass cooling system in conjunction with an architecture for a low frequency resonator chamber the two concepts may be used independently.

As seen in the resonator chambers form circumferentially extending resonator bands responsive to higher frequencies. The resonator chambers form circumferentially extending resonator bands responsive to lower frequencies. The lower frequency resonator bands are axially offset from the higher frequency bands . The presence of the higher and lower frequency bands causes the liner to attenuate a broader spectrum of noise frequencies.

Although the baffled chambers and the bypass cooling system can be used independently certain advantages may be obtained by using both concepts in a single liner. Referring back to the chambers can be tuned to higher frequencies and the tuning can be spatially varied throughout the liner if desired. Similarly the chambers can be tuned to lower frequencies and the tuning of these chambers can also be spatially varied if desired. However the chambers can be tuned to particularly low frequencies due to the extended neck . The region of the face sheet in the vicinity of chambers can be cooled as described with the bypass cooling system without compromising the acoustic admittance of chambers . This cooling may be less effective than the cooling in the vicinity of chambers because of the high porosity of the array of perforations in comparison to the lower porosity of the array of perforations . However the less effective cooling may be justifiable in return for the acoustic admittance. Moreover the coolant discharging through perforations will form a coolant film on the surface of the proximate panel. This film can extend across the region of the panel penetrated by perforations and help compensate for the reduced cooling effectiveness in that region. Thus the designer can trade acoustic performance for cooling effectiveness and vice versa. These considerations will help determine the pattern of chambers for example the different patterns seen in .

Although this invention has been shown and described with reference to a specific embodiment thereof it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes in form and detail may be made without departing from the invention as set forth in the accompanying claims. For example although the liner has been described in the context of a turbine engine afterburner duct it can be applied to other types of ducts or to surfaces other than duct walls.

