---

title: Security techniques in the RFID framework
abstract: The subject invention provides a system and/or a method that facilitates employing a security technique to an RFID network. An interface can receive role-based authorization data related to an operating system. A security component can enhance security to at least one of a manipulation of a process and a utilization of a device within the RFID network based at least in part upon role-based authorization data.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07944355&OS=07944355&RS=07944355
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07944355
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050531
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 606 281 filed on Sep. 1 2004 entitled SYSTEM AND METHODS THAT FACILITATE RFID SERVER PROGRAMMING MODEL AND API S and U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 606 577 filed on Sep. 2 2004 entitled FACILITATE RFID SERVER PROGRAMMING MODEL AND API S. This application is also related to co pending U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 11 069 459 11 025 702 11 061 356 and 11 061 337 filed on Mar. 1 2005 Dec. 29 2004 Feb. 18 2005 and Feb. 18 2005 respectively. The entireties of these applications are incorporated herein by reference.

Many retail manufacture and distribution establishments are applying different and innovative operating methods to increase efficiency. These establishments can monitor store inventory to facilitate optimizing supply and demand relating to consumers. One aspect of maximizing profit hinges on properly stocking inventory such that replenishment occurs in conjunction with exhaustion of goods and or products. For example a retailer selling a computer and or a VCR must stock the computer in relation to its consumer sales and the VCR in relation to its consumer sales. Thus if the computer is in higher demand e.g. more units sold than the VCR the retailer can stock the computer more frequently in order to optimize supply and demand and in turn profit. Monitoring inventory and associated sales can be a complex task wherein product activity is comparable to a black box since inner workings are unknown yet monitoring products is a crucial element in inventory product efficiency.

Automatic identification and data capture AIDC technology and specifically Radio Frequency Identification RFID has been developed based at least upon the need to cure deficiencies of typical monitoring systems and or methodologies e.g. barcode readers barcodes and or UPCs . RFID is a technique of remotely storing and retrieving data utilizing RFID tags. Since RFID systems are based upon radio frequency and associated signals numerous benefits and or advantages precede traditional techniques in monitoring products. RFID technology does not require a line of sight in order to monitor products and or receive signals from RFID tags. Thus no manual scan is necessary wherein the scanner is required to be in close proximity of the target e.g. product . Yet range is limited in RFID based upon radio frequency RFID tag size and associated power source. Additionally RFID systems allow multiple reads within seconds providing quick scans and identification. In other words an RFID system allows a plurality of tags to be read and or identified when the tags are within a range of an RFID reader. The capability of multiple reads in an RFID system is complimented with the ability of providing informational tags that contain a unique identification code to each individual product.

Moreover RFID systems and or methodologies provide real time data associated with a tagged item. Real time data streams allow a retailer distributor and or manufacturer the ability to monitor inventory and or products with precision. Utilizing RFID can further facilitate supplying products on a front end distribution e.g. retailer to consumer and a back end distribution e.g. distributor manufacturer to retailer . Distributors and or manufacturers can monitor shipments of goods quality amount shipping time etc. In addition retailers can track the amount of inventory received location of such inventory quality shelf life etc. The described benefits demonstrate the flexibility of RFID technology to function across multiple domains such as front end supply back end supply distribution chains manufacturing retail automation etc.

An RFID system consists of at least an RFID tag and an RFID transceiver. The RFID tag can contain an antenna that provides reception and or transmission to radio frequency queries from the RFID transceiver. The RFID tag can be a small object such as for example an adhesive sticker a flexible label and integrated chip etc. There are typically four different frequencies the RFID tags utilize low frequency tags between about 125 to 134 kilohertz high frequency tags about 13.56 megahertz UHF tags about 868 to 956 megahertz and Microwave tags about 2.45 gigahertz .

In general an RFID system can include multiple components tags tag readers e.g. tag transceivers tag writers tag programming stations circulation readers sorting equipment tag inventory wands etc. Such devices and in general RFID systems are exposed to security threats based solely on the characteristics which out perform traditional and or conventional systems. The RFID systems and devices are vulnerable and would be inept albeit for security measures associated therewith. With the growth of RFID systems and in particular RFID devices enhancing and improving security is an increasing concern to protect the quality and integrity of such devices and systems.

The following presents a simplified summary of the invention in order to provide a basic understanding of some aspects of the invention. This summary is not an extensive overview of the invention. It is intended to neither identify key or critical elements of the invention nor delineate the scope of the invention. Its sole purpose is to present some concepts of the invention in a simplified form as a prelude to the more detailed description that is presented later.

The subject invention relates to systems and or methods that facilitate employing security to an RFID network. A security component can incorporate a role based authorization model associated with an operating system to an RFID network to provide various security levels wherein the RFID network can be a collection of devices that form a sub system based at least in part upon a process a location an event and or functionality. The security component can utilize the role based authorization model from the operating system to prevent malicious attacks in relation to at least one of a manipulation of a process within the RFID network and the accessibility and or utilization of a device e.g. an RFID reader an RFID writer an RFID printer a printer a reader a writer an RFID transmitter an antenna a sensor a real time device an RFID receiver a real time sensor a device extensible to a web service and a real time event generation system within the RFID network.

In accordance with one aspect of the subject invention the security component can include a role component that can create an RFID administrator and an RFID user group with respective permissions. The RFID administrator can manipulate the process within the RFID network wherein the manipulation can be an execution a modification a creation a deletion e.g. a termination and or a deployment e.g. an initiation . The RFID administrator can incorporate a user and or a group from the operating system wherein the user group hierarchy is implemented within the RFID network. In addition the RFID administrator can dictate permissions to a user and or a group in relation to a more restricted manipulation of such processes. The user and or group that have been permitted to the restricted manipulations of the process can further dictate permission related to the restricted manipulation of such processes. Furthermore the RFID administrator can dictate permissions related to the access and or utilization of the device within the RFID network.

In accordance with another aspect of the subject invention the security component can include an analyzer component that can determine the characteristics related to the authorization model within the operating system to facilitate integrating such roles into the RFID network. Moreover the analyzer component can determine various vulnerabilities and or threats associated with the RFID network wherein such detected weaknesses can be eliminated via track model analysis. In accordance with another aspect the security component can utilize a manager component that manages at least one of a role and permission associated with the RFID network.

In accordance with still another aspect the security component can include a threat component that can utilize track model analysis wherein a threat can be determined and adequate protection can be provided accordingly. The threat component can detect various threats by manual techniques automatic techniques and or any combination thereof to dynamically perceive various threats and or security vulnerabilities in relation to the RFID network. In particular the threat component can detect threats associated to the manipulation of the process within the RFID network and or the accessibility and or utilization of a device within the RFID network.

In accordance with another aspect of the subject invention the security component can further include an API component. The API component can modify permissions associated with at least one of an RFID administrator and an RFID user group. Furthermore the security component can include a notification component that can notify an administrator of a breach potential breach and or an attempted breach. Also the notification component can notify the administrator of an internal breach and or an external breach. In other aspects of the subject invention methods are provided that facilitate employing security to an RFID network.

The following description and the annexed drawings set forth in detail certain illustrative aspects of the invention. These aspects are indicative however of but a few of the various ways in which the principles of the invention may be employed and the subject invention is intended to include all such aspects and their equivalents. Other advantages and novel features of the invention will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the drawings.

As utilized in this application terms component system interface and the like are intended to refer to a computer related entity either hardware software e.g. in execution and or firmware. For example a component can be a process running on a processor a processor an object an executable a program and or a computer. By way of illustration both an application running on a server and the server can be a component. One or more components can reside within a process and a component can be localized on one computer and or distributed between two or more computers.

The subject invention is described with reference to the drawings wherein like reference numerals are used to refer to like elements throughout. In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the subject invention. It may be evident however that the subject invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to facilitate describing the subject invention.

Now turning to the figures illustrates a system that facilitates employing a security technique to radio frequency identification RFID network. A security component can employ a security technique to an RFID network based at least in part upon a characteristic associated with an operating system . The security component can provide protection against security breaches aimed toward a process within the RFID network and or a device within the RFID network . The process and or device within the RFID network are key assets within a server infrastructure which can be exposed to various threats that could arise out of malicious attacks. In other words the security component can protect the process and or device wherein the process can be a deployable RFID process that models the logical processing pipeline for a system of device and or device collections and the device is part of the physical device collection that the process can communicate. It is to be appreciated that the device can be but is not limited to an RFID reader an RFID writer an RFID printer a printer a reader a writer an RFID transmitter an antenna a sensor a real time device an RFID receiver a real time sensor a device extensible to a web service a real time event generation system etc. Moreover although the security component is depicted to be a stand alone component it is to be appreciated that the security component can be incorporated into the RFID network the operating system and or any combination thereof.

In one example the RFID network can include at least one RFID device that is associated with at least one RFID process. It is to be appreciated that the RFID process can utilize any suitable number of devices within the RFID network . The process can be related to a particular RFID sub system e.g. an RFID server RFID network etc. that is an uber or high level object that forms together various entities to create a meaningful unit of execution. The process can be an outbound process e.g. pick pack shipping scenario etc. a manufacturing process a shipping process a receiving process tracking data representation data manipulation data application security . . . . Additionally the process can include an RFID device service a tag read an event e.g. a tag read a tag read error a device up event a device down event and a management event a tag write a device configuration a geographic tracking a number count etc.

The security component can invoke security measures to the RFID network to secure and or protect the process and or device to deter malicious attacks. The security component can protect devices associated with a process and the process that utilizes such devices. The operating system can be any suitable operating system that utilizes a role based authorization model and or data. For example the operating system can incorporate an administrator a group and or a user. Such role based authorization allows tiered levels e.g. hierarchy of authorization based at least in part upon the administrator s discretion. In one example the group can be configured based on roles that users play in an organization such as warehouse manager warehouse employee DC manager store employee etc. Such groups can be selectively assigned various security levels wherein a particular user and or group can be given rights to perform specific tasks.

The security component can incorporate the role based authorization model and or data associated with the operating system to provide substantially similar security and or authorization in relation to the RFID network . In particular the security component can provide role based authorization to a process and or a device within the RFID network . Thus manipulations associated with processes and or utilization of devices within the RFID network can be restricted based at least in part upon the role based authorization model within the operating system .

The system further includes an interface component which provides various adapters connectors channels communication paths etc. to integrate the security component into virtually any operating and or database system s . In addition the interface component can provide various adapters connectors channels communication paths etc. that provide for interaction with the security component the RFID network and the operating system . It is to be appreciated that although the interface component is incorporated into the security component such implementation is not so limited. For instance the interface component can be a stand alone component to receive or transmit data in relation to the system .

For example the security component can invoke security techniques in relation to the process and or the device s within the RFID network . The operating system can contain an administrator a warehouse manager group and a warehouse employee group wherein each group contains at least one user. In other words the operating system utilizes a role based authorization model and or data. The security component can create an additional administrator e.g. RFID administrator and at least one group e.g. RFID user group wherein users and or groups within the operating system can be incorporated into the RFID network providing various security layers. It is to be appreciated that the rights associated with the RFID administrator and the RFID user group can be disparate and or pre defined based at least in part upon the security that is to be implemented. For example the rights of the RFID administrator are supreme in relation to any user therewith. Thus the security component can incorporate the role based authorization model within the operating system to secure and or protect the process es and or devices within the RFID network .

Furthermore the RFID network can include at least one device e.g. an RFID reader an RFID writer an RFID printer a printer a reader a writer an RFID transmitter an antenna a sensor a real time device an RFID receiver a real time sensor a device extensible to a web service a real time event generation etc. that is associated with at least one RFID process . The RFID network can include various sub systems based at least in part upon location function and or process . For example an RFID network can be two groups and or collections of devices one at a shipping door and another at a receiving door. Such RFID network can further include a process associated with each group and or collection of devices based at least in part upon the group and or collection name location and or process name. For instance the process can be a shipping process that is related to the devices at the shipping door wherein the devices can collect data at such location. Similarly another process can be a receiving process that is related to the devices at the receiving door wherein the devices can collect data at such location. The security component can secure and or protect the manipulation of the process and or the accessibility of the device within the RFID network based at least in part upon the role based authorization model associated with the operating system .

The process is an uber and or high level object that can provide a meaningful unit of execution. For instance the process can be a shipping process that represents multiple devices at various dock doors working together to perform tag reads filtering read enrichment alert evaluation and data storage in a sink for a host application to retrieve process. In another example the process can execute a manufacturing process wherein devices are configured to read as well as write dependent upon a location. Moreover additional functions such as filtering enriching etc. can be implemented at the location. In yet another example the process can write to a tag process wherein a tag can be written in real time based at least upon an input. The write process can also check if the write succeeded by reading and passing data back to the host. A manipulation e.g. creation execution deployment modification deletion an initiation and a termination . . . of the process can be secured and or protected by the security component .

In one example the security component can provide access to the process and the device based at least in part upon a list of authorization groups associated with the process . The authorization group consists of a user defined name for the authorization group a flag specifying the read execute modify delete both access level and a list of operating system users and or groups. It is to be appreciated that the list can be potentially extended to structure query language SQL users and or roles. Such authorization group can be a named object that when associated with the process and device artifacts that specifies the list of RFID store users and the access level to that artifact for all of them.

The security component can include a role component that can initiate and or apply a general role and or a role permission right attribute to provide security within the RFID network . The role component can provide at least one guideline and or rights to be enforced in association with the role based authorization model associated with the operating system . The guidelines and or rights relating to the manipulation of the process and or utilization of a device with the process can be based at least in part upon a track model analysis that facilitates the limitation of at least one threat to the system . In other words the role based authorization model can be incorporated into the RFID network wherein specific rights and or attributes can be assigned accordingly.

For instance the role component can utilize two general roles such as an RFID administrator and at least one RFID user group containing at least one user wherein the RFID administrator and the RFID user group has respective attributes guidelines and or rights. The roles e.g. warehouse manager warehouse employee dc manager store employee etc. associated with the operating system can be assigned e.g. by the RFID administrator to the RFID user group to reflect substantially similar hierarchy. In relation to processes the RFID administrator can manipulate e.g. create execute deploy modify delete . . . any process within the RFID network . Furthermore the RFID administrator can add any user to have limited rights to a specific process or processes. Once added to a particular process by the RFID administrator the user can create modify and execute the process and add another user to the particular process. Yet the RFID administrator can further dictate permissions related to device accessibility and or utilization of devices with the process . In other words the user regardless of rights to the process may not access a device if the RFID administrator restricts such device. The role component can incorporate rights according to the above examples wherein the RFID administrator can dictate permissions of the incorporated users and or groups from the operating system . In addition the RFID administrator can remove and or retract a user s permission list.

The security component can include an analyzer component that can analyze various data associated with the system to facilitate employing security techniques to provide protection to at least one of the manipulation of the process and or utilization of a device within the RFID network . In one example the analyzer component can analyze the operating system and determine the role based authorization model associated therewith to incorporate such roles into the RFID network . The analyzer component can determine the various roles associated with the operating system which allows the role component to incorporate such roles with respective rights. In another example the analyzer component can analyze possible threats and or breaches to the security relating to at least one of the manipulation of the process and or utilization accessibility of a device. In other words the analyzer component can determine a possible breach within security and incorporate the appropriate roles and or rights to eliminate such breach possibility.

The security component can further include a manager component that manages the roles attributes and or rights associated with the security component . The manager component can provide the addition groups creation of groups deletion of groups right assignment etc. in relation to the security component . For example the manager component can edit e.g. add delete modify create . . . the rights associated with a role and or group incorporated from the operating system . Moreover the manager component can edit the users associated with a group within the RFID network . In one example the manager component can be utilized by the RFID administrator wherein complete managerial aspects are dictated thereby. It is to be appreciated that the manager component can manage various aspects in relation to the roles and or authorizations incorporated from the operating system . Furthermore although the manager component is incorporated into the security component the subject invention is not so limited. It is to be appreciated that the manager component can be a stand alone component incorporated into the RFID network incorporated into the operating system and or any combination thereof.

In one example the RFID administrator has top priority in rights wherein no user and or group can over step such authority. The RFID administrator can add users to groups delete users from groups create new groups create new users modify groups modify rights associated with a group and or user execute processes deploy processes create processes modify processes provide permission on device utilization etc. Once added by the RFID administrator to the process the user and or group can create the process modify the process delete the process add another user and or group to the process but not deploy and or execute the process . It is to be appreciated that the RFID administrator can dictate permissions on various devices within the RFID network wherein if a device is not granted permission the process associated with such device may not be manipulated regardless of rights related to the process .

The security component can utilize a threat component that can utilize track model analysis to determine a threat and provide adequate protection accordingly. Track model analysis can be invoked to provide a trust forming initiative wherein at least one threat can be mapped to the platform e.g. system in terms of security to provide a security model. The kinds of infractions can be listed and the resources entry points trust levels data flow diagrams and ways of compromised can be determined. Such information can lead to a list of threats from which vulnerabilities can be exposed to allow the security component protect from such vulnerabilities.

The security component provides security related to the manipulation of a process and or the utilization of a device within the RFID network . Numerous threats can be associated with the key assets e.g. processes devices . . . to the RFID network wherein the threat component can determine and protect against such threats. The following threats can be seen as examples and not exhaustive to which the security component can analyze to provide appropriate protection. The process can be exposed to the unauthorized creation of a process. For instance a malicious user could potentially create a logical RFID process that 1 siphons information that is being collected and or 2 does not reflect the business function expected out of an RFID deployment e.g. an incorrect shipping and or receiving process for other gains. The process can be exposed to an unauthorized deployment modification and or deletion. A malicious user can execute RFID logic when it is not suppose to be executed e.g. turn warehouse devices on and scan inventory and count via the deployment of count process if not restricted e.g. unless super users are present and the system is able to sand box other users to give them permissions to do only what they are allowed . Such scenario includes malicious modification deletion of business logic encompassed in a running process for other gains.

Additionally the device can be exposed to various threats. The following examples are not to be limiting to the subject invention. The device can be exposed to a physical attack via a host. An attacker can perform physical probing and or alteration of a device. In a probing attacking the goal of the attacker is to obtain any of the items listed in device properties data sent to tags as well as device firmware. The device configuration can also be altered wherein an attacker can attempt to alter the device configuration in an attempt to cause the device to misreport tag events including over reporting under reporting and or reporting tag events to unauthorized hosts. The device host exchange can be eavesdropped. An attacker may attempt to eavesdrop on communications between the device and the host including protocol data frames from device and host and data sent to the device from the host.

Moreover the injection of reader and or host data frames can be a threat to the device within the RFID network . An attacker can inject data frames masquerading as the device or host including protocol data frames from device and host and data sent to the device from the host. An attacker can further inject data frames and or physical layer noise to disrupt the communications availability of the device and host providing a denial of service on device host data exchange. Further an attacker can attempt to introduce an unauthorized device and or host to propose a threat to the system . The threat component can aim to solve the above mentioned issued by the application and or user of existing security mechanisms in the operating system platform in a specific manner to protect the aforementioned RFID framework entities from the type of threats defined.

The security component can invoke an application program interface API component herein referred to as API . The API can be invoked for example at runtime to edit various roles and or attributes rights associated with roles. It is to be appreciated that various API s can be utilized with the subject invention and the following example is not exhaustive. The API can provide functionality such as but not limited to adding and or removing a user and or group from a list of users who can modify a process e.g. such functionality can be done by the creator of the process . In addition a list of all users and or groups that can modify a process can be returned. In another example the API can add and or remove a user and or group from the list of owners of the process. Moreover the API can return a list of all users and or groups who are owners of the process wherein the process creator is part of such list. The following pseudo code can be employed in order to achieve the above functionality of the API .

The security component can further include a notification component that can notify an administrator of acts potential acts and or other suspicious activity in relation to a security breach. The notification component can utilize such data with the threat component to protect against various security breaches. In other words the notification component can dynamically detect and or protect against a malicious attack on the system . Moreover the notification component can inform e.g. email voicemail text Internet web . . . an administrator of attempted violation of assigned rights associated with a pre defined role. Thus a user within a group authorized to manipulate a first process can be reported to an administrator if such user attempts to violate permissions related to processes other than the first process.

The security component can further include a data store that can store various data related to the system . The data store can provide storage for various threats determined e.g. dynamically manually . . . roles associated with the operating system the role based authorization model rights and or attributes assigned to various users groups and or administrators pseudo code associated with at least one API etc. The data store can be for example either volatile memory or nonvolatile memory or can include both volatile and nonvolatile memory. By way of illustration and not limitation nonvolatile memory can include read only memory ROM programmable ROM PROM electrically programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable programmable ROM EEPROM or flash memory. Volatile memory can include random access memory RAM which acts as external cache memory. By way of illustration and not limitation RAM is available in many forms such as static RAM SRAM dynamic RAM DRAM synchronous DRAM SDRAM double data rate SDRAM DDR SDRAM enhanced SDRAM ESDRAM Synchlink DRAM SLDRAM Rambus direct RAM RDRAM direct Rambus dynamic RAM DRDRAM and Rambus dynamic RAM RDRAM . The data store of the subject systems and methods is intended to comprise without being limited to these and any other suitable types of memory. In addition it is to be appreciated that the data store can be a server a database and or a hard drive.

The RFID network can include a plurality of universes e.g. sub systems RFID networks wherein a universe is a server of RFID entities. For simplicity the RFID network illustrates a single universe containing two collections of devices e.g. device collections where a first collection is shown. For instance an RFID sub system can be a location wherein the entities involved are related to a substantially similar process. In one example a sub system can be a warehouse containing a plurality of receiving and or shipping dock doors with associated devices. Thus first collection can be a collection of devices within the specified sub system. It is to be appreciated a plurality of collection of devices can be implemented. Within a collection of devices a device can receive an RFID signal from a pallet of goods containing at least one RFID tag . It is to be appreciated the pallets and or goods can be tagged based at least upon user specifications e.g. single pallets tagged individual goods tagged pallets and goods tagged etc. .

The security component allows security techniques and or mechanisms associated with the operating system to be incorporated into the RFID network wherein the manipulation of a process and or the accessibility and or utilization of the device can be secured. The security component can utilize the role based authorization model associated with the operating system in conjunction with the rights assigned to an RFID administrator and an RFID user group wherein users and or groups related to the operating system can be integrated into the RFID user group.

It is to be understood that the intelligent component can provide for reasoning about or infer states of the system environment and or user from a set of observations as captured via events and or data. Inference can be employed to identify a specific context or action or can generate a probability distribution over states for example. The inference can be probabilistic that is the computation of a probability distribution over states of interest based on a consideration of data and events. Inference can also refer to techniques employed for composing higher level events from a set of events and or data. Such inference results in the construction of new events or actions from a set of observed events and or stored event data whether or not the events are correlated in close temporal proximity and whether the events and data come from one or several event and data sources. Various classification explicitly and or implicitly trained schemes and or systems e.g. support vector machines neural networks expert systems Bayesian belief networks fuzzy logic data fusion engines . . . can be employed in connection with performing automatic and or inferred action in connection with the subject invention.

A classifier is a function that maps an input attribute vector x x x x x xn to a confidence that the input belongs to a class that is f x confidence class . Such classification can employ a probabilistic and or statistical based analysis e.g. factoring into the analysis utilities and costs to prognose or infer an action that a user desires to be automatically performed. A support vector machine SVM is an example of a classifier that can be employed. The SVM operates by finding a hypersurface in the space of possible inputs which hypersurface attempts to split the triggering criteria from the non triggering events. Intuitively this makes the classification correct for testing data that is near but not identical to training data. Other directed and undirected model classification approaches include e.g. na ve Bayes Bayesian networks decision trees neural networks fuzzy logic models and probabilistic classification models providing different patterns of independence can be employed. Classification as used herein also is inclusive of statistical regression that is utilized to develop models of priority.

A presentation component can provide various types of user interfaces to facilitate interaction between a user and any component coupled to the security component . As depicted the presentation component is a separate entity that can be utilized with the security component . However it is to be appreciated that the presentation component and or similar view components can be incorporated into the security component and or a stand alone unit. The presentation component can provide one or more graphical user interfaces GUIs command line interfaces and the like. For example a GUI can be rendered that provides a user with a region or means to load import read etc. data and can include a region to present the results of such. These regions can comprise known text and or graphic regions comprising dialogue boxes static controls drop down menus list boxes pop up menus as edit controls combo boxes radio buttons check boxes push buttons and graphic boxes. In addition utilities to facilitate the presentation such vertical and or horizontal scroll bars for navigation and toolbar buttons to determine whether a region will be viewable can be employed. For example the user can interact with one or more of the components coupled to the security component .

The user can also interact with the regions to select and provide information via various devices such as a mouse a roller ball a keypad a keyboard a pen and or voice activation for example. Typically a mechanism such as a push button or the enter key on the keyboard can be employed subsequent entering the information in order to initiate the search. However it is to be appreciated that the invention is not so limited. For example merely highlighting a check box can initiate information conveyance. In another example a command line interface can be employed. For example the command line interface can prompt e.g. via a text message on a display and an audio tone the user for information via providing a text message. The user can than provide suitable information such as alpha numeric input corresponding to an option provided in the interface prompt or an answer to a question posed in the prompt. It is to be appreciated that the command line interface can be employed in connection with a GUI and or API. In addition the command line interface can be employed in connection with hardware e.g. video cards and or displays e.g. black and white and EGA with limited graphic support and or low bandwidth communication channels.

At reference numeral a user and or group associated with a role based authorization model within an operating system can be incorporated with the RFID user group. Thus any roles groups and or users related to the authorization model within the operating system can be incorporated into the RFID network to provide a substantially similar hierarchy of users related to such operating system. For example the operating system can include a plurality of users in an organization such as warehouse manager warehouse employee DC manager store employee etc. wherein such characteristics are the basis of the authorization model. Those roles can be incorporated into the RFID network and in particular into the RFID administrator and or RFID user group. At reference numeral security can be provided to the RFID network based at least in part upon the roles and or role based authorization model of the operating system. Thus the use of existing security mechanisms within the operating system platform can be utilized in a specific manner to protect the RFID network from identified threats. The security is provided to at least one of a manipulation e.g. create modify execute deploy manage add user and or group permission . . . of a process and utilization of a device associated with a process.

At reference numeral an RFID administrator and an RFID user group can be created with assigned permissions attributes and or rights. It is to be appreciated that the permissions attributes and or rights can be aimed to protect against various threats known and or dynamically identified utilizing for example the track model analysis. A discussed supra the RFID administrator can have permission levels above all other users and or groups wherein the RFID user group and associated users are subordinate thereto. Moreover the permissions attributes and or rights can be related to the manipulation of a process within the RFID network and or accessibility and or utilization of a device associated with a process within the RFID network. At reference numeral a role based authorization model within an operating system can be integrated to the RFID network wherein various characteristics can be incorporated into the RFID administrator and or RFID user groups. In other words the existing security mechanisms associated with the operating system in particular groups and or users can be utilized with providing security with the RFID network.

At reference numeral a notification of a breach can be instantiated to for instance an administrator. The breach can be any malicious attack on the RFID network internal and or external wherein a notification to the proper administrator can be executed. The notification can be for instance an email a text message a post on a web page a voicemail etc. In one instance the breach can a user with permission to a particular process attempts to access processes outside the scope of such permission. In such a case a notification and or log can be utilized to inform and or track the attempted breach of security. At reference numeral an API can be utilized to manage the role based authorization associated with the RFID network. For example an API can be invoked during runtime to allow at least one of the following 1 the addition removal of a user and or group form a list of users who can modify a process 2 return of a list of all users and or groups who can modify a process 3 add and or remove a user and or group from the list of owners of the process and 4 return the list of all users and or groups who are owners of the process. It is to be appreciated that numerous API s with a plurality of functionality can be employed with the subject invention and the above examples are not to be seen as limiting.

In order to provide additional context for implementing various aspects of the subject invention and the following discussion is intended to provide a brief general description of a suitable computing environment in which the various aspects of the subject invention may be implemented. While the invention has been described above in the general context of computer executable instructions of a computer program that runs on a local computer and or remote computer those skilled in the art will recognize that the invention also may be implemented in combination with other program modules. Generally program modules include routines programs components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks and or implement particular abstract data types.

Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the inventive methods may be practiced with other computer system configurations including single processor or multi processor computer systems minicomputers mainframe computers as well as personal computers hand held computing devices microprocessor based and or programmable consumer electronics and the like each of which may operatively communicate with one or more associated devices. The illustrated aspects of the invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where certain tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. However some if not all aspects of the invention may be practiced on stand alone computers. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in local and or remote memory storage devices.

One possible communication between a client and a server can be in the form of a data packet adapted to be transmitted between two or more computer processes. The system includes a communication framework that can be employed to facilitate communications between the client s and the server s . The client s are operably connected to one or more client data store s that can be employed to store information local to the client s . Similarly the server s are operably connected to one or more server data store s that can be employed to store information local to the servers .

With reference to an exemplary environment for implementing various aspects of the invention includes a computer . The computer includes a processing unit a system memory and a system bus . The system bus couples system components including but not limited to the system memory to the processing unit . The processing unit can be any of various available processors. Dual microprocessors and other multiprocessor architectures also can be employed as the processing unit .

The system bus can be any of several types of bus structure s including the memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus or external bus and or a local bus using any variety of available bus architectures including but not limited to Industrial Standard Architecture ISA Micro Channel Architecture MSA Extended ISA EISA Intelligent Drive Electronics IDE VESA Local Bus VLB Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI Card Bus Universal Serial Bus USB Advanced Graphics Port AGP Personal Computer Memory Card International Association bus PCMCIA Firewire IEEE 1394 and Small Computer Systems Interface SCSI .

The system memory includes volatile memory and nonvolatile memory . The basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines to transfer information between elements within the computer such as during start up is stored in nonvolatile memory . By way of illustration and not limitation nonvolatile memory can include read only memory ROM programmable ROM PROM electrically programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable programmable ROM EEPROM or flash memory. Volatile memory includes random access memory RAM which acts as external cache memory. By way of illustration and not limitation RAM is available in many forms such as static RAM SRAM dynamic RAM DRAM synchronous DRAM SDRAM double data rate SDRAM DDR SDRAM enhanced SDRAM ESDRAM Synchlink DRAM SLDRAM Rambus direct RAM RDRAM direct Rambus dynamic RAM DRDRAM and Rambus dynamic RAM RDRAM .

Computer also includes removable non removable volatile non volatile computer storage media. illustrates for example a disk storage . Disk storage includes but is not limited to devices like a magnetic disk drive floppy disk drive tape drive Jaz drive Zip drive LS 100 drive flash memory card or memory stick. In addition disk storage can include storage media separately or in combination with other storage media including but not limited to an optical disk drive such as a compact disk ROM device CD ROM CD recordable drive CD R Drive CD rewritable drive CD RW Drive or a digital versatile disk ROM drive DVD ROM . To facilitate connection of the disk storage devices to the system bus a removable or non removable interface is typically used such as interface .

It is to be appreciated that describes software that acts as an intermediary between users and the basic computer resources described in the suitable operating environment . Such software includes an operating system . Operating system which can be stored on disk storage acts to control and allocate resources of the computer system . System applications take advantage of the management of resources by operating system through program modules and program data stored either in system memory or on disk storage . It is to be appreciated that the subject invention can be implemented with various operating systems or combinations of operating systems.

A user enters commands or information into the computer through input device s . Input devices include but are not limited to a pointing device such as a mouse trackball stylus touch pad keyboard microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner TV tuner card digital camera digital video camera web camera and the like. These and other input devices connect to the processing unit through the system bus via interface port s . Interface port s include for example a serial port a parallel port a game port and a universal serial bus USB . Output device s use some of the same type of ports as input device s . Thus for example a USB port may be used to provide input to computer and to output information from computer to an output device . Output adapter is provided to illustrate that there are some output devices like monitors speakers and printers among other output devices which require special adapters. The output adapters include by way of illustration and not limitation video and sound cards that provide a means of connection between the output device and the system bus . It should be noted that other devices and or systems of devices provide both input and output capabilities such as remote computer s .

Computer can operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as remote computer s . The remote computer s can be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a workstation a microprocessor based appliance a peer device or other common network node and the like and typically includes many or all of the elements described relative to computer . For purposes of brevity only a memory storage device is illustrated with remote computer s . Remote computer s is logically connected to computer through a network interface and then physically connected via communication connection . Network interface encompasses wire and or wireless communication networks such as local area networks LAN and wide area networks WAN . LAN technologies include Fiber Distributed Data Interface FDDI Copper Distributed Data Interface CDDI Ethernet Token Ring and the like. WAN technologies include but are not limited to point to point links circuit switching networks like Integrated Services Digital Networks ISDN and variations thereon packet switching networks and Digital Subscriber Lines DSL .

Communication connection s refers to the hardware software employed to connect the network interface to the bus . While communication connection is shown for illustrative clarity inside computer it can also be external to computer . The hardware software necessary for connection to the network interface includes for exemplary purposes only internal and external technologies such as modems including regular telephone grade modems cable modems and DSL modems ISDN adapters and Ethernet cards.

What has been described above includes examples of the subject invention. It is of course not possible to describe every conceivable combination of components or methodologies for purposes of describing the subject invention but one of ordinary skill in the art may recognize that many further combinations and permutations of the subject invention are possible. Accordingly the subject invention is intended to embrace all such alterations modifications and variations that fall within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

In particular and in regard to the various functions performed by the above described components devices circuits systems and the like the terms including a reference to a means used to describe such components are intended to correspond unless otherwise indicated to any component which performs the specified function of the described component e.g. a functional equivalent even though not structurally equivalent to the disclosed structure which performs the function in the herein illustrated exemplary aspects of the invention. In this regard it will also be recognized that the invention includes a system as well as a computer readable medium having computer executable instructions for performing the acts and or events of the various methods of the invention.

In addition while a particular feature of the invention may have been disclosed with respect to only one of several implementations such feature may be combined with one or more other features of the other implementations as may be desired and advantageous for any given or particular application. Furthermore to the extent that the terms includes and including and variants thereof are used in either the detailed description or the claims these terms are intended to be inclusive in a manner similar to the term comprising. 

