---

title: System, method, and computer readable storage medium for informing a user about an item that is available via an e-commerce website
abstract: A user interface for communicating over a voice channel regarding an item that is available at an e-commerce website is disclosed and includes a speaker to communicate at least one audible voice message and at least one audible non-voice message. The audible voice message can indicate the status of an item and/or the status of an offer to purchase the item. Further, the at least one audible non-voice message can indicate a time period in which user input can be received. Moreover, the at least one audible non-voice message is transmitted concurrently with the at least one audible voice message.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07962376&OS=07962376&RS=07962376
owner: Unwired Nation
number: 07962376
owner_city: Austin
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050916
---
As of May 2005 the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association CTIA estimates that there are 182 million wireless subscribers in the United States. Further the CTIA estimates that over 2.5 billion text messages are sent every month. Text messages sent via short messaging service SMS are currently used by Internet companies to deliver notifications to mobile telephones. Unfortunately text messaging is not secure does not provide guaranteed delivery is not free and is not sent in real time.

Regarding security issues programs have been provided that can enable someone to spoof a sender s SMS address. Further since SMS messages are sent using store and forward based systems there is no guarantee that sent SMS messages are received within any particular timeframe. As such some SMS providers present a disclaimer to their users that the provider is not responsible for messages that are lost or significantly delayed due to transmission via the Internet. Also unlike voice calling plans there currently are no nights and weekends free service plans for SMS messaging.

For certain e commerce websites e.g. on line auction sites text messaging is not a very efficient way to interact with the website because the auctions are typically fast paced and require confirmed delivery of bids. Further the auction sites may utilize instant feedback for usability and understanding of the system. Moreover a text messaging interface can be difficult to use with a mobile device due to the size of the text on a small display screen and the requirement to read the text. These problems become more evident while trying to send and receive text messages while driving.

Accordingly there is a need for an improved system and method of communicating with e commerce websites e.g. auction websites.

A method of contacting a user about an item that is available via an e commerce website is disclosed and includes authenticating a user and transmitting at least one voice message to the user. The voice message indicates the status of an item and or the status of an offer to purchase the item e.g. a bid submitted at an online auction site. Additionally the method includes transmitting at least one audible non voice message to the user. The at least one audible non voice message indicates a time period in which user input can be received.

In another embodiment a user interface for communicating over a voice channel regarding an item that is available at an e commerce website is disclosed and includes a speaker to communicate at least one audible voice message and at least one audible non voice message. The audible voice message can indicate the status of an item and or the status of an offer to purchase the item. Further the at least one audible non voice message can indicate a time period in which user input can be received. Moreover the at least one audible non voice message is transmitted concurrently with the at least one audible voice message.

In still another embodiment a method is disclosed and includes presenting a list of items for sale and receiving a user selection of an item from the list of items for sale. Further the method includes placing the selected item on an action list in response to the user selection and placing a call to the user over a voice channel before an end of an offer for sale of the selected item. The method also includes authenticating the user and transmitting a plurality of voice messages over the voice channel after the user is authenticated. Additionally the method includes transmitting an audible non voice message while transmitting at least one of the plurality of voice messages.

In yet still another embodiment a method is provided and includes receiving a request to contact a user from a vendor website server regarding an item offered for sale at the vendor website server and retrieving contact information for the user. Additionally the method includes initiating a call to the user over a voice channel. The method also includes transmitting at least one voice message to the user and transmitting at least one audible non voice message to the user.

In still yet another embodiment a system for notifying a user about an item at an auction website over a voice channel is provided and includes a voice generation module that is embedded within a memory. The voice generation module includes a first voice message. Further the first voice message includes a greeting a reason for the call and a prompt for a personal identification number. The reason for the call is related to an event associated with the auction website.

Referring to a system of facilitating e commerce is shown and is designated . As shown the system includes a monitoring system that communicates with a vender server via the Internet . Further the monitoring system communicates with a voice over Internet protocol VoIP server via the network . In a particular embodiment a user telephone is coupled to the monitoring system via the Internet . Further the user telephone can be coupled to the Internet via a telephone network e.g. a public switched telephone network PSTN or a wireless telephone network such as global system for mobile communication GSM network.

In a particular embodiment the vender server can be an e commerce server that offers goods for sale with fixed pricing or escalating pricing based on an auction format. As shown the vender server can include a processor and a memory coupled to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the vender server . For example the vender server can include a vender interface module embedded within the memory . The vender interface module can provide connectivity with the vender server e.g. via the Internet . In an illustrative embodiment the vender server also includes a user history watch list module than can be used to track the shopping or bidding history of one or more users and items that one or more user are seeking to purchase.

As shown in the vender server can further include an inventory module that can be used to track the inventory provided for sale via the vender server . Further the vender server can include a cross sell up sell module that can be used to increase the sales provided by the vender server . For example when a user purchases a particular item the cross sell up sell module can recognize related items that may be useful to the user and offer those related items to the user for sale in conjunction with a purchased item. also shows that the vender server can include a transaction processing module for processing transactions with the vender server .

As depicted in the VoIP server can include a processor and a memory that is accessible to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the VoIP server . For example as shown an outbound calling capacity module can be embedded within the memory. In a particular embodiment the outbound calling capacity module can determine the number of outbound calls that the VoIP server is capable of establishing at any given time. also indicates that the VoIP server can include a direct inward dialing DID availability module that is embedded within the memory of the VoIP server . In an illustrative embodiment the DID availability module can determine whether direct inward dialing is available for a particular user and if so a DID service can be use to identify a called party e.g. by using DTMF or other signaling means before connecting a call to a called party.

In a non limiting exemplary embodiment the web server includes a processor and a computer readable medium e.g. a memory that is accessible to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the web server . For example an account registration module and an account management module can be embedded within the memory of the web server . In a particular embodiment the modules can be used to allow one or more users to establish user accounts with the monitoring system . Further the modules can be used to allow users to configure multiple user accounts on a per vender basis and configure one or more notification events or trigger events on a per vender basis.

Additionally in a particular embodiment the modules can be used to allow one or more users to update contact information or notification information previously input to the monitoring system. The contact information can include alternate numbers at which a user can be reached e.g. a home telephone number a work telephone number and a mobile telephone number. Also in a particular embodiment the modules can allow users to configure call security settings for the user accounts e.g. the modules can allow each user to establish a personal identification number PIN with the system and each user can be prompted to input a PIN when contacted by the monitoring system .

As illustrated in the call server within the monitoring system can include a processor and a computer readable medium e.g. a memory that is accessible to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the call server . For example an inbound outbound dialing event management module may be embedded within the memory . Also a DTMF event recognition module may be embedded within the memory . Further a caller authentication module may be embedded within the memory . also shows that an interactive voice response IVR module can be embedded within the memory . . In an alternative embodiment the caller authentication module may be part of a third party identification verification system.

In a particular embodiment the inbound outbound dialing event management module within the call server can operate in order to establish calls to users when notification events are detected. Further the DTMF event recognition module can be used to handle DTMF recognition of input received from a user device e.g. a telephone with touch tone capabilities. Moreover the caller authentication module can interact with other components within the monitoring system e.g. the user account database in order to provide security validation such as telephone number verification or PIN verification. Additionally the modules within the call server can operate with other components within the monitoring system in order to handle one or more user sessions at the vender websites.

As depicted in the voice mail notification server can include a processor and a computer readable medium e.g. a memory that is accessible to the processor . In a particular embodiment one or more software applications or modules may be embedded within the memory of the voice mail notification server . For example a voice mail notification event handling module can be embedded within the memory . Moreover a voice mail storage module can be embedded within the memory . A GSM to MPEG layer 3 MP3 conversion module can also be embedded within the memory .

In a particular embodiment the voice mail notification event handling module handles the distribution of non live audio notifications e.g. to voice mail systems. Further the GSM to MP3 conversion module can be used to convert GSM audio files to MP3 audio files. Additionally the voice mail storage module can be used to store various audio notifications that can be broadcast to users that are registered with the monitoring system .

In an exemplary non limiting embodiment the account server interacts with the call server and a commerce interface . In a particular embodiment the account server can act as a virtual user for the vender websites when a registered user has been authenticated by the call server . Further the account server receives DTMF inputs e.g. from a user via the call server and translates the DTMF inputs to outbound Web events on a per vendor basis. For example a user may press a 1 at a keypad of the user telephone and the account server can translate that response to an instruction to an auction website to increase a bid by one increment. Additionally the account server receives inputs from the vender websites and translates the inputs into audible phone events. Also the account server can translate the inputs into audible menus that can be broadcast to a registered user.

The commerce interface may be implemented as an application programming interface API that can interact with the account server and the vender interface module at the vender server in order to receive data representative of purchasing events and bidding events.

As illustrated in the user account database can include user registration data watch list data and site specific credentials . Also as shown in the user history database can include transaction history data historical price data and historical availability data . The caller rules database can include one or more event triggers i.e. notification events. For example the notification events can include the offer for sale of a particular item at a particular vendor website at a target price or the imminent end of an auction for a sought after item that a user has placed a bid.

In a particular embodiment the caller rules database can also include one or more contact rules and one or more caller rules . The contact rules can indicate the manner in which a registered user is to be contacted and a user defined order of calling a plurality of different contact numbers for the user. Further the caller rules can include user defined rules that will always control the action of the monitoring system when acting as a virtual user. For example when a particular item is offered for sale the user can specify for the monitoring system to automatically purchase the item at the asking price. Thereafter the monitoring system can contact the user to indicate that the item has been purchased. In an alternative embodiment the data provided by the databases can be stored in a single database that is accessible to one or more of the other components within the monitoring system .

Each of the servers described above is a processing element that can be a server as described or a process. Further any number or combination of the modules described above can be stored and executed within a single processing element or multiple processing elements in communication with each other.

In a particular embodiment the notification device transmits a non voice message and a voice message to a communication device e.g. a wireless telephone. Additionally in a particular embodiment the non voice generation module generates the non voice message that is transmitted to the communication device . Also in a particular embodiment the voice generation module generates the voice message that is transmitted to the communication device . In a particular embodiment the voice generation module can generate and transmit a first voice message a second voice message a third voice message etc. Table 1 includes a plurality of exemplary voice messages that may be transmitted to the communication device by the voice generation module . As shown the messages are numbered but the messages are not necessarily played in the order shown.

As depicted in the communication device includes a display a keypad a speaker and a microphone . In a particular embodiment the communication device can receive the non voice message and the voice message from the notification device and broadcast or communicate the non voice message and the voice message to a user via the speaker . The non voice message can be broadcast in the background of the voice message . For example the non voice message can be a low pulsing tone that slowly increases in frequency volume and or pitch while the voice message is broadcast to the user. In a particular embodiment the pulsing of the non voice message indicates a countdown of time e.g. the time remaining to purchase an item via an auction website.

A user can respond to the voice message by speaking a command into the microphone or by toggling a button on the keypad that corresponds to a menu option presented by the voice message . Accordingly the notification device can communicate the status of an item that is available at a vendor website to a user via the communication device . Further a user can take action with respect to the item by inputting a command via the keypad or the keypad .

In a particular embodiment the system can also provide the user with a tutorial in order to teach the user how to interact with the system during an auction for an item. The tutorial can simulate an auction and allow a user to bid on an imaginary item. Table 2 includes a plurality of voice messages that can be transmitted to a user during the tutorial.

Referring to a method of configuring a user account at the monitoring system is shown and commences at block . At block the monitoring system receives a set up request from a user. At block the user is prompted for a vendor website URL . Moving to block the monitoring system receives the vendor website URL from the user.

At block the monitoring system prompts the user for account information e.g. information concerning the user account with the vendor website. In a particular embodiment the user account information can include a user account name a user account number and a user password. Moving to block the system receives the user account information. Thereafter at decision step the system prompts the user to determine whether the user has an additional account with the vendor website. If so the method returns to block and continues as described.

If the user does not have an additional account with the vendor website the method proceeds to block and the user is prompted for a trigger event. In a particular embodiment the trigger event can be a particular online auction for a particular item. Further in a particular embodiment the trigger event can be the release of a particular item e.g. concert tickets at a vendor website. Further the trigger event can be a price decrease of a particular item the release of a new book the release of a new compact disk etc. At block the system receives the trigger event for the vendor.

Continuing to decision step the system prompts the user to determine whether the user wishes to set up an account with another vendor. If the user indicates that the user would like to set up an account with another vendor the method returns to block and continues as described. If the user indicates that the user does not want to set up an account with another vendor the method proceeds to block and the system prompts the user for contact information or notification information. In a particular embodiment the contact information or notification information can include a telephone number e.g. a cellular telephone number a mobile telephone number or a public switched telephone network PSTN telephone number. At block the system receives the user contact information or notification information.

Proceeding to block the system prompts the user for number validation. At block the system receives the number validation from the user. Next at block the system can prompt the user for an authentication e.g. a personal identification number PIN that can be associated with the user account at the monitoring system. At block the system receives the PIN from the user. The method then ends at state . Accordingly the method described above can be used by a user to register with the monitoring system. Further based on the information input to the monitoring system the user can be alerted when any of the trigger events input to the monitoring system occur at one or more vendor websites.

Referring to a method of monitoring a vendor website for a trigger event is shown. Beginning at block the monitoring system accesses the vendor website e.g. via the Internet. At block the monitoring system receives data from the vendor website. Next at block the monitoring system monitors the data from the vendor website. Moving to decision step the monitoring system determines whether a notification event is detected based on the data received from the vendor website. If a notification event is not detected the method returns to block and continues as described herein. In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can detect a notification event by monitoring the data received from the vender website for one or more of the triggers input by the user e.g. a imminent end of an auction and a price decrease of a product.

On the other hand if a notification event is detected the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system transmits a pre notification message to the user. Next at block the monitoring system interacts with a user via a voice channel. In a particular embodiment the pre notification message can be sent to the user a predetermined time before the interaction with the user e.g. thirty minutes prior to the interaction. Additionally the pre notification message can be sent to the user via a short messaging system SMS an email system or an alphanumeric paging system. Also in a particular embodiment the pre notification message can include the exact time that the interaction with the user is scheduled the subject of the interaction and other relevant information e.g. a bid status an auction status a time remaining for the auction etc. Further in an exemplary non limiting embodiment the interaction with the user can be facilitated using an interactive voice response IVR module at the monitoring system.

Returning to at decision step the monitoring system determines whether the transaction has been completed e.g. whether the user has purchased an item associated with the notification event or whether an auction associated with the notification event has ended. If the transaction is completed the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system provides customer account information to the vendor website. In a particular embodiment the account information can include a login identification and a password. Further in a particular embodiment the account information can include an affiliate identification which can be used to track successful bids and successful transactions. In another embodiment the account information can include billing information e.g. an account number a credit card number etc.

At block the monitoring system receives compensation from the vendor website for facilitating the transaction. The method then ends at state . In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can be compensated via an affiliate program associated with the vendor website. For example an affiliate program identification can be tracked and the monitoring system can be credited for transactions. Additionally in a particular embodiment a transaction may include a completed purchase of an item. Alternatively a transaction may include a successful bid for an item at an auction website. Returning to decision step if the transaction is not completed e.g. the user has decided not to purchase the item associated with the notification event the method ends at state .

In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can monitor the number of successful transactions and determine the rate at which successful transactions occur. As such the monitoring system can further target particular users that are prone to completing transactions and purchasing goods. Further the monitoring system can determine the percentage of total calls established that result in completed transactions that may be subject to billing to a vendor website. Alternatively the monitoring system can determine the percentage of total calls that are compensated calls where the vendor website pays compensation either directly or through an affiliated payment plan in connection with user action made during the calls. In a particular embodiment during operation the percentage of total calls billed to one or more vendor websites is above a targeted percentage e.g. ten percent twenty percent and fifty percent. The percentage of calls billed can be used to modify the monitoring system. For example if the percentage of calls billed falls below the targeted percentage the monitoring system can modify the number of users that are called. Alternatively the monitoring system can review the historical data for each user and only target those users that have a history of completing transactions via the monitoring system.

Referring to a method of contacting a registered user regarding an auction website event is shown and commences at block . At block the monitoring system attempts to contact a registered user over a voice channel such as a cellular telephone. Next at decision step the monitoring system determines whether the user is available i.e. has the user answered the telephone. If the user is not available the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether a voice mail system answers the call from the monitoring system. If not the method ends at state . Otherwise if a voice mail system answers the call from the monitoring system the method continues to block and the monitoring system transmits an audio message e.g. an MP3 message to the user voice mail. The method then ends at state .

Returning to decision step when the user is available the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system transmits an audio greeting to the user . Thereafter at step the monitoring system prompts the user for a PIN in order to verify the user s identity. Proceeding to decision step the monitoring system determines whether a PIN is received.

When a PIN is not received the monitoring system prompts the user to determine whether the user would like the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN. If the user indicates that the user does not want the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN the method ends at state . Conversely when the user indicates to the monitoring system that the user does want the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system retrieves the user PIN. Next at block the monitoring system transmits the user PIN to the user email account. At block the monitoring system indicates that the PIN has been transmitted to the user email account.

Returning to decision step when a PIN is received from the user the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether the PIN is correct. If the PIN is incorrect the method moves to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the PIN is incorrect. The method then returns to block and continues as described herein.

When a correct PIN is received at decision step the method continues to block and the monitoring system transmits an auction announcement to the user e.g. by transmitting an audio message to the user. In a particular embodiment the auction announcement can include the number of the auction the category of the auction the sub category of the auction and the name of the item. Thereafter at block the monitoring system transmits the current price of the item the current bid state and the remaining auction time to the user. In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can contact the user when the remaining auction time is less than ten minutes e.g. six minutes three minutes etc. Further in an alternative embodiment a time remaining for the auction can be transmitted to the user in response to the user inputting a request for the time remaining e.g. using a keypad at a telephone. In another alternative embodiment the time remaining can be dynamically injected into a phone session in order to give real time updates concerning the time remaining for the auction or a quantity remaining for a particular item.

Moving to decision step the monitoring website determines whether the user is the high bidder. If the user is the high bidder the method continues to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the user is the high bidder. At block the monitoring system monitors the time remaining in the auction. Next at block the monitoring system monitors the bid. Proceeding to decision step the monitoring system determines whether the bid has changed. If the bid changes the method returns to block and continues as described.

On the other hand if the bid has not changed the method moves to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether the auction has ended. If the auction has not ended the method returns to block and continues as described herein. When the auction ends the method moves to block and the monitoring system indicates that the auction has ended. The method then ends at state .

Returning to decision step if the user is not the high bidder the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates that the user is not the high bidder. Next at decision step the monitoring system prompts the user to determine whether the user would like to increase his or her bid. If the user does not want to increase the bid the method ends at state . When the user wants to increase the bid the method moves to block and the monitoring system retrieves the bid increment from the auction website. In a particular embodiment the monitoring system can increase the user s bid to the user s maximum bid.

In a particular embodiment the monitoring system determines real time state information such as high bid status through interaction with the auction website. For example the time remaining for an auction can be managed at the auction website and the monitoring system can periodically poll the auction website in order to determine the time remaining.

Proceeding to decision step the monitoring system determines whether the user s bid is greater than the current bid. If the user s bid is not greater than the current bid the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates that the user is still outbid. The method returns to decision step and continues as described. At decision step when the user s bid is greater than the current bid the method moves to block and the monitoring system prompts the user to confirm the bid. Next at block the monitoring system places the bid for the user.

Continuing to block the monitoring system parses a bid response received from the auction website. At decision step the monitoring system determines whether the user s bid is successful. If the user s bid is not successful the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates that the user s bid has failed. The method then returns to decision step and continues as described herein.

At decision step if the user s bid is successful the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether the user has been outbid. If the user is outbid the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the bid is successful but the user has been outbid. The method then returns to decision step and continues as described. Conversely if the user is not outbid the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the user s bid was successful. Then the method returns to block and continues as described.

Referring to a method of contacting a registered user about an e commerce website is shown and commences at block . At block the monitoring system attempts to contact a registered user via a telephone e.g. a cellular telephone or a landline telephone. Next at decision step the monitoring system determines whether the user is available i.e. has the user answered the call. If the user is not available the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether a voice mail system answers the call from the monitoring system. If not the method ends at state . Otherwise if a voice mail system answers the call from the monitoring system the method continues to block and the monitoring system transmits an audio message e.g. an MP3 message to the user voice mail. The method then ends at state .

Returning to decision step when the user is available the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system transmits an audio greeting to the user . Thereafter at step the monitoring system prompts the user for a PIN in order to verify the user s identity. Proceeding to decision step the monitoring system determines whether a PIN is received.

When a PIN is not received the monitoring system prompts the user to determine whether the user would like the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN. If the user indicates that the user does not want the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN the method ends at state . Conversely when the user indicates to the monitoring system that the user does want the monitoring system to retrieve the PIN the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system retrieves the user PIN. Next at block the monitoring system transmits the user PIN to the user email account. At block the monitoring system indicates that the PIN has been transmitted to the user email account.

Returning to decision step when a PIN is received from the user the method proceeds to decision step and the monitoring system determines whether the PIN is correct. If the PIN is incorrect the method moves to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the PIN is incorrect. The method then returns to block and continues as described.

When a correct PIN is received at decision step the method continues to block and the monitoring system indicates that a sought after item e.g. an item on a watch list or wish list established by the user with the monitoring system or the vendor website is available for purchase or is at a target price desired by the user. Next at block the monitoring system transmits a current price to the user. In a particular embodiment the monitoring system communicates with the user by transmitting audio messages to the user. Moving to decision step the monitoring system prompts the user in order to determine whether the user wants to purchase the sought after item. If the user does not want to purchase the sought after item the method ends at state .

On the other hand if the user indicates that the user wants to purchase the sought after item the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system transmits the user payment information previously supplied to the monitoring system to the vender website. Thereafter at block the monitoring system determines whether payment has been accepted by the vendor website. If payment is not accepted the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that payment has not been accepted by the vendor website. The method then ends at state . In a particular embodiment payment can be facilitated using previously stored payment data e.g. using a one click shopping mechanism at the vendor website.

When payment is accepted the method proceeds to block and the monitoring system indicates to the user that the sought after item has been purchased. Proceeding to block the monitoring system bills the vendor website for completing the transaction. The method then ends at state .

In one or more of the methods disclosed a user is authenticated by inputting a PIN. However the user can input one or more alternative authentication inputs. For example the authentication input can be a biometric input such as a voice input a fingerprint scan a palm scan an iris scan a retinal scan facial mapping infrared pattern matching etc. Alternatively the authentication can be performed using a physical token device e.g. a passkey or a universal serial bus USB dongle.

Referring to a method of establishing a user account with a vender system is shown and commences at block . At block the vendor website prompts the user to register with the vendor website. Next at block the vendor website determines whether an indication to register with the vendor website is received. When an indication to not register is received the method ends at state . On the other hand when an indication to register with the vendor website is received the method moves to block and the vendor website is prompted for user information. At block the vendor website receives the user information. In a particular embodiment the user information includes a first name a last name an address a city a state a zip code a country a primary telephone number a secondary telephone number a date of birth and an email address.

Proceeding to decision step the vendor website determines whether a continue button is selected before a timeout period ends. If the continue button is not selected the method ends at state . When the continue button is selected the method moves to decision step and the vendor website determines whether the required information is received from the user. If the required information is not received from the user the method moves to block and the vender website indicates an error to the user that all or some of the required information was not received from the user. The method then returns to decision step and continues as described.

Returning to decision step when the required information is received the method continues to decision step and the vendor website determines whether a user agreement is accepted by the user e.g. by selecting a box next to a statement that affirms that the user has accepted the user agreement. If the user agreement is not accepted the method proceeds to block and the vendor website indicates an error to the user that the user agreement has not been accepted. The method then returns to decision step and continues as described. At decision step when the user agreement is accepted the method continues to block and the vendor website transmits a confirmation code.

Moving to block the vendor website prompts the user for registration information. At block the vendor website receives the user registration information. In a particular embodiment the user registration information includes an identification a password an email address and the confirmation code transmitted to the user. Further the identification and the password can be selected by the user and approved by the vendor website.

At block the vendor website prompts the user for a secret question. At block the vendor website prompts the user for the answer to the secret question. In a particular embodiment the secret question and answer can be used as a second level of security in order to verify the user s identity with the vendor website e.g. when the user contacts the vendor website to modify one or more account settings.

Continuing to decision step the vendor website prompts the user to determine whether the user would like to receive real time product status updates e.g. auction updates via a voice channel provided by a wireless telephone or a land line telephone. If the user wants to receive real time product status updates the method continues to block and the vendor website prompts the user for primary contact information e.g. a wireless telephone number. At block the vendor website receives the primary contact information. Further at block the vendor website prompts the user for secondary contact information. At block the vendor website receives the secondary contact information. Then the vendor website confirms the registration at block and the method ends at state .

Returning to decision step when the user chooses not to receive real time product updates the method proceeds to block and the vendor website confirms the user registration. The method then ends at . In a particular embodiment the primary contact information can be the primary telephone number received above. Further the secondary contact information can be the secondary telephone number received above. Alternatively the user may want to contact via other telephone numbers not input with the user information.

Returning to decision step if one or more items that satisfy the search query are available the method continues to block and the vendor website presents a list of the items that satisfy the search query. At decision step the vendor website determines if any items on the list are selected. If not the method ends at state . On the other hand if any items are selected the method proceeds to decision step and the vendor website determines whether any user action has been taken with respect to the selected items. In a particular embodiment the user action can be a bid a request to watch the item or a best offer for the item.

When user action is taken with respect to a selected item the method proceeds to decision step and the vendor website determines whether the user is signed in. If the user is signed in the method proceeds to block and the selected item is placed on an action list. The method then moves to decision step .

Returning to decision step when the user is not signed in the method proceeds to decision step and the vendor website determines whether the user is registered with the vendor website. If the user is registered the method proceeds to block and the vendor website receives the user registration credentials. At decision step the vendor website determines whether the registration credentials are valid. If so the method proceeds to block and the selected item is placed on the action list. The method then moves to decision step . At decision step if the registration credentials are invalid the method returns to block and continues as described herein. At decision step if the user is not registered the method proceeds to block and the vendor website registers the user. The method then moves to decision step .

Returning to decision step if no user action is taken with respect to a selected item the method moves directly to decision step and the vendor website determines whether there are any items on the user s action list e.g. previously selected items and currently selected items. If there are not any items on the user s action list the method ends at state . Conversely if there are items on the user s action list the method proceeds to block and the vendor website monitors sale offers for the items on the action list.

Proceeding to decision step the vendor website determines whether a time remaining for any offer of sale is below a predetermined threshold. If the time remaining for any offer of sale is not below the predetermined threshold the method returns to block and continues as illustrated in . On the other hand if the time remaining for any offer of sale is below the predetermined threshold the method continues to block and the vendor website retrieves the user contact information. Thereafter at block the vendor website places a call regarding the item to the user over a voice channel. The method then ends at state . In a particular embodiment the vendor website can contact the user using the method depicted in . In an alternative embodiment the vendor website can contact the user using the method depicted in . Additionally the vendor website can attempt to contact the user using the primary contact information first. If the user is unavailable via the primary contact information the method attempts to contact the user using the secondary primary contact information.

Referring to an alternative method of contacting a registered user about a product available at a vender website is illustrated and commences at block . At block a vendor website initiates a telephone call to a user e.g. to a primary contact telephone number or a secondary contact telephone number. At decision step the vendor website determines whether the user is available i.e. has the answered the telephone call. If the user is not available the method ends at state .

On the other hand when the user is available the method proceeds to block and the vendor website attempts to authenticate the user. For example in a particular embodiment the vendor website can prompt the user for an identification and a PIN. At decision step the vendor website determines whether the user is authenticated. If the user is not authenticated the method moves to block and the vendor website transmits an error message to the user. The method then ends at state .

Returning to decision step when the user is authenticated the method proceeds to block and the vendor website transmits a greeting to the user. At block the vendor website identifies the item that is the reason for the call. Thereafter at block the vendor website indicates that user has T minutes to make a decision about the item. In a particular embodiment T is a time remaining of an offer for sale for the item or an auction for the item. At block the vendor website indicates a list of possible actions that the user can take with respect to the item e.g. bid for the item purchase the item cancel the item watch etc.

Proceeding to block the vendor website transmits a pulsing tone in the background of the call. At decision step the vendor website determines whether any user input has been received e.g. a tone due to a keypress that corresponds to a user action or a voice command that corresponds to a user action. If user input is not received the method continues to block and the vendor website monitors the time T until the end of the offer for sale of the item. On the other hand if user input is received the method moves to decision step and the vendor website determines whether the status of the item has changed in response to the user input. If the status of the item changes in response to the user input the method proceeds to block and the vendor website transmits a secondary tone to indicate a change the status of the item. Next at block the vendor website indicates the present status of the item to the user. Thereafter the method moves to block .

Returning to decision step if the status does not change in response to the user input the method continues to block and the vendor website indicates to the user that the status of the item is the same. The method then moves to block and the vendor website monitors the time T until the end of the offer for sale of the item.

Continuing to decision step the vendor website determines whether T is zero and the offer for sale of the item has ended. If the T is not zero the method proceeds to block and the vendor website increases the frequency of the pulsing tone by one unit. At block the vendor website increases the pitch of the pulsing tone by one unit. Further at block the vendor website increases the volume of the pulsing tone by one unit.

Returning to decision step when T is zero method proceeds to block and the vendor website indicates that decision period has ended. At block the vendor website indicates the final status of the item. The method then ends at state .

Moving to block the third party system initiates a call to the user over a voice channel using the user contact information. At decision step the third party system determines whether the user is available i.e. has the user answered the telephone call. If the user is not available the method moves to block and the third party system indicates to the vender website that the user is not available. At block the third party system ends the call and the method ends at state .

Returning to decision step when the user is available the method proceeds to block and the third party system transmits a greeting to the user. At block the third party system requests an authentication from the user. Moving to decision step the third party system determines whether an authentication is received from the user. If not the method proceeds to block and the third party system indicates an error to the user e.g. that an authentication has not been received from the user. Thereafter at block the third party system ends the call and the method ends at state .

At decision step when an authentication is received from the user the method continues to block and the third party system transmits the authentication to the vendor website. Moving to decision step the third party system determines whether the user is authenticated based on a response from the vendor website. If the user is not authenticated the method proceeds to block and the third party system indicates an error to the user e.g. that the user has not been authenticated. The third party system ends the call at block and the method ends at state .

Conversely when the user is authenticated at decision step the method proceeds to block and the third party system indicates to the user that user is authenticated. At block the third party system receives a status of an item that the user has previously indicated that he or she would like the vendor website to watch and sends real time updates associated with the item. Moving to block the third party system receives a time remaining for the offer for sale for the item from the vendor website. At block the third party system indicates the status of the item to the user and the third party system indicates a time remaining to take action on the item at block .

Proceeding to block the third party system transmits a pulsing tone in the background of the call. At decision step the third party system determines whether a user action concerning the item has been received from the user. If a user action is received the method moves to block and the third party system transmits the user action to the vendor website. Then at block the third party system receives a status update for the item from the vendor website. Further at block the third party system transmits the status update to the user. The method then moves to decision step .

Returning to decision step if no user action is received the method also proceeds to decision step . At decision step the third party system determines whether an indication of an end of the offer for sale of the item is received from the vendor server. If so the method continues to block and the third party system transmits an indication to the user that item is no longer for sale. At block the third party system receives a final status of the item. Additionally the third party system transmits the final status to the user at block . The method then ends at state .

Returning to decision step when an indication of an end of the offer for sale of the item is received the method moves to block and the third party system receives a time remaining for offer for sale from the vendor website. At block the third party system increases a frequency of the pulsing tone. At block the third party system increases a pitch of the pulsing tone. Moreover at block the third party system increases a volume of the pulsing tone. The method then returns to block and continues as illustrated in .

With the configuration of structure described above the system and method of event triggered voice call origination provides a way to monitor auction websites and e commerce websites and facilitate transactions with those websites. For example the system can contact a user concerning an item that the user has submitted a bid to purchase at an auction website. In particular the system can contact the user as the auction for the item is nearing its scheduled end. The system can communicate voice messages to the user concerning the item e.g. price current bid status item category item sub category time remaining etc. Also the system can communicate non voice messages to the user to indicate time remaining or a change in bid status. For example the non voice message can include a pulsing tone that speeds up as the end of the auction nears. Moreover the non voice message can include a secondary tone that indicates whether the user has become the high bidder or whether the user has been outbid. The user can interact with the system using a keypad at a communication device and can submit additional bids via the communication device. Alternatively the user can interact with the system using voice commands.

In another embodiment the system method and user interface provides a notification device that includes a voice message generation module that can be used to generate a voice message and a non voice message generation module that can be used to generate a non voice message. Also the notification device includes a communication interface that can be used to communicate the voice message and the non voice message over a voice channel. The notification device can include primary contact information associated with a user and the communication interface can communicate with the user using the primary contact information.

Additionally the notification device can include secondary contact information associated with the user and the communication interface can communicate with the user using the secondary contact information when the communication interface is unable to contact the user using the primary contact information. Moreover the communication interface can communicate with a user voice mail when the user is unavailable.

In a particular embodiment the voice message provided by the notification device includes at least one of the following a greeting an authentication request an auction number a category a sub category an item name a current price a current bid and a bid increment. Also the voice message can include an indication of whether or not the user is a high bidder.

The above disclosed subject matter is to be considered illustrative and not restrictive and the appended claims are intended to cover all such modifications enhancements and other embodiments which fall within the true spirit and scope of the present invention. Thus to the maximum extent allowed by law the scope of the present invention is to be determined by the broadest permissible interpretation of the following claims and their equivalents and shall not be restricted or limited by the foregoing detailed description.

