---

title: Three-way valves and fuel injectors using the same
abstract: Three-way valves having reduced leakage and fuel injectors using the same. Three-way spool poppet valves are disclosed having a spool with a poppet valve thereon cooperating with a seat on the valve housing to provide a substantially leak free valve closing in one direction characteristic of a poppet valve while preserving the advantages of a spool valve. Three-way ball valves are also disclosed having substantially leak free valves closing in both directions, but further including reduced short circuit losses due to direct flow from a high pressure supply to a low pressure vent during transition of the ball from one position to the opposite position. Fuel injectors with direct needle control using the three-way valves of the present invention are also disclosed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08196844&OS=08196844&RS=08196844
owner: Sturman Industries, Inc.
number: 08196844
owner_city: Woodland Park
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051220
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 638 896 filed Dec. 21 2004.

The U.S. Government has certain rights in this invention pursuant to Contract No. W56HZV 04 C 0677 awarded by the United States Army.

The present invention relates to the field of three way valves and fuel injectors using three way valves.

Embodiments of the present invention provide improved devices for fluid control in various applications. A typical example is the control of a high pressure fuel injector. Typically two way poppet valves open and closed are used due to their superior leakage characteristics low and the ability to pressure balance a two way poppet valve. It is highly desirable to use a three way valve for improved performance and control but this is difficult due to a three way valve s inability to pressure balance completely unless it is a spool valve which leaks excessively. For purposes of this disclosure a three way valve will be described as a valve coupling a supply S passage to a control C passage or coupling the control passage to a vent V though other port identifications may be more appropriate depending on the use of the three way valve.

Spool valve. A spool valve can create the required hydraulic paths but while in either position S C or C V the valve has a very short leak seal path from a high pressure area to a vented area which can lead to high system parasitic losses. This valve can be designed to have a hydraulic short circuit momentarily coupling of supply and vent when transitioning from one position to the other or not depending on the application. The advantages are primarily in its pressure balance thereby requiring very low actuation forces and in the ability to be designed to avoid the short circuit.

Three way hard seat valve Poppet . This type of valve can have no leakage in either position but when the valve is transitioning from one position to the other there necessarily . exists a direct flow path between the supply and the vent that could lead to large losses of energy and system noise. This type of valve cannot be completely pressure balanced and therefore requires more actuating forces than a typical pressure balanced spool valve.

Two two way hard seat valves Poppet . This option has no leakage and can have a direct flow path between the supply and the vent or not depending on control of the system. The disadvantage of this system is that twice as many control valves are needed to achieve three way control adding system and control complexity and further requires more room to package.

Three way hard seat valve High actuating force requirements due to pressure imbalance and short circuit loss.

Also known are three way ball valves. Here a ball is moveable from one seat to an opposing seat allowing fluid communication between a port at the side of the ball through whichever seat is uncovered by the ball. With the supply of pressure through one seat and the control at the side of the ball and the vent through the other seat there is a momentary flow path between the supply and the vent during the transition of the ball from one seat to the other.

First referring to a preferred embodiment of a three way spool poppet valve in accordance with the present invention may be seen. The valve is comprised of a spool having a poppet valve at one end thereof cooperating with a poppet valve seat at the end of the spool valve housing . The valve itself is coupled to supply S port a second port a control C port a first port and a vent V port that vents region to a low pressure which may or may not be equal to atmospheric pressure. The various ports are labeled as supply control and vent as one particular embodiment shown is used to control pressure over a hydraulic surface in one case over the needle of a intensifier type fuel injector to provide direct needle control for the injector and in another case to control pressure over a hydraulic actuator for a three way ball valve. In other applications more appropriate port identifications might be used. Also in a groove is provided in the spool housing though is not coupled to any functional port.

In the position shown the spool is pushed downward by spring loaded or hydraulically actuated member and is in its lowermost position closing the poppet valve against the poppet valve seat at the upper region thereof. This prevents leakage of any fluid through the small gaps of the spool valve out that end to the vent. In this position the spool allows fluid communication between the supply port and the control port which in the direct injector needle control application keeps the injector needle closed in spite of the intensified fuel pressure surrounding the needle.

In the embodiment shown when solenoid coil is activated armature member rises pulling spool member upward. During the first part of the upward movement of the spool the poppet valve begins to open even before the spool moves upward far enough to close the flow path between the supply port and the control port . However during this time land blocks free communication between the control port and the vent until fluid communication between the supply port and the control port is blocked by the spool valve. Then land will move entirely into the vicinity of relief now allowing free fluid communication between the control port and the vent . Thus the three way spool poppet valve of the present invention combines the leak proof performance of a poppet valve with a spool valve but at the same time eliminating the usual short circuit that is the momentary fluid communication between a supply port and a vent port characteristic of a three way poppet valve.

The spool poppet valve of the present invention will remain substantially pressure balanced even with a substantial pressure on the poppet valve itself. In particular referring to the angle on the poppet valve member is slightly greater than the angle on the poppet valve seat . Consequently sealing occurs at the diameter of the spool to preserve the pressure balance. Even with wear at the point of contact sealing will occur substantially at that diameter to preserve the pressure balance.

Thus this embodiment of the invention creates a three way hydraulic control valve using a unique combination of a poppet seat and a spool valve. The valve is normally on the poppet seat. On the guide portion of the valve a port exists creating a spool valve for the third way flow. Since the porting is arranged to flow from supply to control in this position leakage is controlled by a long guide and the poppet seat and is therefore very low. Additionally by way of another relief on the guide portion of the valve this valve can now eliminate the hydraulic short circuit HSC of supply fluid to vent while the valve is transitioning from one position to the other i.e. supply control to control vent . This is unique and beneficial also in the sense that the valve does not need to close on the poppet seat against flow across the poppet seat as all flow to vent other than spool valve leakage is stopped by the spool valve. Thus this valve combines the advantages of a spool valve low actuation forces due to pressure balance and possibility of no short circuit with the advantages of a two way poppet pressure balance and low leak condition . Thus the valve requires low actuation forces due to pressure balance for optimum packaging and low mass low leakage and the option of no short circuit. This valve can therefore be a three way valve used at very high pressures where a poppet valve is typically used but only as a two way. A pressure balanced three way low leakage valve is highly desired for fuel system applications as one example for direct control of needle motion in a diesel fuel injector.

An alternate embodiment is shown in . In this Figure parts with the same function as parts identified in are identified with the same numerals even though the configuration of the parts may differ. The ports supply S control C and vent v are also labeled. The upper region of spool is relieved out of the plane of the cross section to couple the control C to vent V when the spool moves upward to open the poppet valve.

There are various ways of actuating the valves of the type represented in . One is through an integrated magnetic end of the valve of . Another is with a separate armature attached to the valve as in . In each case the actuation can take place with one actuator and a spring return as in or with two actuators one for driving the valve in each direction. If electrically actuated the valve requires little electric power and in general is simple has very high speed and a low mass in a small package. The actuator could be by way of example solenoids of E core or Pot core configurations or mechanical or piezoelectric to name a few. Also if desired an O ring could be used on the spool or in the spool housing opposite the poppet valve to prevent leakage at that location also.

Another form of novel three way valve may be seen in . Here a three way ball valve is shown. Ball is captured between two seats and being held against seat by hydraulically actuated piston . Again using the same port designations the high pressure supply S port is below seat the control C port is adjacent the sides of the ball and the vent V port is above seat . With the ball in the position shown the supply port is blocked and the control port and vent are in fluid communication. When the top of piston is vented the differential pressure between the supply pressure in port and the vent will push the ball upward to rest against seat and seal port . Normally in a ball valve of this type the ball motion is substantial in order to provide adequate flow passages from the open port around the ball providing a substantial short circuit i.e. time during which a substantial flow passage exists between the supply and the vent. In the novel ball valve of piston has an integral spool valve like land on its end which cooperates with the land on the inside of body member . These perform like a normal spool valve opening enough with the ball in the lower position to provide an adequate flow passage between the control port and the vent but immediately beginning to close and closing during the early part of the vertical motion of the ball to substantially limit the time and flow passage area during which the supply port is in fluid communication with the vent port . Thus the short circuit characteristic of such ball valves is not eliminated but its effect is substantially reduced thereby substantially improving the performance of the valve. There are various ways of actuating the valve. The valve is not pressure balanced and therefore needs only to be actuated in one direction and will return to the original position once actuating force is removed. The actuating force could be generated by any of many different types of actuators including hydraulic magnetic and piezoelectric hydraulic being shown in the fuel injector application herein described.

The valves of the present invention are well suited for various applications one of which is in diesel fuel injectors. By way of example is a cross section of an injector with being cross sections of the upper part and the lower part of the injector of taken on a larger scale. Note that for clarity each include a portion of the center of the injector. The injector shown is of the well known intensifier type. It includes first and second three way spool poppet valves and generally in accordance with of the present invention and a three way ball valve also in accordance with of the present invention. The three way spool poppet valves are both electromagnetically actuated though the two actuators are of somewhat different configurations while the three way ball valve is hydraulically actuated as in the embodiment of . Three way spool poppet valve controls pressure over the piston controlling the three way ball valve see piston in that in turn controls pressure over the intensifier . Three way spool poppet valve provides direct needle control by directly controlling pressure over piston in contact with the needle .

A further improvement on the ball valve of may be seen in . This embodiment is similar to that of and accordingly corresponding parts are similarly labeled. Like the embodiment of this embodiment also incorporates integral spool valve like land on its end that cooperates with the land on the inside of body member . As before these perform like a normal spool valve opening enough with the ball in the lower position to provide an adequate flow passage between the control port and the vent but immediately beginning to close and closing during the early part of the vertical motion of the ball to substantially limit the time and flow passage area during which the supply port is in fluid communication with the vent port . Thus as before the short circuit characteristic of such ball valves is not eliminated but its effect is substantially reduced thereby substantially improving the performance of the valve. In addition however in this embodiment orificed spacer is added defining a restricted flow path between the ball and the orificed spacer . This restriction is chosen to allow adequate flow from ports past the spool valve to the vent ports when the ball is in the position shown in but restricts flow from the supply S port to the vent ports as the ball moves away from the position shown toward its opposite position. In that regard note that the orificed spacer does not restrict flow from the supply S port to the control C ports when the ball is in its upper most position. In the exemplary fuel injector application as described the valve will spend most of the time in the position shown in and exhibit very low leakage because of the ball being forced onto the hard seat . For injection the ball will be forced upward against the hard seat by the pressure from the supply and the lack of pressure over the hydraulically actuated piston again exhibiting very low leakage. During movement of the ball from the position venting the ports coupled to the region over the intensifier as shown to its upper most position the less flow past the ball to the vent V the better as that flow is from the undesired hydraulic short circuit from the supply S directly to the vent V . In fact the flow restriction between the orificed spacer and the ball can be advantageous for the operation of the valve as the ball moves upward from the position shown as the pressure drop caused by the restriction causes a greater differential pressure across the ball helping to move the ball upward quickly and avoiding the initial high speed flow from the supply S and the control C past the ball holding the ball in close proximity to the seat to restrict the flow from the supply S to the control C during initiation of fuel intensification in the injector. On moving the ball downward from its uppermost position to its lowermost position to stop intensification the flow past the ball need only be enough to relieve the pressure on the intensifier in the injector and to allow the intensifier piston and the intensifier plunger to return to their uppermost positions between injection events. In the embodiment shown the fuel rail pressure is provided under the intensifier plunger to displace the fuel between injection events from over the intensifier piston to vent. Accordingly the flow rate between the ball and the orificed spacer need only be adequate to achieve this at any power and speed. Thus the orificed spacer defines a circular cylindrical restriction around the ball restricting flow to the minimum allowable to achieve the function of the three way valve.

Thus the three way spool poppet valves disclosed herein provide a substantially leak proof valve when in one position yet preserve the advantages of a three way spool valve. The ball valves of the present invention provide a substantially leak proof valve when in either position as is characteristic of ball valves though further include means for minimizing the short circuit flow path from a high pressure supply directly to a low pressure vent as the ball transitions from one position to the opposite position. These features are useful and advantageous in many applications one of which is in fuel injectors as also disclosed herein. Thus while certain preferred embodiments and applications of the present invention have been disclosed and described herein for purposes of illustration and not for purposes of limitation it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes in form and detail may be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

