---

title: Infrared device having an optical power limiter with improved optical gain
abstract: An infrared device in accordance with the present invention includes an optical train for receiving incident radiation into the device, a focal plane array for receiving the incident radiation from the optical train, and an optical power limiter (OPL) that is positioned therebetween. To improve the overall optical gain for the device, the optical train initially focuses the incident radiation into an intermediate focal plane that is located within the OPL. With this configuration, however, the incident radiation begins to lose focus once it passes through the intermediate focal plane and exits the OPL. To prevent this, the infrared device includes a plurality of microlenses on the OPL surface that is facing the focal plane array. The plurality of microlenses re-focuses the incident radiation onto a final focal plane that is coincident with the focal plane array.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07042646&OS=07042646&RS=07042646
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07042646
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050110
---
This application is a Continuation In Part and claims the benefit of the filing date Jun. 26 2001 of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 888 509 now abandoned by Thomas Colandene entitled Off Focal Plane Micro Optics .

The invention described herein may be manufactured used sold imported and or licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America.

The present invention applies generally to optical imaging devices. More particularly the present invention is useful as an IR imaging device with an optical power limiter that protects the device against harmful incident radiation while simultaneously having an improved optical gain for the device.

Infrared IR staring sensors are well known in the prior art for obtaining data in the IR spectrum. Typically IR sensors include an optical train for receiving incident radiation. The optical train receives the optical rays through an aperture and then directs the incoming IR optical rays onto a focal plane array FPA for further processing and display by other components of the device.

Because the FPA by design is very sensitive to changes in light intensity however one of the disadvantages of these devices is that during operation the device is vulnerable to light radiation sources of extreme intensity such as laser sources. A laser beam could damage the FPA if it illuminated the FPA directly so it is extremely desirable that the vulnerability of the IR device be minimized to this type of radiation.

To minimize this vulnerability various optical systems make use of or could make use of components known as optical power limiters OPL . OPL s are made of materials which minimize laser damage to the focal plane array by blocking passage of the laser energy but allowing passage of scene radiation through the OPL.

The placement of OPL s in an infrared sensor however does have disadvantages in that there is a loss of optical gain for the device. That is IR radiation loses focus slightly as it passes through the OPL. Thus the solution in the prior art was to place the OPL as close to the focal plane array as possible to minimize the loss in optical gain for the device.

In view of the above it is therefore one object of the invention to provide an infrared device having an OPL with improved optical gain for the device. It is another object of the present invention to provide an infrared device with an OPL wherein incident radiation is focused into an intermediate focal plane that is located within the OPL. Yet another object of the present invention is to provide an IR device with an OPL wherein the OPL has integral structure that re focuses incident radiation passing therethrough from an intermediate focal plane onto a final focal plane that is co planar with the focal plane array. Another object of the present invention is to provide an infrared device with an OPL that is easy to manufacture in a cost efficient manner.

An infrared device having an improved optical gain in accordance with the present invention includes an optical train for receiving incident radiation therein and a focal plane array for receiving the incident radiation from the optical train. The focal plane array contains an array of detector elements which allow for further processing of the incident radiation into an image format. The device of the present invention further includes an optical power limiter OPL that is positioned between the focal plane array and the optical train. The OPL prevents excess radiant energy such as that from a laser source that may enter the device through the optical train from damaging the detector elements of the focal plane array.

To improve the overall optical gain for the device the optical train initially focuses the incident radiation into an intermediate focal plane that that is located within the OPL. With this configuration however the incident radiation begins to lose focus once it passes through the intermediate focal plane and exits the OPL. Thus the device in accordance with the present invention has a means for re focusing the incident radiation that has passed through the intermediate focal plane and is leaving the OPL. Preferably the re focusing means comprises a plurality of microlenses that are formed integral to the OPL on the OPL surface facing the focal plane array. Preferably the OPL is made from an Indium Antimonide InSb material which facilitates the forming of the aforementioned microlenses on the OPL surface.

The plurality of microlenses re focuses the incident radiation onto a final focal plane that is coincident with the focal plane array. In the preferred embodiment of the invention each microlens corresponds to a respective detector element of the focal plane array.

For the methods of the present invention the OPL is positioned on the optical axis between the optical train and the focal plane array. The optical train focuses incident radiation onto an intermediate focal plane that is co planar with the OPL. The method further comprises the step of re focusing the incident radiation as it passes therethrough. The re focusing step is accomplished with a plurality of microlenses that re focus the radiation onto a focal plane that is coincident with the focal plane array.

Referring now to the a typical infrared IR staring sensor device is shown and designated by reference character . As shown in the device includes an optical train that comprises a plurality of lenses . The lenses focus and re direct incoming optical ray bundles of IR radiation through a Dewar window . After passing through Dewar window the optical ray bundles pass through the sensor pupil cold stop and they are then directed onto a focal plane array FPA . As the incoming optical ray bundles impinge on the FPA a plurality of detector elements or pixels a representative pixel is shown in receive the IR data from the ray trace. After the FPA receives the IR data other components of the sensor convert the data in the optical ray bundles into an IR image in a manner known in the art.

Before reaching the FPA however the optical rays pass through an optical power limiter OPL that is located along the line of sight of the device between the optical train and the focal plane array . The OPL has structure and is made of a material which allows for passage of IR radiation therethrough. At the same time the OPL prevents the passage of high intensity light such as a laser beam from passing therethrough. Thus the OPL prevents certain types of high intensity light from shining directly on the FPA as high intensity light would damage the sensitive detector elements.

One of the disadvantages of OPL s however is that they tend to refract the IR radiation passing therethrough. To correct this loss of focus and referring now to the structure of the IR device can be modified. Specifically the optical power limiter is positioned spaced apart from the optical train so that the optical train focuses incident radiation onto an intermediate focal plane that is coincident with the OPL. Stated differently the optical train focuses incident radiation into an intermediate focal plane that is located within the OPL as shown in .

As can be seen from the ray trace in once the incident radiation passes through the OPL it begins to refract. Accordingly a re focusing means is required to re direct incident radiation onto the focal plane. For the present invention the re focusing means comprises a plurality of microlenses that are formed integral to the optical power limiter on a microlens surface of the OPL that faces the FPA. To do this the OPL is preferably made of an Indium Antimonide InSb material. For clarity a single ray trace is shown leaving a single microlens in . In the preferred embodiment however a plurality of microlenses are formed in microlens surface and arranged in an array with each microlens corresponding to a respective pixel in FPA .

The microlenses re focus the incident radiation as it leaves the OPL onto a final focal plane . The final focal plane is coincident with a plane containing the FPA pixels . In this manner the OPL can provide improved protection for the FPA without a loss in focus of the image data. Stated differently the structure of the OPL of the present invention in addition to its power limiting function provides for improved optical gain for the overall IR device .

While the IR sensor having an optical power limiter with improved gain of the present invention as herein shown and disclosed in detail is fully capable of obtaining the objects and providing the advantages above stated it is to be understood that the presently preferred embodiments are merely illustrative of the invention. As such no limitations are intended other than as defined in the appended claims.

