---

title: Apparatus and methods for determining connection quality of a wireless device on a wireless communications network
abstract: Apparatus and methods for determining a connection quality of a wireless device with a wireless communications network comprise a user manager operable to receive a plurality of communications messages as recorded by the wireless device, where the plurality of communications messages comprise messages transmitted from and received by the wireless device via the wireless communication network. Further, a connection quality module associated with the user manager is operable to generate a connection quality record comprising a connection quality characteristic based on a detection of a predetermined sequence of communications messages within the plurality of communications messages. Optionally, an optimization module may generate a configuration change for the wireless device and/or a network component based on the connection quality characteristic.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08620314&OS=08620314&RS=08620314
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 08620314
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050310
---
The disclosed embodiments relate to wireless devices and wireless communication networks and more particularly to apparatus and methods for determining a connection quality of a wireless device on a wireless network.

Wireless communications devices such as mobile phones pagers handheld computers etc. are becoming increasingly popular for both business and personal use. One advantage of such devices is their wireless aspect allowing them to be utilized whenever and wherever a user desires. As the use of wireless devices grow and as the associated wireless communications networks grow users have an ever increasing expectation of being able to connect with a wireless network at any location. Thus one aspect of user satisfaction when utilizing a wireless device deals with the ability of the wireless device to establish a communications connection with a wireless network as well as the ability of the wireless device to maintain that connection.

Some communications protocols have developed standard mechanisms that define an event associated with a connection characteristic such as an access failure and a call drop. For example in the Code Division Multiple Access CDMA protocol such mechanisms include timers that are associated with an event that defines a failure e.g. from the Interim Standard IS 95 standard time limit Tis associated with a call drop. Other protocols such as the Universal Mobile Telephone System UMTS protocol do not have such standard mechanisms that correspond to a connection quality characteristic. Without such standard mechanisms it is difficult to measure and manage connection quality between a wireless device and a wireless network.

To address one or more of the drawbacks of the prior art the disclosed embodiments provide a system and method is disclosed for determining a connection quality of a wireless device on a wireless network based on standard over the air communications messages.

In one embodiment a method of determining a connection quality between a wireless device and a wireless communications network comprises receiving a plurality of communications messages as recorded by the wireless device where the plurality of communications messages comprise messages transmitted from and received by the wireless device via the wireless communication network. The method further comprises generating a connection quality record comprising a connection quality characteristic based on a detection of a predetermined sequence of communications messages within the plurality of communications messages. In an alternate embodiment a computer readable medium for determining a connection quality between a wireless device and a wireless communications network comprises at least one sequence of instructions wherein execution of the instructions by a processor causes the processor to perform the steps as described above.

In another embodiment a method of determining a connection quality between a wireless device and a wireless communications network comprises

receiving a plurality of communications messages transmitted from and received by the wireless device on the wireless communications network and identifying a connection quality characteristic within the plurality of communications messages based on a detection of a predetermined sequence of messages. The method further comprises generating a connection quality record associated with the received plurality of messages the connection quality record comprising the connection quality characteristic generating a configuration change for at least one of the wireless device and a network component in the wireless communication network based on the connection quality record. In an alternate embodiment a computer readable medium for determining a connection quality between a wireless device and a wireless communications network comprises at least one sequence of instructions wherein execution of the instructions by a processor causes the processor to perform the steps as described above.

In a further embodiment a wireless device connection quality determination apparatus comprises a user manager operable to receive a plurality of communications messages as recorded by the wireless device where the plurality of communications messages comprise transmitted messages sent from the wireless device over a wireless communications network. The apparatus further comprises a connection quality module operable to generate a connection quality record comprising a connection quality characteristic based on a detection of a predetermined sequence of communications messages within the plurality of communications messages.

In a further embodiment an apparatus for determining a connection quality between a wireless device and a wireless communications network comprises a first means for receiving a plurality of communications messages transmitted from and received by the wireless device on the wireless communications network and a second means for identifying a connection quality characteristic within the plurality of communications messages based on a detection of a predetermined sequence of messages. The apparatus further comprises a third means for generating a connection quality record associated with the received plurality of messages the connection quality record comprising the connection quality characteristic. Additionally the apparatus comprises a fourth means for generating a configuration change for at least one of the wireless device and a network component in the wireless communication network based on the connection quality record.

In another embodiment a wireless communications device comprises a processor operable to transmit and receive a plurality of communications messages respectively to and from a wireless network and a memory having a resident connection quality module. The resident connection quality module comprises executable instructions operable to collect and forward the communications messages across the wireless network wherein a predetermined sequence of the plurality of communications messages corresponds to a connection quality characteristic of the wireless device on the wireless network.

In yet another embodiment a wireless communications device comprises logic configured to process a plurality of communications messages for transmission from the wireless communications device to a wireless communications network and for receipt by the wireless communications device from the wireless communications network. The device further comprises logic configured to gather the plurality of communications messages in the form of a communications log and transmit at a predetermined time the communications log across the wireless communications network. Further a predetermined sequence of the plurality of communications messages corresponds to a connection quality characteristic of the wireless device on the wireless network.

In still another embodiment a wireless communications device comprises a first means for processing a plurality of communications messages for transmission from the wireless communications device to a wireless communications network and for receipt by the wireless communications device from the wireless communications network. The device further comprises a second means for gathering the plurality of communications messages in the form of a communications log and transmitting at a predetermined time the communications log across the wireless communications network where a predetermined sequence of the plurality of communications messages corresponds to a connection quality characteristic of the wireless device on the wireless network.

In another embodiment a method for determining a connection quality characteristic of a wireless communications device comprises processing a plurality of communications messages for transmission from the wireless communications device to a wireless communications network and for receipt by the wireless communications device from the wireless communications network. The method further comprises gathering the plurality of communications messages in the form of a communications log and transmitting at a predetermined time the communications log across the wireless communications network where a predetermined sequence of the plurality of communications messages corresponds to a connection quality characteristic of the wireless device on the wireless network. In an alternate embodiment a computer readable medium for determining a connection quality between a wireless device and a wireless communications network comprises at least one sequence of instructions wherein execution of the instructions by a processor causes the processor to perform the steps as described above.

Additional aspects and advantages of the disclosed embodiments are set forth in part in the description which follows and in part are obvious from the description or may be learned by practice of the disclosed embodiments. The aspects and advantages of the disclosed embodiments may also be realized and attained by the means of the instrumentalities and combinations particularly pointed out in the appended claims.

The disclosed embodiments include apparatus and methods for determining connection characteristics such as access failures and call drops associated with communications messages as logged by a wireless device during communications activities with a wireless network. These apparatus and methods identify predetermined sequences of communications messages such as standard over the air messages and associate them with for example an access failure event and or a call drop event to allow connection quality to be measured analyzed and or improved. The described apparatus and methods are particularly suited for communications protocols without standardized connection quality related event mechanisms such as but not limited to the Universal Mobile Telephone System UMTS protocol.

Referring to one embodiment of a connection quality determination system includes a plurality of wireless devices that each have a resident connection quality module operable to transfer a respective wireless device communication log to a user manager server for determining a connection quality characteristic . For example connection quality characteristic may be in the form of an access failure metric and or a call drop metric associated with a plurality of communication messages transmitted from and or received by the respective wireless devices as reflected by log as will be described in more detail below. The plurality of wireless devices are located in a wireless network area and communicate with each other and or other computer devices via a wireless network . User manager includes an analysis engine that operates a remote connection quality module to analyze according to predetermined parameters the plurality of communications messages contained within the received log . For example the predetermined parameters include identifying one or more predetermined sequences of communications messages such as those predetermined sequences defined by an access failure module as corresponding to an access failure event and such as those predetermined sequences defined by a call drop module as corresponding to a call drop event. Analysis engine outputs a connection quality record that includes the identified connection quality characteristic if any associated with the plurality of communications messages from each log . Connection quality record may be reviewed manually such as by a technician for evaluation of connection quality related issues. Optionally user manager may include an optimization module that analyzes each respective connection quality record as well as other additional wireless device and network component configuration and performance data to determine updated wireless device configurations and or network component configurations to improve a given connection quality characteristic . User manager may then transfer the updated configurations to the respective wireless device and or network component in order to improve the connection quality characteristics associated with the system.

The wireless devices can include any mobile or portable communications device such as cellular telephone personal digital assistant two way text pager a laptop computer a tablet computer and even a separate computer platform that has a wireless communication portal and which also may have a wired connection to a network or the Internet. Additionally the wireless device can be a remote slave or other device that does not have an end user thereof but simply communicates data across the wireless network . For example the wireless device may include a remote sensor a diagnostic tool a data relay and the like. The apparatus and method of determining wireless connection quality based on communications messages logged on the wireless device can accordingly be applied to any form of wireless communications device or module including a wireless communication portal a wireless modem PCMCIA cards access terminals personal computers telephones or any combination or sub combination thereof.

In a cellular telephone embodiment for example referring to system may include wireless network connected to a wired network via a carrier network . The use of cellular telecommunication pathways has been increasing because wireless devices such as the plurality of cellular telephones illustrated in are being manufactured with increased computing capabilities and are becoming tantamount to personal computers and hand held personal digital assistants PDAs communicating packets including voice and data over wireless network . These smart cellular telephones have installed application programming interfaces APIs onto their local computer platform that allow software developers to create software applications that operate on the cellular telephone and control certain functionality on the device. is a representative diagram that more fully illustrates the components of a cellular wireless network and interrelation of the elements of one embodiment of the present system. Cellular wireless network is merely exemplary and can include any system whereby remote modules such as wireless devices communicate over the air between and among each other and or between and among components of a wireless network including without limitation wireless network carriers and or servers.

In system user manager can be in communication over a LAN network with a separate data repository for storing the data gathered from the remote wireless devices such as the respective communication logs . Further a data management server may be in communication with user manager to provide post processing capabilities data flow control etc. User manager data repository and data management server may be present on the cellular network with any other network components that are needed to provide cellular telecommunication services. User manager and or data management server communicate with carrier network through a data link such as the Internet a secure LAN WAN or other network. Carrier network controls messages generally being data packets sent to a mobile switching center MSC . Further carrier network communicates with MSC by a network such as the Internet and or POTS plain old telephone service . Typically in network a network or Internet portion transfers data and the POTS portion transfers voice information. MSC may be connected to multiple base stations BTS by another network such as a data network and or Internet portion for data transfer and a POTS portion for voice information. BTS ultimately broadcasts messages wirelessly to the wireless devices such as cellular telephones by short messaging service SMS or other over the air methods.

Further each wireless device such as a plurality of cellular telephones in this cellular telephone embodiment has computer platform that can transmit data across wireless network and that can receive and execute software applications and display data transmitted from user manager or another computer device connected to wireless network . Computer platform also includes an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other chipset processor microprocessor logic circuit or other data processing device. ASIC or other processor may execute application programming interface API layer that interfaces with any resident programs such as connection quality module in a memory of the wireless device. API is a runtime environment executing on the respective wireless device. One such runtime environment is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW software developed by Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. Other runtime environments may be utilized that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless computing devices. Memory may include read only and or random access memory RAM and ROM EPROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. Computer platform also includes a local database that can hold the software applications files or data not actively used in memory such as the software applications or data downloaded from user manager . Local database typically includes one or more flash memory cells but can be any secondary or tertiary storage device such as magnetic media EPROM EEPROM optical media tape or soft or hard disk. Additionally local database can ultimately hold a local copy of connection quality module or agent as is further described herein.

Referring to in one embodiment computer platform includes the resident version of the connection quality module that interfaces with API and is executable by a communications processing engine such as a processor associated with a chipset and or ASIC of the respective wireless device. Communications processing engine includes various processing subsystems embodied in hardware firmware software and combinations thereof that enable the functionality of the respective wireless device and the operability of the respective device on wireless network such as for initiating and maintaining communications and exchanging data with other networked devices. For example communications processing engine may include one or a combination of processing subsystems such as sound non volatile memory file system transmit receive searcher layer 1 layer 2 layer 3 main control remote procedure handset power management diagnostic digital signal processor vocoder messaging call manager Bluetooth system Bluetooth LPOS position determination position engine user interface sleep data services security authentication USIM SIM voice services graphics USB multimedia such as MPEG GPRS etc. In one embodiment API includes a class of software extensions that allow the resident version of the connection quality module to access communications processing engine . These software class extensions can communicate with processing subsystems on the wireless device which allows both data reads and commands. For example this class can send commands including retrieval requests for communications messages and or communication logs on behalf of the applications that invoke it. The class object can then forward the responses of the subsystems to the resident version of the connection quality module or ultimately across wireless network to user manager .

For example in the described embodiments the plurality of communications messages may be generated by one or more of processing subsystems and collected by another subsystem such as a diagnostic subsystem. The resident version of connection quality module executes through API to collect this information and manages the transfer of this information to user manager .

Additionally wireless device communications log may be a collection of the plurality of communications messages and may include addition wireless device related information as is discussed below. The plurality of communications messages include for example the collection of messages transmitted from received by and generated within each respective wireless device . For example communications messages include standard over the air messages exchanged between the respective wireless device and wireless network . Wireless network includes any communications network operable at least in part for enabling wireless communications between a respective wireless device and any other device connected to wireless network . Further wireless network includes all network components such as BTS and all connected devices that form the network.

Further the resident version of connection quality module may execute to retrieve additional wireless device related information from computer platform or elsewhere on the respective wireless device and manage the transfer of this information to user manager . For instance additional wireless device related information may include a wireless device identification such as a mobile identification number an International Mobile Subscriber Identity IMSI a Mobile Directory Number MDN and any other unique identifying number associated with the respective wireless device. Also additional wireless device related information may include position information such as position location information from at least one or any combination of a Global Positioning System GPS a Geographic Information System GIS a terrestrial network based positioning system a combined terrestrial network based and GPS system such as the QPoint Positioning Software and gpsOne hybrid Assisted GPS wireless location technology available from Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. and or any other system or tool used to gather transform manipulate analyze and produce information relating to the location position of the respective wireless device. Position information may further include an identification of other network components having known locations such as BTS with which the respective wireless device is in communication to thereby provide information about a relative position of the wireless device. Further additional wireless device related information may include processing related data generated by processing subsystems or any other component of the respective wireless device in the formation of and or related to the communications messages .

Referring back to user manager may be at least one of any type of server personal computer mini mainframes and the like. User manager and its corresponding components can give a ready view of communication logs collected from the wireless devices in any form such as tables maps graphics views plain text or any other type of displayed printed and or interactive output.

Referring to in one embodiment output generated by user manager may be in the form of a interactive report having a plurality of drop down menus for obtaining more detailed information relating to the summary information provided by the report. For example referring to some of the summary information may include a table that presents specific information relating to the wireless device and the connection quality characteristic. In another example referring to some of the summary information may be presented in the form of bar charts and pie charts relating to different connection quality characteristics. In a further example referring to user manager may generate a geographic map that includes connection quality characteristic representations associated with different geographic locations .

Referring back to user manager or plurality of servers can send software agents or applications such as the resident connection quality module to wireless devices in the wireless network area such that the wireless devices return data from their resident applications and subsystems. Wireless devices may transmit data such as communication logs to user manager or some other computer device on the network. User manager utilizes communication logs for purposes such as connection quality determinations product set ups device and or network diagnosis and configuration and or data mining. Further there can be a separate servers or computer devices associated with user manager that work in concert to provide data in usable formats to parties and or a separate layer of control in the data flow between the wireless devices and user manager .

Additionally as mentioned above analysis engine executes connection quality module to review communications log and generate connection quality record . Analysis engine includes at least one of an application specific integrated circuit ASIC a chipset a processor a microprocessor a logic circuit and any other data processing device. Connection quality module may include software hardware firmware and generally any executable instructions operable by analysis engine . Connection quality module may download the resident version of connection quality module to each wireless device . Alternatively the resident version of connection quality module may be loaded onto the respective wireless device during the initial assembly process or via serial connections during a configuration process. Further connection quality module is executable by user manager to manage the collection of communications logs from wireless devices . Connection quality module may pull the logs based on commands from a user or the logs may be pushed from the respective devices at predetermined times or upon reaching predetermined memory data storage levels.

Access failure module includes instructions executable by analysis engine to determine if one or more predetermined sequences of communications messages exist within communications log thereby indicating an access failure event. Such an access failure event is reported as a type of connection quality characteristic in record associated with log . For example in one embodiment access failure events are based on a relationship between access attempts and access successes. As such connection quality characteristic may include any type of metric associated with the access failure event such as a sum of access failure events a rate of access failure events etc.

In one embodiment the access failure related predetermined sequence of communications messages include messages that relate to a difference between an access attempt and an access success. An access attempt comprises a sequence of communication messages that include a first type of a radio connection request message having an originating conversational call a terminating conversational call or an emergency call as an establishment cause. Further an access attempt comprises a sequence of communication messages that include a second type of radio connection request message having a registration as the establishment cause and followed by one of a connection management service request signaling message or a setup signaling message without any new radio connection request message in between. Additionally the access success sequence of messages comprises 1 an alerting signaling message associated with one of the first type or the second type of radio connection request messages respectively or 2 a connect signaling messages associated with one of the first type or the second type of radio connection request message respectively that do not have an associated alerting signaling message or 3 a connect acknowledgement signaling message associated with one of the first type or the second type of radio connection request message respectively that does not have an associated alerting signaling message or an associated connect signaling message.

Similarly call drop module includes instructions executable by analysis engine to determine if one or more predetermined sequences of communications messages exist within communications log thereby indicating a call drop. Such a call drop event is reported as a type of connection quality characteristic in record associated with log . For example in one embodiment call drop events are based on state changes abnormal releases and abnormal disconnects that occur after an access success. As such connection quality characteristic may include any type of metric associated with the call drop event such as a sum of call drop events a rate of call drop events etc.

In one embodiment the call drop related predetermined sequences of communications messages are messages associated with an access success that relate to an abnormal release an abnormal disconnect and or a state change. An abnormal release comprises a release signaling message having an abnormal cause code and associated with an alerting signaling message corresponding to the access success and which is not preceded by an associated disconnect signaling message. An abnormal disconnect comprises a disconnect signaling message having an abnormal cause code and associated with the access success and which is not preceded by any associated release signaling message. For both a release message and a disconnect message a normal cause code is associated with a proper functioning of the system. For example a normal cause code may be associated with a successful connection normal call clearing the call being rejected or other unspecified causes. In particular as identified in the 3GPP specification 24.008 and as utilized in signaling messages in the UMTS protocol normal cause codes include at least cause numbers 0 2 4 5 7 9 16 20 21 23 24 and 31. In contrast an abnormal cause code is associated with some error in the communications message and or within the communications network and or with some call disabling event. For example an abnormal cause code may be associated with an unacceptable channel a busy user a changed number an operator determined barring etc. In particular as identified in the 3GPP specification 24.008 and as utilized in signaling messages in the UMTS protocol abnormal cause codes include at least all cause numbers not considered as normal cause codes such as cause numbers 1 3 6 8 17 19 22 25 30 32 127. A call drop state change comprises a change from an active state to an idle state except when there is a normal release signaling message or a normal disconnect signaling message between the state change messages.

Further the connection quality record may further associate the access failure and call drop types of connection quality characteristics with additional information from the respective wireless device s such as the respective wireless device ID position information and other wireless device related information see . This additional associated information may be useful in trouble shooting connection quality issues and identifying problem areas and or devices such as when logs from a plurality of wireless devices are analyzed and the results output in a manner that correlates connection quality characteristics and geographic position . As such connection quality record includes any form of output that represents a connection quality characteristic as well as any other related data associated with the plurality of communications messages from communications log of one or more respective wireless devices.

Additionally as mentioned above optimization module may access connection quality record and apply predetermined algorithms or programs to optimize the settings of one or more device and or network related configurations to improve the connection quality such as by reducing access failures and or call drops. Optimization module may include any hardware software firmware and or other set of executable instructions operable to analyze connection quality record and determine revised network specific and or wireless device specific configuration changes to reduce the occurence of access failure events and or call drop events. Additionally optimization module may be operable to initiate further communications with a respective wireless device and or a network component such as a base station to retrieve additional communications related data associated with the plurality of communications messages in order to perform further analysis and optimization of one or more connection quality characteristics . The optimizations performed by optimization module may also be performed all or in part by a technician manually reviewing the connection quality record and any associated communications related data.

For example referring to after receiving a plurality of communications messages logged by a respective wireless device one embodiment of a method of determining an access attempt includes reviewing a first communications message to determine if it is a connection request message Blocks . If it is not a connection request message then the method identifies the message as not being an access attempt Block skips to the next message Block and performs the same review. If it is a connection request message then the method involves determining if it was preceded by another connection request message Block .

If it is preceded by another connection request then the method determines if there is a signaling message between the two connection request messages Block . If there is no signaling message between the connection request messages then the connection request message being analyzed i.e. the latter connection request message is disregarded as a duplicate Block is not considered as an access attempt Block and the method skips to the next message Block . If there is a signaling message between the two connection request messages then the two connection requests are for distinct access attempts so then the cause code of the connection request under examination is further analyzed to determine if it is a registration call or a conversational emergency call Blocks .

Similarly if the connection request message is not preceded by another connection request message then the method determines if the cause of the connection request message is a registration call or a conversational emergency call Blocks .

If it is neither one of a registration call nor a conversational emergency call then the method identifies the message as not being an access attempt and skips to the next message Blocks .

If the connection request is a registration call then the method determines if the connection request is followed by a service request type 1 or a set up signal Block . If it is not followed by a service request type 1 or a set up signal then the method identifies the message as not being an access attempt and skips to the next message Blocks . If it is followed by a service request type 1 or a set up signal then the method counts the connection request message as an access attempt Block .

On the other hand if the connection request message is an originating or terminating conversational call or an emergency call then the method counts the connection request message as an access attempt Block .

Referring to in continuing with the analysis of a sequence of messages that is counted as an access attempt Block one embodiment of a method for determining an access success continues by determining if the connection request has an associated alerting signaling message Block . If there is an associated alerting signaling message then the method counts the sequence as an access success Block . If there is not an associated alerting signaling message then the method includes a determination as to whether there is an associated connect signaling message Block . If there is an associated connect signaling message then the method counts the sequence as an access success Block . If there is not an associated connect signaling message then the method includes a determination as to whether there is an associated acknowledgement signaling message Block . If there is an associated acknowledgement signaling message then the method counts the sequence as an access success Block . If there is not an associated acknowledgement signaling message then the method counts the attempt as an access failure Block and skips to the next message Block to return to the flow of .

Referring to in continuing with the analysis of a sequence of messages that is counted as an access success Block one embodiment of a method for determining a call drop continues by determining if the connection request is associated with a release message or a disconnect message Blocks .

If the connection request is associated with either a release message or a disconnect message then the method determines if the respective release or disconnect message contained a normal cause code Block . If there is a normal cause code then the sequence is not associated with a call drop Block and the message is skipped and the process moves to the next message Block . If there is not a normal cause code then the method counts the sequence as a call drop Block and skips to the next message to evaluate the next sequence of messages Block .

If the connection request is associated with neither a release message nor a disconnect message then the method proceeds to determine if the connection request message is associated with a state change Block .

Referring to if the connection request is associated with neither one of an abnormal release message nor an abnormal disconnect message from then the method proceeds to determine if the connection request is associated with a state change from active to idle Block . If there is no state change from active to idle then the method determines that the sequence is not a call drop Block and the method proceeds to the next message Block . If there is a state change from active to idle then the method determines that the sequence is a call drop Block and the method proceeds to the next message Block .

In one embodiment associated with a UMTS protocol the user manager or other computer device execute the described method to determine a UMTS access failure rate and a UMTS call drop rate. The UMTS access failure rate is defined as follows UMTS Access Failure Rate Access Attempt Access Success Access Attempt 100 where 

a sum of the number of unique RRC Connection Request Messages with an ESTABLISHMENTCAUSE ORIGINATING CONVERSATIONAL CALL TERMINATING CONVERSATIONAL CALL or EMERGENCY CALL

a sum of the number of unique RRC Connection Request Messages with the ESTABLISHMENTCAUSE REGISTRATION followed by either CM SERVICE REQUEST NAS Signaling with SERV TYPE 1 or SETUP NAS Signaling message without any new RRC Connection Request Message in between 

Note If a RRC Connection Request Message is followed by another RRC Connection Request Message without a RRC Signaling Message in between then the second RRC Connection Request Message is considered as a duplicate.

a sum of the number of ALERTING NAS Signaling messages associated with the RRC Connection Request messages counted above

a sum of the number of CONNECT NAS Signaling messages without the ALERTING NAS Signaling messages associated with the RRC Connection Request messages counted above

a sum of the number of CONNECT ACK NAS Signaling messages without the ALERTING NAS Signaling nor the CONNECT NAS Signaling messages associated with the RRC Connection Request messages counted above.

Similarly the UMTS call drop rate is defined as follows UMTS Call Drop Rate Call Drops due to State Change ABNORMAL RELEASE NAS Signaling ABNORMAL DISCONNECT NAS Signaling Access Success 100 where 

where a CAUSE NORMAL for RELEASE NAS Signaling and DISCONNECT NAS Signaling Messages are related to a Successful Connection Cause Code 0 a Normal Call Clearing Cause Code 16 a Call Rejected Cause Code 21 Note This is a user initiated event and an unspecified NORMAL Cause Code 2 4 5 7 9 15 20 23 24 31 and where a CAUSE NORMAL for RELEASE NAS Signaling and DISCONNECT NAS Signaling Messages having all Cause Codes not listed above as NORMAL.

Referring to various examples of UMTS access attempts and access successes are illustrated. In each of these cases downwardly extending arrow represents a timeline of the transmission or receipt of messages at wireless device .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents a single access attempt and a single access success because the connection request message with the proper establishment cause was properly followed by an alerting message .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents a single access attempt and a single access success because the connection request message with the proper establishment cause was properly followed by an alerting message and because the second connection message is considered a duplicate because there is no signaling message between the two connection messages.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents two access attempts with one access failure and one access success. The first access attempt failed because none of the following are associated with the first connection request message ALERTING NAS Signaling message CONNECT NAS Signaling message CONNECT ACK NAS Signaling message. Further the RRC Connection Setup message is a radio resource control RRC signaling message that since it occurs between two connection request messages is interpreted to mean that the first access attempt has ended. The second access attempt was successful because of the alerting message .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents two access attempts with one access failure and one access success. The first access attempt failed because none of the following are associated with the first connection request message ALERTING NAS Signaling message CONNECT NAS Signaling message CONNECT ACK NAS Signaling message. Further the WCDMA System information block of messages is a signaling message that since it occurs between two connection request messages is interpreted to mean that the first access attempt has ended. The second access attempt was successful because of the alerting message .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents two access attempts with one access failure and one access success. The first access attempt failed because none of the following are associated with the first connection request message ALERTING NAS Signaling message CONNECT NAS Signaling message CONNECT ACK NAS Signaling message. Further the RRC Connection Setup message is a signaling message that since it occurs between two connection request messages is interpreted to mean that the first access attempt has ended. The second access attempt was successful because of the associated connect signaling message .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents two access attempts with one access failure and one access success. The first access attempt failed because none of the following are associated with the first connection request message ALERTING NAS Signaling message CONNECT NAS Signaling message CONNECT ACK NAS Signaling message. Further the WCDMA System information block of message is a signaling message that since it occurs between two connection request messages is interpreted to mean that the first access attempt has ended. The second access attempt was successful because of the associated connect acknowledgement signaling message .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents two access attempts with one access failure and one access success. The first access attempt comprising the first connection request message with establishment cause being a registration and the corresponding service request message failed because none of the following are associated with the first connection request message ALERTING NAS Signaling message CONNECT NAS Signaling message CONNECT ACK NAS Signaling message. The second access attempt comprising the second connection request message with establishment cause being a registration and the corresponding setup message was successful because of the associated alerting message .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access attempt with no access failures and one access success. The first connection request message with establishment cause in the form of a registration is not counted as an access attempt because it is not followed by a service type being of a Type 1. The second access attempt i.e. the second connection request was successful because of the associated alerting message .

Referring to various examples of UMTS call drops are illustrated. Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and one call drop. The access success was counted because the connection request message was followed by an alerting message . The call drop occurs based on the change from the active state to the idle state occurred without a normal release message or a normal disconnect message between the state change messages.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and one call drop. The access success was counted because the first connection request message was followed by an alerting message . The second connection request message is a duplicate because there is no RRC signaling message between the two connection request messages . The call drop occurs based on the change from the active state to the idle state without a normal release message or a normal disconnect message between the state change messages.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with one access failures and one call drop. The first connection request resulted in an access failure because it was not associated with one of an alerting message a connect message or a connecting acknowledgement message . Further the signaling message in the form of a connection setup message is between the two connection request messages thereby resulting in an attempt and a failure. The access success was counted because the second connection request message was followed by an alerting message . The call drop occurs based on the change from the active state to the idle state without a normal release message or a normal disconnect message between the state change messages.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and one call drop. The access success was counted because the first connection request message was followed by an alerting message . The call drop occurs based on the associated abnormal release message .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and no call drops. The access success was counted because the first connection request message was followed by an alerting message . The normal release message between the state change from an active state to an idle state precludes a call drop event.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents no access successes with no access failures and no call drops. The connection request message followed by the alerting message is not counted because the establishment cause of the connection request does not meet the requirements to be counted as an attempt. Thus the state change from an active state to an idle state is not relevant since there is not an access success.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and no call drops. The access success was counted because the first connection request message was followed by a connect message . The normal disconnect message between the state change from an active state to an idle state precludes a call drop event.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and one call drop. The first connection request message with a registration establishment cause followed by setup message constitutes and access attempt. The associated connect acknowledgement message thereby results in an access success. A call drop event occurs because of the lack of a normal disconnect or a normal release between the state change from an active state to an idle state .

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and one call drop. The access success was counted because the first connection request message was properly followed by an alerting message . A call drop event occurs because of the presence of the abnormal disconnect message after the access success.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and one call drop. The access success was counted because the first connection request message was properly followed by an alerting message . Even though a normal release message occurs after the access success a call drop event occurs because an abnormal disconnect message occurs prior to the normal release message.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and no call drops. The access success was counted because the first connection request message was properly followed by an alerting message . Even though an abnormal release message occurs between the state change from an active state to an idle state a call drop event does not occur because a normal disconnect message occurs prior to the abnormal release message.

Referring to this sequence of messages represents one access success with no access failures and no call drops. The access success was counted because the first connection request message was properly followed by an alerting message . Even though an abnormal disconnect message occurs between the state change from an active state to an idle state a call drop event does not occur because a normal release message occurs prior to the abnormal disconnect message.

Thus in summary referring to one embodiment of a method of determining a connection quality of a wireless device with a wireless communications network comprises receiving a plurality of communications messages Block . For example such communications messages include messages in communications log as recorded by and sent from wireless device to user manager over wireless network . In an optional step the method may include receiving position information and or device identification information that is correlated to the received communications messages Block . For example such position information includes position information and such device identification information includes wireless device ID sent from wireless device to user manager over wireless network . Next the method includes analyzing the communications messages for a predetermined sequence of messages associated with a connection quality characteristic Block . For example this step includes analysis engine executing connection quality module to search for predetermined access failure related sequences of communications messages and for predetermined call drop related sequences of communications messages contained within the plurality of communications messages . Further the method includes generating a connection quality record associated with the received communications and having the connection quality characteristic Block . For example this step includes analysis engine generating connection quality record which includes connection quality characteristic such as access failures and call drops based on the predetermined sequences . Optionally the method further includes correlating the connection quality characteristic with the position information and or the wireless device identification information Block . For example this step includes presenting the results in a table a geographic map etc. having a given connection quality characteristic associated with device related information such as device ID and position information . Additionally the method optionally may include optimizing a configuration of a wireless device and or a network component based on the connection quality record Block . For example this step includes analysis engine executing optimization module to run predetermined algorithms or programs to optimize the settings of one or more device and or network related configurations to improve the connection quality such as by reducing access failures and or call drops. In another example of this step the method may include a technician or analyst reviewing the results and manually making the configuration adjustments. Additionally it should be noted that the method may be implemented in different locations within the system in different devices and by centralized or decentralized processing mechanisms.

While the various disclosed embodiments have been illustrated and described it will be clear that the subject matter of this document is not limited to these embodiments only. Numerous modifications changes variations substitutions and equivalents will be apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and scope of the disclosed embodiments as described in the claims.

