---

title: Electrophotographic photosensitive member, process cartridge, and electrophotographic apparatus
abstract: An electrophotographic photosensitive member superior in dot reproducibility and a process cartridge and an process cartridge having the electrophotographic photosensitive member are provided. Where in a light attenuation curve drawn in a way in which the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is so charged that intensity of an electric field is 15 (V/μm) to establish the surface potential of the electrophotographic photosensitive member into a given value E(V) and then exposed to light under conditions that the electrophotographic photosensitive member has a surface potential of 0.8 E(V) at a time point T(ms) passes after exposure starts, the inclination of the light attenuation curve at a time point T(ms) passes after exposure starts is represented by m, and in a dark-time surface potential attenuation curve drawn in a way in which the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is charged under conditions that the electrophotographic photosensitive member has a surface potential of 0.8 E(V) at a time point T(ms) passes after charging is finished and thereafter no exposure is performed, the inclination of the dark-time surface potential attenuation curve at a time point T(ms) passes after charging is finished is represented by m′, the m and m′ satisfy |m−m′|≦0.020, provided that T=[{d/(μ×E)}×100]×10, where d is the layer thickness (μm) of the charge transport layer and μ is the drift mobility [cm/(V·s)] of the charge transport layer.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07141341&OS=07141341&RS=07141341
owner: Canon Kabushiki Kaisha
number: 07141341
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050224
---
This application is a continuation of International Application No. PCT JP2004 019761 filed on Dec. 24 2004 which claims the benefit of Japanese Patent Application No. 2003 434016 filed on Dec. 26 2003.

This invention relates to an electrophotographic photosensitive member and a process cartridge and an electrophotographic apparatus which have the electrophotographic photosensitive member.

Various systems such as an electrophotographic system a thermal transfer system and an ink jet recording system have been employed in image forming apparatus. Of these image forming apparatus employing the electrophotographic system are superior to image forming apparatus employing the other systems in view of higher speed higher image quality and less noise and are employed in many copying machines and printers.

Image formation by the electrophotographic system is performed by a process in which the surface of an electrophotographic photosensitive member is electrostatically charged the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member thus charged is exposed to exposure light to form an electrostatic latent image on the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member this electrostatic latent image is developed with a toner a developer to form a toner image on the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member and this toner image is transferred from the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member to a transfer material such as paper.

At present laser light is widely used as the above exposure light. Where laser light is used as exposure light the electrostatic latent image formed on the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is formed as a digital electrostatic latent image a digital latent image .

As the electrophotographic photosensitive member widely used is an electrophotographic photosensitive member an organic electrophotographic photosensitive member having a photosensitive layer containing an organic charge generating material and a charge transporting material. As such a photosensitive layer from the viewpoint of durability what is prevalent is one having layer configuration of a multi layer type regular layer type in which a charge generation layer containing a charge generating material and a charge transport layer containing a charge transporting material are superposed in this order from the support side.

In these days the progress of electrophotographic technique is remarkable and electrophotographic photosensitive members are also required to have high performance. In particular the performance that deals with higher image quality has become strongly demanded.

As the reason that such higher image quality is demanded it is cited that the electrophotographic technique has in virtue of their on demand availability advanced into the market that has belonged to printing techniques such as offset printing and screen printing. Accordingly a high image quality on the level of that in printing techniques is demanded in respect of reproducibility of small point characters and photographic images in particular reproducibility of halftone images.

However in the printing techniques such as offset printing and screen printing the shape of a plate is faithfully reproduced whereas in the electrophotographic technique especially when laser light is used as exposure light there is a problem concerning deterioration of dot reproducibility i.e. a problem such that not only dots on the electrophotographic photosensitive member surface but dots on reproduced images are inevitably enlarged as compared with laser beam spots. It is considered that the dots of electrostatic latent images formed on the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member are shallower and broader in their three dimensional shapes. Also this problem is remarkable where the dots are contiguous to each other.

As a technique by which the dot reproducibility is improved an induction photosensitive member is disclosed in e.g. Japanese Patent Applications Laid open No. H01 169454 No. H03 287171 and No. H09 096914 in which its potential does not attenuate until reaching a certain amount of exposure light and steep attenuation of potential takes place when exceeding that amount of exposure light.

The induction photosensitive member has superior single dot reproducibility. However where the dots are contiguous to each other the steep attenuation of potential takes place also at dots overlapping areas areas where exposure has overlapped between dots so that the dot reproducibility may deteriorate.

Nowadays manufactures having a high resolution of 600 dpe to 1 200 dpi and further 1 200 dpi to 2 400 dpi are on the market and aftertime they are expected to have much higher resolution. At present in electrophotographic apparatus making use of widely prevailing infrared semiconductor lasers laser beams have a spot diameter of about 60 to 80 m whereas dot to dot distance at 600 dpi is 42 m at 1 200 dpi 21 m and at 2 400 dpi 10.5 m. Hence the overlapping of dots becomes conspicuous.

Use of electrophotographic photosensitive members having good dot reproducibility leads to not only improvement in resolution but also improvement in gradation.

Accordingly an object of the present invention is to provide an electrophotographic photosensitive member promising a superior dot reproducibility and a process cartridge and an process cartridge which have such an electrophotographic photosensitive member.

As a result of extensive studies the present inventors have discovered that the above object can be achieved by the use of an electrophotographic photosensitive member whose rate of attenuation of potential on a lapse of a certain time after exposure is kept at a specific value or less.

More specifically the present invention is an electrophotographic photosensitive member comprising a support a charge generation layer containing a charge generating material provided on the support and a charge transport layer containing a charge transporting material provided on the charge transport layer wherein 

where in a light attenuation curve drawn in a way in which the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is so charged that intensity of an electric field applied to the electrophotographic photosensitive member is 15 V m to establish a surface potential of the electrophotographic photosensitive member into a given value E V and subsequently the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is exposed to light under conditions that the electrophotographic photosensitive member has a surface potential of 0.8 E V at a time point that T ms passes after exposure starts an inclination of the light attenuation curve at a time point that T ms passes after exposure starts is represented by m and in a dark time surface potential attenuation curve drawn in a way in which the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is charged under conditions that the electrophotographic photosensitive member has a surface potential of 0.8 E V at a time point that T ms passes after charging is finished and thereafter no exposure is performed an inclination of the dark time surface potential attenuation curve at a time point that T ms passes after charging is finished is represented by m m and m satisfy the following expression I 0.020 I provided that T d E 100 10where d is a layer thickness m of the charge transport layer and is a drift mobility cm V s of the charge transport layer.

The present invention is also a process cartridge and an electrophotographic apparatus which have the above electrophotographic photosensitive member.

According to the present invention an electrophotographic photosensitive member can be provided ensuring superior dot reproducibility and thereby forming character images superior in sharpness and a process cartridge and an electrophotographic apparatus can be provided having such an electrophotographic photosensitive member.

Described first is a judgement method by which judgement is made on whether or not a electrophotographic photosensitive member satisfies the above condition of the present invention hereinafter referred to also as judgement method of the present invention .

The judgement method of the present invention is conducted in an environment of normal temperature and normal humidity 23 C. 50 RH .

In the present invention as stated above when the inclination of a light attenuation curve at a time point that T ms passes after exposure starts is represented by m where the light attenuation curve is drawn in a way in which the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is so charged that the intensity of an electric field applied to the electrophotographic photosensitive member is 15 V m to set the surface potential of the electrophotographic photosensitive member at a given value E V and subsequently the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is exposed to light under the conditions that the electrophotographic photosensitive member have a surface potential of 0.8 E V at a time point that T ms passes after exposure starts and the inclination of a dark time surface potential attenuation curve at a time point that T ms passes after charging is finished is represented by m where the dark time surface potential attenuation curve is drawn in a way in which the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is charged under the conditions that the electrophotographic photosensitive member have a surface potential of 0.8 E V at a time point that T ms passes after charging is finished and thereafter no exposure is performed m and m satisfy the following expression I 0.020 I .

The T ms is defined by d E 100 10 where the layer thickness m of the charge transport layer of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is represented by d m and the drift mobility of the charge transport layer is represented by cm V s . Letter symbols d and E are constants and hence T is also a constant.

In the present invention the value of m m is 0.020 or less. It may preferably be 0.015 or less and in particular more preferably be from 0.001 or more to 0.015 or less.

Electric charges generated in the charge generation layer are injected into the charge transport layer. In the charge transport layer they are transported to the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member. Some electric charges come to the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member in a short time and some electric charges take a relatively long time to come to the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member. The present inventors have considered that dots are first formed by the electric charges having come to the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member in a short time and thereafter the electric charges having taken a relatively long time to come to the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member i.e. delayed electric charges disturb the first formed dots to lower the dot reproducibility. As to the above m m it means that the smaller the value is the less the delayed electric charges are.

The attenuation of potential that is not due to light such as injection of holes from the support into the charge generation layer i.e. the inclination m of the dark time surface potential attenuation also participates in the inclination m of light attenuation shown in . Therefore the value found by subtracting m from m m m is the inclination of precise light attenuation.

In the present invention the m and m are measured with a modified machine of a drum tester CYNTHIA 90 manufactured by Gen Tech Inc. As a light source used is LD chip SLD344YT manufactured by Sony Corp driver ALP7204PA manufactured by Asahi data systems Ltd. pulse width 2 s . Data of potential are inputted to a digital oscilloscope 54710A manufactured by Hewlett Packard Co by the use of which the potential attenuation curve is drawn and the values of m and m are calculated.

The constitution of the electrophotographic photosensitive member of the present invention is described below.

As mentioned above the electrophotographic photosensitive member of the present invention is an electrophotographic photosensitive member comprising a support a charge generation layer containing a charge generating material provided on the support and a charge transport layer containing a charge transporting material provided on the charge transport layer.

The charge transport layer of the electrophotographic photosensitive member of the present invention may be a hole transport layer containing a hole transporting material or an electron transport layer containing an electron transporting material. In the case where the charge transport layer provided on the charge generation layer is the hole transport layer the electrophotographic photosensitive member is a negative charge type electrophotographic photosensitive member. In the case where it is the electron transport layer the electrophotographic photosensitive member is a positive charge type electrophotographic photosensitive member. From the viewpoint of electrophotographic performance the charge transport layer provided on the charge generation layer may preferably be the hole transport layer.

In the following the electrophotographic photosensitive member is primarily described taking as an example a case in which the charge transport layer is the hole transport layer.

As the support it is sufficient to have conductivity conductive support . For example usable are supports made of a metal or made of an alloy such as aluminum nickel copper gold iron aluminum alloy or stainless steel. Also usable are supports made of the above metal a plastic such as polyester resin polycarbonate resin or polyimide resin or glass and having a layer formed by vacuum deposition of aluminum aluminum alloy indium oxide tin oxide alloy or the like. Still also usable are supports composed of plastic or paper impregnated with conductive fine particles such as carbon black tin oxide particles titanium oxide particles or silver particles together with a suitable binder resin and supports made of a plastic containing a conductive binder resin. As the shape of the support it may include a cylinder a belt etc. A cylindrical support is preferred.

For the purpose of preventing interference fringes caused by scattering of laser light or the like the surface of the support may be subjected to cutting surface roughening such as honing or blasting or aluminum anodizing or may be subjected to chemical treatment with a solution prepared by dissolving a metal salt compound or a metal salt of a fluorine compound in an acid aqueous solution containing as a main component an alkali phosphate phosphoric acid or tannic acid.

The honing includes dry honing and wet honing. The wet honing is a method in which a powdery abrasive is suspended in a liquid such as water and the suspension obtained is sprayed on the surface of the support at a high speed to roughen the surface of the support where surface roughness may be controlled by selecting spray pressure or speed the type shape size hardness or specific gravity of the abrasive suspension temperature and so forth. The dry honing is a method in which an abrasive is sprayed by air on the surface of the support at a high speed to roughen the surface of the support where surface roughness may be controlled in the same way as the wet honing. The abrasive used in the honing may include particles of silicon carbide alumina iron and glass beads.

A conductive layer intended for the prevention of interference fringes caused by scattering of laser light or the like or for the covering of scratches of the support surface may be provided between the support and the charge generation layer or an intermediate layer described later.

The conductive layer may be formed by coating the support with a dispersion prepared by dispersing conductive particles such as carbon black metal particles or metal oxide particles in a binder resin. Preferable metal oxide particles may include particles of zinc oxide and titanium oxide. Also as the conductive particles particles of barium sulfate may be used. The conductive particles may be provided with coat layers.

The conductive particles may preferably have volume resistivity in the range of from 0.1 to 1 000 cm and more preferably in the range of from 1 to 1 000 cm This volume resistivity is the value determined by using a resistance meter LORESTA AP manufactured by Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation. A sample for measurement is one solidified at a pressure of 49 MPa to be in the form of a coin. . Also the conductive particles may preferably have average particle diameter in the range of from 0.05 m to 1.0 m and more preferably in the range of from 0.07 m to 0.7 m. This average particle diameter is the value measured by centrifugal sedimentation. The proportion of the conductive particles in the conductive layer may preferably be in the range of from 1.0 to 90 by weight and more preferably in the range of from 5.0 to 80 by weight based on the total weight of the conductive layer.

The binder resin used in the conductive layer may include e.g. phenol resins polyurethane resins polyamide resins polyimide resins polyamide imide resins polyamic acid resins polyvinyl acetal resins epoxy resins acrylic resins melamine resins and polyester resins. Any of these may be used alone or in the form of a mixture or copolymer of two or more types. These have good adhesion to the support and also improve dispersibility of the conductive particles and have good solvent resistance after films have been formed. Of these phenol resins polyurethane resins and polyamic acid resins are preferred.

The conductive layer may preferably be in a layer thickness of from 0.1 m to 30 m and more preferably from 0.5 m to 20 m.

The conductive layer may preferably have a volume resistivity of 10 cm or less and more preferably in the range of from 10to 10 cm. This volume resistivity is the value determined by forming a coating film on an aluminum plate by the use of the same material as the conductive layer whose volume resistivity is to be measured forming a thin gold film on this coating film and measuring with a pA meter the value of electric current flowing across both electrodes the aluminum plate and the thin gold film. 

The conductive layer may optionally be incorporated with fluorine or antimony or a leveling agent may be added to the conductive layer in order to improve its surface properties.

An intermediate layer also called a subbing layer or an adhesion layer functioning as a barrier and an adhesive may be provided between the support or the conductive layer and the charge generation layer. The intermediate layer is formed for the purposes of e.g. improving the adhesion of the photosensitive layer coating performance and the injection of electric charges from the support and protecting the photosensitive layer from electrical breakdown.

The intermediate layer may be formed using a resin such as acrylic resin allyl resin alkyd resin ethyl cellulose resin an ethylene acrylic acid copolymer epoxy resin casein resin silicone resin gelatin resin nylon phenol resin butyral resin polyacrylate resin polyacetal resin polyamide imide resin polyamide resin polyallyl ether resin polyimide resin polyurethane resin polyester resin polyethylene resin polycarbonate resin polystyrene resin polysulfone resin polyvinyl alcohol resin polybutadiene resin polypropylene resin or urea resin or a material such as aluminum oxide.

The intermediate layer may preferably be in a layer thickness of 0.1 m to 5 m and more preferably from 0.3 m to 2 m.

The charge generating material used in the electrophotographic photosensitive member of the present invention may include e.g. azo pigments such as monoazo disazo and trisazo phthalocyanine pigments such as metal phthalocyanines and metal free phthalocyanine indigo pigments such as indigo and thioindigo perylene pigments such as perylene acid anhydrides and perylene acid imides polycyclic quinone pigments such as anthraquinone and pyrenequinone squarilium dyes pyrylium salts thiapyrylium salts triphenylmethane dyes inorganic materials such as selenium selenium tellurium and amorphous silicon quinacridone pigments azulenium salt pigments cyanine dyes xanthene dyes quinoneimine dyes styryl dyes cadmium sulfide and zinc oxide. Any of these charge generating materials may be used alone or in a combination of two or more types.

Of the above various charge generating materials azo pigments and phthalocyanine pigments are preferred in view of their high sensitivity and phthalocyanine pigments are particularly preferred.

Of phthalocyanine pigments metal phthalocyanine pigments are preferred. In particular oxytitanium phthalocyanine chlorogallium phthalocyanine dichlorotin phthalocyanine and hydroxygallium phthalocyanine are preferred. Of these hydroxygallium phthalocyanine is particularly preferred.

As the oxytitanium phthalocyanine preferred are oxytitanium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 9.0 14.2 23.9 and 27.1 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction and oxytitanium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 9.5 9.7 11.7 15.0 23.5 24.1 and 27.3 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction.

As the chlorogallium phthalocyanine preferred are chlorogallium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 7.4 16.6 25.5 and 28.2 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction chlorogallium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 6.8 17.3 23.6 and 26.9 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction and chlorogallium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 8.7 to 9.2 17.6 24.0 27.4 and 28.8 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction.

As the dichlorotin phthalocyanine preferred are dichlorotin phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 8.3 12.2 13.7 15.9 18.9 and 28.2 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction dichlorotin phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 8.5 11.2 14.5 and 27.2 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction dichlorotin phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 8.7 9.9 10.9 13.1 15.2 16.3 17.4 21.9 and 25.5 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction and dichlorotin phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 9.2 12.2 13.4 14.6 17.0 and 25.3 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction.

As the hydroxygallium phthalocyanine preferred are hydroxygallium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 7.3 24.9 and 28.1 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction and hydroxygallium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 7.5 9.9 12.5 16.3 18.6 25.1 and 28.3 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction.

The charge generating material may preferably have particle diameters of 0.5 m or less and more preferably in the range of from 0.01 m to 0.2 m.

The binder resin used in the charge generation layer may include e.g. acrylic resins aryl resins alkyd resins epoxy resins diallyl phthalate resins silicone resins styrene butadiene copolymers cellulose resins nylons phenol resins butyral resins benzal resins melamine resins polyacrylate resins polyacetal resins polyamide imide resins polyamide resins polyallyl ether resins polyarylate resins polyimide resins polyurethane resins polyester resins polyethylene resins polycarbonate resins polystyrene resins polysulfone resins polyvinyl acetal resins polyvinyl methacrylate resins polyvinyl acrylate resins polybutadiene resins polypropylene resins methacrylic resins urea resins vinyl chloride vinyl acetate copolymers vinyl acetate resins and vinyl chloride resins. In particular butyral resins are preferred. Any of these may be used alone or in the form of a mixture or copolymer of two or more types.

As one of methods for producing the electrophotographic photosensitive member that satisfies the above condition defined by the expression I a method is available in which the charge transport layer provided on the charge generation layer is the hole transport layer and an electron transporting material is incorporated in the charge generation layer.

The electron transporting material may include e.g. fluorenone compounds such as trinitrofluorenone imide compounds such as pyromellitic imide and naphthyl imide quinone compounds such as benzoquinone diphenoquinone diiminoquinone naphthoquinone stilbene quinone and anthraquinone fluorenylidene compounds such as fluorenylidene aniline and fluorenylidene malonitrile carboxylic anhydrides such as phthalic anhydride cyclic sulfone compounds such as thiopyrane dioxide oxadiazole compounds and triazole compounds. Of these imide compounds are preferred. In particular naphthalene tetracarboxylic acid diimide compounds having structure represented by the following formula 1 are more preferred.

In the above formula 1 Rand Rare each independently a substituted or unsubstituted alkyl group a substituted or unsubstituted alkyl group interrupted with an ether group a substituted or unsubstituted alkenyl group a substituted or unsubstituted alkenyl group interrupted with an ether group a substituted or unsubstituted aryl group a substituted or unsubstituted aralkyl group or a monovalent substituted or unsubstituted heterocyclic group and Rand Rare each independently a hydrogen atom a halogen atom a nitro group a substituted or unsubstituted alkyl group or a substituted or unsubstituted alkoxyl group.

The above alkyl group may include chain like alkyl groups such as a methyl group an ethyl group and a propyl group and cyclic alkyl groups such as a cyclohexyl group and a cycloheptyl group. The above alkenyl group may include a vinyl group and an allyl group. The above aryl group may include a phenyl group a naphthyl group and an anthryl group. The above aralkyl group may include a benzyl group and a phenetyl group. The above monovalent heterocyclic group may include a pyridyl group and a fural group. The above halogen atom may include a fluorine atom a chlorine atom and a bromine atom. The above alkoxyl group may include a methoxyl group an ethoxyl group and a propoxyl group.

The substituent each of the above groups may have may include alkyl groups such as a methyl group an ethyl group a propyl group and a cyclohexyl group alkenyl groups such as a vinyl group and an allyl group a nitro group halogen atoms such as a fluorine atom a chlorine atom and a bromine atom halogenated alkyl groups such as a perfluoroalkyl group aryl groups such as a phenyl group a naphthyl group and an anthryl group aralkyl groups such as a benzyl group and a phenetyl group and alkoxyl groups such as a methoxyl group an ethoxyl group and a propoxyl group.

Of the naphthalene tetracarboxylic acid diimide compounds having structure represented by the above formula 1 preferred are those in which at least one of Rand Ris a substituted or unsubstituted straight chain alkyl group or a substituted aryl group. Also of the substituted or unsubstituted straight chain alkyl group a straight chain alkyl group substituted with a halogen atom is preferred and of the substituted aryl group an aryl group substituted with a halogen atom an aryl group substituted with an alkyl group or an aryl group substituted with a halogenated alkyl group is preferred. Also from the viewpoint of solubility in solvents it is preferable that the naphthalene tetracarboxylic acid diimide compounds having structure represented by the above formula 1 have an unsymmetrical structure e.g. Rand Rare different groups or that a bulky group such as an alkyl group having 4 or more carbon atoms is introduced.

As the electron transporting material to be incorporated in the charge generation layer preferred is one whose reduction potential reduction potential with respect to a saturated calomel electrode is in the range of from 0.50 to 0.30 V and more preferably in the range of from 0.50 to 0.35 V.

In the present invention the reduction potential is measured by three electrode cyclic voltammetry in the following way.

A peak top of the first reduction potential as measured is regarded as the reduction potential of the electron transporting material.

The electron transporting material in the charge generation layer may preferably be in a proportion of from 10 to 60 by weight and more preferably from 21 to 40 by weight based on the weight of the charge generating material in the charge generation layer.

Electron affinity E of the electron transporting material and electron affinity G of the charge generating material in the charge generation layer may preferably be in a difference E G of from 0.20 or more to 0.20 or less more preferably from 0.10 or more to 0.20 or less and still more preferably more than 0 and 0.20 or less.

The optical bandgap 1239.8 absorption end nm determined using an ultraviolet visible spectrophotometer V 570 manufactured by JASCO Corporation is subtracted from the work function determined using an atmospheric pressure electron spectrometer AC 2 manufactured by Riken Keiki Co. Ltd.

The sum of a numerical value found when the unit of the above reduction potential is V and a numerical value 4.53 found when the unit of ionization potential of the saturated calomel electrode is eV is the numerical value found when the unit of that electron affinity is eV .

In addition the ionization potential of the electrode is statistically calculated in the same manner as disclosed in Japanese Patent Application Laid open No. 2000 019746 using the charge transporting material described in the present invention.

The charge generation layer may be formed by coating a charge generation layer coating dispersion obtained by dispersing the charge generating material and optionally the electron transporting material in the binder resin together with a solvent followed by drying. As a method for dispersion a method is available which makes use of a homogenizer an ultrasonic dispersion machine a ball mill a sand mill a roll mill a vibration mill an attritor or a liquid impact type high speed dispersion machine. The charge generating material and the binder resin may preferably be in a proportion ranging from 0.5 1 to 4 1 weight ratio and more preferably ranging from 1 1 to 1 3 weight ratio .

As the solvent used for the charge generation layer coating dispersion it may be selected from the viewpoint of the binder resin to be used and the solubility or dispersion stability of the charge generating material. As an organic solvent usable are alcohols sulfoxides ketones ethers esters aliphatic halogenated hydrocarbons aromatic compounds and so forth.

The charge generation layer may preferably be in a layer thickness of 5 m or less and more preferably from 0.01 m to 2 m and still more preferably from 0.05 m to 0.5 m.

To the charge generation layer a sensitizer an antioxidant an ultraviolet absorber and a plasticizer which may be of various types may also optionally be added.

The hole transporting material used in the electrophotographic photosensitive member of the present invention may include e.g. triarylamine compounds hydrazone compounds styryl compounds stilbene compounds pyrazoline compounds oxazole compounds thiazole compounds and triarylmethane compounds. Any of these may be used alone or in a combination of two or more.

As the electron transporting material to be incorporated in the hole transport layer preferred is one whose oxidation potential oxidation potential with respect to a saturated calomel electrode is in the range of from 0.70 to 0.80 V and more preferably in the range of from 0.71 to 0.76 V.

In the present invention the oxidation potential is measured in the same manner as the measurement of the reduction potential and a peak top of the first oxidation potential as measured is regarded as oxidation potential of the hole transporting material.

The binder resin used in the hole transport layer may include e.g. acrylic resins acrylonitrile resins allyl resins alkyd resins epoxy resins silicone resins nylons phenol resins phenoxy resins butyral resins polyacrylamide resins polyacetal resins polyamide imide resins polyamide resins polyallyl ether resins polyarylate resins polyimide resins polyurethane resins polyester resins polyethylene resins polycarbonate resins polystyrene resins polysulfone resins polyvinyl butyral resins polyphenylene oxide resins polybutadiene resins polypropylene resins methacrylic resins urea resins vinyl chloride resins and vinyl acetate resins. In particular polyarylate resins polycarbonate resins and so forth are preferred. Any of these may be used alone or in the form of a mixture or copolymer of two or more types.

The hole transport layer may be formed by coating a hole transport layer coating solution prepared by dissolving the hole transporting material and binder resin in a solvent followed by drying. The hole transporting material and the binder resin may preferably be in a proportion ranging from 10 5 to 5 10 weight ratio and more preferably from 10 8 to 6 10 weight ratio .

As the solvent used in the hole transport layer coating solution usable are ketones such as acetone and methyl ethyl ketone esters such as methyl acetate and ethyl acetate aromatic hydrocarbons such as toluene and xylene ethers such as 1 4 dioxane and tetrahydrofuran and hydrocarbons substituted with a halogen atom such as chlorobenzene chloroform and carbon tetrachloride.

The hole transport layer may preferably be in a layer thickness of from 1 m to 50 m and in particular more preferably from 3 m to 30 m.

To the hole transport layer an antioxidant an ultraviolet absorber a plasticizer and so forth may optionally be added.

A protective layer intended for the protection of the hole transport layer may also be provided on the hole transport layer. The protective layer may be formed by coating a protective layer coating solution obtained by dissolving a binder resins in a solvent followed by drying. The protective layer may be formed by coating a protective layer coating solution obtained by dissolving a binder resin monomer or oligomer in a solvent followed by curing and or drying. To effect the curing light heat or radiations such as electron rays may be used.

The protective layer may preferably be in a layer thickness of from 0.5 m to 10 m and more preferably from 1 m to 5 m.

When the coating solutions for the above various layers are applied coating methods may be used as exemplified by dip coating spray coating spinner coating roller coating Mayer bar coating and blade.

In reference numeral denotes a cylindrical electrophotographic photosensitive member which is rotatively driven around an axis in the direction of an arrow at a stated peripheral speed.

The surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member rotatively driven is uniformly electrostatically charged to a positive or negative given potential through a charging means primary charging means such as a charging roller . The electrophotographic photosensitive member thus charged is then exposed to exposure light imagewise exposure light emitted from an exposure means not shown for slit exposure laser beam scanning exposure or the like. In this way electrostatic latent images corresponding to the intended image are successively formed on the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member .

The electrostatic latent images thus formed on the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member are developed with a toner contained in a developer a developing means has to form toner images. Then the toner images thus formed and held on the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member are successively transferred by applying a transfer bias from a transfer means such as a transfer roller which are transferred onto a transfer material such as paper P fed from a transfer material feed means not shown to the part contact zone between the electrophotographic photosensitive member and the transfer means in the manner synchronized with the rotation of the electrophotographic photosensitive member .

The transfer material P to which the toner images have been transferred is separated from the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is led through a fixing means where the toner images are fixed and is then put out of the apparatus as an image formed material a print or a copy .

The surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member from which toner images have been transferred is subjected to removal of the developer toner remaining after the transfer through a cleaning means such as a cleaning blade . Thus its surface is cleaned. It is further subjected to charge elimination by pre exposure light not shown emitted from a pre exposure means not shown and thereafter repeatedly used for the formation of images. In addition where as shown in the primary charging means is a contact charging means making use of a charging roller or the like the pre exposure is not necessarily required.

The apparatus may be constituted of a combination of plural components integrally held in a container as a process cartridge from among the constituents such as the above electrophotographic photosensitive member charging means developing means transfer means and cleaning means so that the process cartridge can be mounted on and detached from the main body of an electrophotographic apparatus such as a copying machine or a laser beam printer. In the apparatus shown in the electrophotographic photosensitive member and the charging means developing means and cleaning means are integrally held to make up a process cartridge that is detachably mountable to the main body of the electrophotographic apparatus through a guide means such as rails provided in the main body of the electrophotographic apparatus.

The electrophotographic apparatus shown in has a charging means making use of a corona discharge assembly and a transfer means making use of a corona discharge assembly. As to how it operates it does like the electrophotographic apparatus constructed as shown in .

The present invention is described below in greater detail by giving specific working examples. The present invention however is by no means limited to these. In the following examples part s refers to part s by weight .

Next 10 parts of titanium oxide particles coated with tin oxide containing 10 by weight of antimony oxide 5 parts of resol type phenol resin trade name PRYOPHEN J 325 available from Dainippon Ink Chemicals Incorporated 4 parts of methyl cellosolve 1 part of methanol and 0.002 part of silicone oil polydimethylsiloxane polyoxyalkylene copolymer weight average molecular weight 3 000 were subjected to dispersion for 2 hours by means of a sand mill making use of glass beads of 1 mm in diameter to prepare a conductive layer coating dispersion.

This conductive layer coating dispersion was applied onto the support by dipping followed by drying at 150 C. for 30 minutes to form a conductive layer with a layer thickness of 15 m.

Next 15 parts of alcohol soluble polyamide resin trade name AMILAN CM8000 available from Toray Industries Inc. was dissolved in a mixed solvent of 150 parts of methanol and 200 parts of butanol to prepare an intermediate layer coating solution.

This intermediate layer coating solution was applied onto the conductive layer by dipping followed by drying at 90 C. for 10 minutes to form an intermediate layer with a layer thickness of 0.7 m.

Next 2 parts of hydroxygallium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 7.3 24.9 and 28.1 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction a charge generating material 1 part of polyvinyl butyral resin trade name S LEC BM S available from Sekisui Chemical Co. Ltd. 25 parts of tetrahydrofuran and 5 parts of cyclohexanone were subjected to dispersion for 5 hours by means of a sand mill making use of glass beads of 1 mm in diameter and then 150 parts of tetrahydrofuran and 50 parts of cyclohexanone were added. To the mixture obtained 0.6 part of a compound having structure represented by the above formula E 1 an electron transporting material was dissolved to prepare a charge generation layer coating dispersion. The charge generating material had an average particle diameter of 0.18 m which was measured by centrifugal sedimentation using CAPA700 manufactured by Horiba Ltd. This charge generation layer coating dispersion was applied onto the intermediate layer by dipping followed by drying at 100 C. for 10 minutes to form a charge generation layer with a layer thickness of 0.2 m.

Next 5 parts of a compound represented by the following formula 2 a hole transporting material oxidation potential 0.71 V mobility 1.5 10 cm V s 

This hole transport layer coating solution was applied onto the charge generation layer by dipping followed by drying at 110 C. for 70 minutes to form a hole transport layer a charge transport layer the same applies hereinafter with a layer thickness of 20 m.

Thus an electrophotographic photosensitive member was produced having a support and a conductive layer an intermediate layer a charge generation layer and a hole transport layer in this order on the support wherein the hole transport layer is a surface layer.

The m and m of the electrophotographic photosensitive member produced were measured in such a manner as described previously. The values of m and m are shown in Table 2.

Electrophotographic photosensitive members were produced in the same manner as in Electrophotographic Photosensitive Member except that the type and amount of the charge generating material the type and amount of the charge transporting material and the type and amount of the binder resin in the charge generation layer coating dispersion and the type of the hole transporting material in the charge transport layer coating solution were changed as shown in Table 1. The m and m were measured in the same way. The values of the m and m are shown in Table 2.

Electrophotographic photosensitive members were produced in the same manner as in Electrophotographic Photosensitive Member except that the intermediate layer was provided directly on the support without providing any conductive layer and instead the surface of the support was subjected to wet honing to be roughened and the type and amount of the charge generating material the type and amount of the charge transporting material and the type and amount of the binder resin in the charge generation layer coating dispersion and the type of the hole transporting material in the charge transport layer coating solution were changed as shown in Table 1. The m and m were measured in the same way. The values of the m and m are shown in Table 2.

Electrophotographic photosensitive members were produced in the same manner as in Electrophotographic Photosensitive Member except that the type and amount of the charge generating material the type and amount of the charge transporting material and the type and amount of the binder resin in the charge generation layer coating dispersion and the type of the hole transporting material in the charge transport layer coating solution were changed as shown in Table 1. The m and m were measured in the same way. The values of the m and m are shown in Table 2.

In Table 1 HOGaPc stands for hydroxygallium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 7.3 24.9 and 28.1 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction TiOPc stands for oxytitanium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 9.5 9.7 11.7 15.0 23.5 24.1 and 27.3 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction 4 stands for an azo pigment having structure represented by the following formula 4 5 stands for an azo pigment having structure represented by the following formula 5 BM S stands for polyvinyl butyral resin trade name S LEC BM S available from Sekisui Chemical Co. Ltd. BX 1 stands for polyvinyl butyral resin trade name S LEC BX 1 available from Sekisui Chemical Co. Ltd. U 100 stands for polyarylate resin trade name U 100 available from Unichika Ltd. 2 stands for a compound having structure represented by the above formula 2 6 stands for a compound having structure represented by the following formula 6 7 stands for a compound having structure represented by the following formula 7 8 stands for a compound having structure represented by the following formula 8 9 stands for a compound having structure represented by the following formula 9 10 stands for a compound having structure represented by the following formula 10 11 stands for a compound having structure represented by the following formula 11 and 12 stands for a compound having structure represented by the following formula 12 .

An electrophotographic photosensitive member was produced in the same manner as in Electrophotographic Photosensitive Member except that 2 parts of the oxytitanium phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 9.5 9.7 11.7 15.0 23.5 24.1 and 27.3 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction was changed to 2 parts of a hydroxygallium phthalocyanine crystal synthesized as described below. The m and m were measured in the same way. The values of the m and m are shown in Table 2.

That is 73 g of o phthalodinitrile 25 g of gallium trichloride and 400 ml of chloronaphthalene were allowed to react at 200 C. for 4 hours in an atmosphere of nitrogen and thereafter the product obtained was filtered at 130 C. The product having been filtered was subjected to dispersion washing at 130 C. for 1 hour using N N dimethylformamide and then filtered and washed with methanol followed by drying to obtain 45 g of chlorogallium phthalocyanine.

15 g of this chlorogallium phthalocyanine was dissolved in 450 g of 10 C. concentrated sulfuric acid and the solution obtained was dropwise added to 2 300 g of ice water with stirring to effect reprecipitation followed by filtration. Next the product having been filtered was subjected to dispersion washing with 2 ammonia water and thereafter thoroughly washed with ion exchange water and then filtered followed by drying to obtain 13 g of hydroxygallium phthalocyanine.

10 g of this hydroxygallium phthalocyanine 300 g of N N dimethylformamide and 0.4 g of a compound having structure represented by the above formula E 14 an electron transporting material were subjected to milling at 22 C. for 6 hours together with 450 g of glass beads of 1 mm in diameter. After the milling solid matter was taken out from the liquid and was washed with methanol and then thoroughly with water followed by drying to obtain 9.2 g of hydroxygallium phthalocyanine.

An electrophotographic photosensitive member was produced in the following way with reference to description relating to the production of the electrophotographic photosensitive member of Example 16 in Japanese Patent Application Laid open No. H09 096914. The m and m were measured in the same way. The values of the m and m are shown in Table 2.

An aluminum cylinder of 30 mm in diameter and 260.5 mm in length was prepared as a support. In addition the surface of the support was roughened by wet honing in the same manner as Electrophotographic Photosensitive Member .

Next 4 parts of dichlorotin phthalocyanine crystals with a crystal form having strong peaks at Bragg angles 2 0.2 of 8.3 13.7 and 28.3 in CuK characteristic X ray diffraction a charge generating material 2 parts of polyvinyl butyral resin trade name S LEC BM S available from Sekisui Chemical Co. Ltd. and 100 parts of n butanol were subjected to dispersion for 2 hours by paint shaking making use of glass beads to prepare a charge generation layer coating dispersion.

This charge generation layer coating dispersion was applied onto the support by dipping followed by drying at 115 C. for 10 minutes to form a charge generation layer with a layer thickness of 0.5 m.

Next 15 parts of fine hexagonal selenium crystals 8 parts of vinyl chloride vinyl acetate copolymer trade name UCAR Solution Vinyl Resin VMCH available from Union Carbide electrical resistivity 10 cm and 100 parts of isobutyl acetate were subjected to dispersion for 200 hours by means of an attritor making use of stainless steel beads of 3 mm in diameter to prepare a sigmoid S shaped type charge transport layer coating dispersion.

This sigmoid type charge transport layer coating solution was applied onto the charge generation layer by dipping followed by drying at 115 C. for 10 minutes to form a sigmoid type charge transport layer a first hole transport layer with a layer thickness of 2 m.

In addition the hexagonal selenium in the sigmoid type charge transport layer was in a volume ratio of about 35 . Also the hexagonal selenium had an average particle diameter of 0.05 m.

Next 15 parts of a compound having a repeating structural unit represented by the following formula 13 molecular weight 80 000 a high molecular weight hole transporting material 

This hole transport layer coating solution second hole transport layer coating solution was applied onto the sigmoid type charge transport layer first hole transport layer by dipping followed by drying at 135 C. for 1 hour to form a hole transport layer a second hole transport layer with a layer thickness of 20 m.

Thus an electrophotographic photosensitive member was produced having a support and a charge generation layer a sigmoid type charge transport layer first hole transport layer and a hole transport layer second hole transport layer in this order on the support the hole transport layer second hole transport layer being a surface layer.

In addition for the following Evaluations 1 to 3 three members were prepared for each of Electrophotographic Photosensitive Members to .

Electrophotographic photosensitive members used in Examples 1 to 21 and Comparative Examples 1 to 6 are as shown in Table 3.

An evaluation apparatus used in Evaluation 1 is a modified machine of a laser beam printer operated by contact charging making use of a charging roller reverse development and negative charging trade name LBP2510 manufactured by CANON INC. . This evaluation apparatus is one modified so that the amount of exposure light is variable and the resolution is 1 200 dpi laser spot diameter 80 m . A voltage generated by superimposing a sinusoidal AC voltage of 1 800 V in peak to peak voltage and 800 Hz in frequency on a DC voltage of 650 V is applied to the charging roller by means of a high pressure power source Model 610 manufactured by TREK Inc.

The electrophotographic photosensitive member produced in each example was attached to a cyan color process cartridge of LBP2510 and this process cartridge was set in the evaluation apparatus. Setting dark area potential at 650V and light area potential at 2050V images were reproduced in a 25 C. and 15 RH environment and evaluated.

First images with a density of 12 were reproduced on 5 000 sheets and thereafter the dark area potential and the light area potential were measured without changing the setting of the amount of light. The potential was measured by attaching a potential probe trade name Model 6000B 8 manufactured by TREK Inc. to the development position and using a surface potentiometer trade name Model 1344 manufactured by TREK Inc. . Evaluation was made on the difference between dark area potential before 5 000 sheet reproduction Vd 650 V and dark area potential after 5 000 sheet reproduction Vd and the difference between light area potential before 5 000 sheet reproduction Vl 200 V and light area potential after 5 000 sheet reproduction Vl .

Thereafter the dark area potential and the light area potential were adjusted again so as to be 650 V and 200 V respectively where a one dot and one space image see and a 5 point character image were reproduced for image evaluation. The evaluation results are shown in Table 3.

Development bias was changed and contrast potential the absolute value of the difference between development bias and light area potential was set at from 300 V to 400 V where evaluation was made on changes in dot diameters. The shallower and broader the dots of electrostatic latent images are the larger the changes in dot diameters are. See . In letter symbol a shows a case in which a dot is relatively deep and narrow and letter symbol b shows a case in which a dot is relatively shallow and broad. In the evaluation a dot analyzer DA 5000S manufactured by Oji Scientific Instruments was used. Before toner images on the surface of the electrophotographic photosensitive member were all transferred to paper the electrophotographic photosensitive member was operated to stop being rotated and was left standing for 18 hours. Thereafter the process cartridge was taken out and dot diameters at the middle area in the lengthwise direction of the electrophotographic photosensitive member were measured on 20 dots to find a difference in their average values.

As to the 5 point character images reproduced evaluation was made on relative values found when the line widths of the characters in Example 1 were assumed as 1.00 and on the state of the characters visually inspected as they were.

Electrophotographic photosensitive members used in Examples 22 to 42 and Comparative Examples 7 to 12 are as shown in Table 4.

An evaluation apparatus used in Evaluation 2 is the same as the evaluation apparatus used in Evaluation 1 except that the voltage to be applied to the charging roller was changed to only a DC voltage the voltage was adjusted to a value with which the surface potential of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is set to be 650 V .

The evaluation was made in the same way as in Evaluation 1. The results of evaluation are shown in Table 4.

Electrophotographic photosensitive members used in Examples 43 to 63 and Comparative Examples 13 to 18 are as shown in Table 5.

An evaluation apparatus used in Evaluation 3 is the same as the evaluation apparatus used in Evaluation 1 except that the charging was changed to corona charging the value of voltage to be applied to a corona charging assembly was adjusted to a value with which the surface potential of the electrophotographic photosensitive member is set to be 650 V .

The evaluation was made in the same way as in Evaluation 1. The results of evaluation are shown in Table 5.

In addition in Comparative Examples 6 12 and 18 the one dot and one space images were attempted to be reproduced but resulted in solid black images and hence the dot diameters were not measurable.

This application claims priority from Japanese Patent Application No. 2003 434016 filed Dec. 26 2003 which is hereby incorporated by reference herein.

