---

title: Time-resolved exhaust emissions sensor
abstract: A sensor may be used to measure particulate mass concentration in the exhaust of an internal combustion engine. The sensor may include a signal electrode and a detector electrode at least partially enclosed within a sensor body. The sensor may continuously measure the particulate mass concentration in the exhaust of the internal combustion engine. Continuously measuring the particulate mass concentration may produce a time-resolved measurement of the particulate mass concentration. In certain embodiments, the sensor may be coupled to a feedback control system that may adjust operating conditions of the internal combustion engine.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07650780&OS=07650780&RS=07650780
owner: Board of Regents, The University of Texas System
number: 07650780
owner_city: Austin
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050119
---
This application is a continuation in part of PCT Application No. PCT US03 22599 entitled Time Resolved Exhaust Emissions Sensor to Matthew J. Hall filed on Jul. 18 2003 which claims the benefits of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 397 117 entitled Time Resolved Exhaust Emissions Sensor to Matthew J. Hall filed on Jul. 19 2002 and U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 397 454 entitled Time Resolved Exhaust Emissions Sensor Using Compact Light Scattering to Matthew J. Hall filed on Jul. 19 2002.

This invention was made with government support under Contract No. HL059472 awarded by the National Institute of Health. The government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates generally to devices and methods for measuring time resolved concentration and or size distribution of particulate matter emitted in the exhaust of an internal combustion engine.

Internal combustion engines e.g. diesel engines typically generate an exhaust flow that contains varying amounts of particulate matter. The amount and size distribution of particulate matter in the exhaust flow tends to vary with engine operating conditions such as fuel injection timing injection pressure or the engine speed to load relationship. Adjustment of these conditions may be useful in reducing particulate matter emissions and particulate matter sizes from the engine. Reducing particulate matter emissions from internal combustion engines is environmentally favorable. Currently however no device exists for determining the mass concentration and the size distribution of the particulate matter in the exhaust of an operating engine in the field e.g. on board a vehicle and in real time.

A device for determining the real time mass concentrations of particulate matter in the exhaust emission of an internal combustion engine may be useful for controlling operation of the engine. For example time resolved mass concentration measurements of particulate matter may be used to provide feedback to a control system for adjustment of operating conditions of the engine to reduce the mass concentration of the particulate matter. These time resolved measurements may also be used to monitor particulate matter emission compliance in the field and or to calibrate engine operating parameters.

The angular dependence of the intensity of light scattering from an aggregate of particles e.g. particulate matter may be used to determine mass concentrations. A device that measures angular dependence of the intensity of light scattering from an aggregate of particles is generally known as a nephelometer. Nephelometers are typically used to measure the size and concentration of particles in gases or liquids. Research grade nephelometers have been used in research environments for measuring mass concentrations in exhaust emissions from engines. Research grade nephelometers however are typically large e.g. about the size of a small refrigerator and not usable in the field i.e. on board a vehicle . The size of a nephelometer may be related to the number of detectors used to measure the scattering intensity at multiple angles. For example a typical research grade nephelometer uses 36 detectors for measuring scattering intensity at 36 different angles. In addition research grade nephelometers may include large external laser systems that are not suitable for use in the field.

A device for monitoring mass concentrations and size distributions of particulate matter in the exhaust of an internal combustion engine may be simple compact and inexpensive so that the device can be used on the exhaust system of an engine in the field. The device may withstand the severe operating conditions of the exhaust system e.g. temperature corrosion etc. and be resistant to fouling from particulate matter buildup.

A sensor may be used to measure mass concentration of particulate matter in exhaust of a combustion device. The sensor may include a signal electrode and a detector electrode at least partially enclosed in a sensor body. In some embodiments the signal electrode and or the detector electrode may be enclosed in an insulating material and a conducting tube to reduce or eliminate the temperature sensitivity of the sensor. The insulating material may have a dielectric constant substantially similar to or greater than a dielectric constant of air.

The sensor may be at least partially placed in a flow of exhaust from a combustion device. A voltage may be applied to a signal electrode of the sensor. A detector electrode may be coupled to a detector system that can be used to measure charge accumulated on the detector electrode as particulate matter flows between the electrodes of the sensor or that can measure the current flow to the detector electrode. Charge accumulation or the electrical current on the detector electrode may vary with changes in the mass concentration of the particulate matter. The charge accumulation or electrical current may be converted to an output voltage by the detector system. In some embodiments an increase in mass concentration of particulate matter in the exhaust may result in an increase in the output voltage of the detector system.

The output voltage of the detector system may be measured continuously for time resolved measurement of mass concentration of the particulate matter in the exhaust of the combustion device. In some embodiments the detector system may be coupled to a feedback control system that operates the combustion device. Operating conditions of the combustion device may be adjusted by the feedback control system to reduce mass concentration of particulate matter in the exhaust.

In certain embodiments a device may be used to measure mass concentrations and size distributions of particulate matter in the exhaust emission of a combustion engine in real time and in the field e.g. on board a vehicle . The device may include a cylinder section that may be coupled to an exhaust conduit of the combustion engine. A light source may be coupled to the perimeter of the cylinder section. The light source may be compact and relatively inexpensive. In an embodiment the light source is a diode laser.

A selected number of detectors e.g. 1 to 6 may be coupled to the perimeter of the cylinder section. The detectors may be photodetectors e.g. photodiodes avalanche photodiodes or photomultipliers . In an embodiment the photodetectors are placed at various selected angles with respect to the light source. The various angles of the photodetectors may be selected to provide a relatively good estimate of particulate matter size. In certain embodiments the angles may be selected based on theoretical scattering profiles of light. The theoretical scattering profiles may be determined based upon a particle size distribution refractive index of particles and a wavelength of light. For example in one embodiment three photodetectors may be placed at angles of about 20 about 35 and about 70 with respect to the light source based upon the theoretical scattering profiles.

An electronics system may be coupled to the light source and the detectors. The electronics system may provide power to the light source and the detectors and or obtain data from the detectors. The electronics system may process the data from the detectors to determine mass concentrations and size distributions of particulate matter. The electronics system may continuously monitor mass concentrations and size distributions in real time. Operating parameters of the combustion engine may be modified based upon the measurements of mass concentrations and size distributions. The operating parameters may be modified to calibrate the engine or to comply with emission requirements.

In certain embodiments a flow of gas e.g. air may be provided to optical surfaces of the detectors and the light source to inhibit particulate matter contamination of the optical surfaces. In an embodiment a compressor coupled to the cylinder section may be used to provide the flow of gas.

While the invention is susceptible to various modifications and alternative forms specific embodiments thereof are shown by way of example in the drawings and may herein be described in detail. The drawings may not be to scale. It should be understood however that the drawings and detailed description thereto are not intended to limit the invention to the particular form disclosed but on the contrary the intention is to cover all modifications equivalents and alternatives falling within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

In certain embodiments signal electrode and detector electrode may be spaced apart by a distance of between about 0.05 cm and about 1.5 cm. In one embodiment a distance between signal electrode and detector electrode is about 0.4 cm. The distance between the electrodes may vary however. For example the distance between the electrodes may be varied based upon a desired sensitivity for sensor and or a selected use of the sensor e.g. engine type exhaust volume etc. .

In an embodiment signal electrode is a high voltage electrode. Signal electrode may be operable up to 1500 volts. Signal electrode may also be operable in a range of 400 volts to 1200 volts or in one embodiment a range of 500 volts to 1000 volts. Signal electrode may include high voltage materials such as copper aluminum platinum etc. A diameter of signal electrode may be selected based on factors such as but not limited to an operating voltage range and or current range of the signal electrode. The diameter of signal electrode is typically between about 0.02 cm and about 0.5 cm. In one embodiment signal electrode is a copper electrode of about 0.1 cm diameter.

Detector electrode may be used to detect charge or electrical current produced in an exhaust system. Detector electrode may be any electrode capable of collecting and conducting an electrical signal. For example detector electrode may include materials such as copper aluminum platinum etc. A diameter of detector electrode may be selected based on factors such as but not limited to a desired sensitivity of the detector electrode or an operating range i.e. voltage range or current range of the detector electrode. The diameter of detector electrode is typically between about 0.02 cm and about 0.5 cm. In an embodiment detector electrode is a copper electrode with a diameter of about 0.1 cm.

In certain embodiments sensor may be placed in an exhaust system of an internal combustion engine e.g. a diesel engine or other similar combustion device to detect particulate emissions from the combustion device. Sensor may be simple to build simple to use compact and durable. Sensor may be operable without fouling typically caused by accumulation of particulate matter in an exhaust sensor.

In certain embodiments one or more electrodes may be at least partially enclosed in a sheath e.g. an electrically insulating sheath to increase the resistance of a sensor to fouling. depicts a front view of an embodiment of sensor . Signal electrode and or detector electrode may be at least partially enclosed in sheath . In certain embodiments sheath may enclose all but the tips of signal electrode and detector electrode . In such embodiments a region or volume is formed between an uncovered tip of signal electrode and an uncovered tip of detector electrode . In this region or volume an electrical measurement between the electrodes may be made. In certain embodiments sheath may be made of electrically insulating material such as plastic e.g. Teflon .

Exhaust conduit may be coupled to combustion device . Exhaust conduit may be an exhaust pipe of combustion device . Sensor may be coupled to exhaust conduit . Sensor may be coupled to exhaust conduit such that sensor head shown in lies in the exhaust conduit. Sensor may be coupled to exhaust conduit at any desired location along the exhaust conduit. The location of sensor along exhaust conduit may be selected for example to provide a desired sensitivity or to locate the sensor such that an operating temperature of the sensor does not exceed a maximum selected temperature e.g. a maximum operating temperature of materials in the sensor .

An end of signal electrode on sensor located externally to exhaust conduit may be coupled to voltage supply . Voltage supply may be a high voltage power supply or other device capable of supplying high voltage to signal electrode . Voltage supply may also operate at low current for low power consumption. In an embodiment voltage supply is capable of providing a voltage up to 1500 volts to signal electrode . In certain embodiments voltage supply provides a voltage that is lower than a voltage that may create a spark breakdown between the electrodes. The voltage supplied to signal electrode may be a positive or negative bias voltage. In certain embodiments voltage supply provides a positive voltage between 500 volts and 1000 volts to signal electrode . In an embodiment voltage supply provides a constant voltage to signal electrode .

An end of detector electrode on sensor located externally to exhaust conduit may be coupled to detector system . In some embodiments detector electrode may be grounded. Detector system may be an electronic system used to measure charge accumulation or current flow on detector electrode . In an embodiment detector system is a charge amplifier system that measures the accumulation of charge or the current flow on detector electrode . Detector system may convert the charge accumulation or the current flow measured on detector electrode into an output voltage. Detector system may produce changes in voltage as the charge accumulation or the current flow from particulate matter increases or decreases on detector electrode . As particulate matter flow increases through sensor in exhaust conduit charge accumulation or current flow i.e. the output voltage of detector system may increase. The charge accumulation or the current flow in sensor may be affected by a change in dielectric constant between signal electrode and detector electrode produced by the flow of particulate mass between the electrodes. The charge accumulation or the current flow in sensor may also be due to the presence of carbon ions produced from the ionization of particulate matter by the high voltage electric field between the electrodes. In general detector electrode may be operated in a similar manner to a detector electrode used in a hydrocarbon flame ionization detector FID . In some embodiments a spark discharge e.g. a spark plug may be placed in exhaust conduit to generate a discharge and ionize the particulate matter for detection in sensor .

The output voltage of detector system tends to vary with variations in mass concentration at sensor . Thus a particular voltage output may correspond to an individual mass concentration. Voltage output of detector system may be calibrated versus mass concentration to determine a correlation between voltage output and mass concentration for the sensor.

In an embodiment the voltage output of detector system may be monitored continuously. Consumption of power during continuous monitoring may be kept relatively low because of the constant voltage at signal electrode and the low current flow through sensor . Continuous monitoring of the voltage i.e. mass concentration may allow for time resolved measurement of the mass concentration. Time resolved measurement may allow for detection of trends in the mass concentration of particulate matter. In other embodiments mass concentration measurements may not be time resolved e.g. measurements may include total mass over a length of time concentration at a singular point in time etc. .

In certain embodiments detector system may be coupled to a feedback control system for operating combustion device . Operating conditions of combustion device may be adjusted based on the mass concentration of the particulate matter measured by detector system . Operating conditions may be adjusted to reduce the mass concentration of the particulate matter if the mass concentration exceeds a selected value. For example operating conditions such as fuel injection timing injection pressure and or an engine speed load relationship may be adjusted to reduce the mass concentration. In some embodiments these conditions may be adjusted or refined to produce a desired low mass concentration of particulate matter as detected by sensor .

In some embodiments sensor may be temperature sensitive. Sensor may be temperature sensitive such that an output voltage of the sensor as determined by detector system drifts to an offset value at higher temperatures. The output voltage may drift to a maximum offset value and remain at the maximum offset value at a certain increased temperature. In certain embodiments the temperature dependence of sensor may be compensated for through calibration e.g. temperature versus voltage offset correlation measurements or other compensation methods.

The temperature sensitivity of sensor may be reduced or eliminated by covering or shielding signal electrode and or detector electrode . In an embodiment an insulating material with a dielectric constant substantially similar to or greater than air e.g. greater than about 1.0 may be placed around signal electrode and or detector electrode . In the insulating material signal electrode and or detector electrode may be further placed in conducting tubes e.g. copper tubes . Shielding signal electrode and or detector electrode with the insulating material and the conducting tubes may reduce or eliminate the temperature sensitivity of sensor .

In an experiment an exhaust plume from a sooting acetylene flame was drawn through a 5 inch diameter metal duct. The flow of exhaust was drawn by a vacuum system attached to the end of the metal duct. Sensor was coupled to the metal duct such that sensor head was in the flow of exhaust. Sensor was charged with a voltage of between 500 volts and 1000 volts using a high voltage power supply. A strong voltage signal was observed on an oscilloscope coupled to sensor when a particulate stream was introduced into the exhaust flow. When the particulate stream was reduced or removed from the exhaust flow the voltage signal decreased to a minimum value.

In another experiment sensor was placed in a flow of exhaust generated by a diesel engine. Sensor was found to be sensitive to the temperatures generated in a diesel engine exhaust. Shielding of signal electrode and detector electrode as described above appeared to eliminate the temperature sensitivity of the sensor.

In certain embodiments light scattering may be used to measure size distribution of particulate matter in exhaust emission of a combustion engine. depicts a plot of theoretical Mie scattering profiles for a laser wavelength of 1064 nm and spherical particles with a refractive index of 1.60. The refractive index of 1.60 is typical for particulate matter e.g. soot found in exhaust systems of internal combustion engines. Scattering intensity is shown versus angle of detection for various mean particle diameters. The theoretical curves in are for a log normal distribution of particle sizes with a 0.05 standard deviation. Log normal distributions of particle sizes have been shown to be typical in internal combustion engine exhaust emissions. The theoretical curves are relatively unaffected by the width of the particle distribution i.e. standard deviations larger than 0.05 .

The theoretical curves in show that using smaller numbers of detectors may provide a good estimate of particulate matter size. For example three detectors placed at scattering angles of about 20 about 35 and about 70 may allow a relatively good estimation of particulate matter size distributions in an engine exhaust emission for a laser wavelength of 1064 nm and particulate matter with a refractive index of soot. Using these three angles may provide a good cross section of scattering curves shown in . Other small numbers of detectors e.g. 4 or 5 may also be used to provide an estimate of particulate matter size distributions. The number of detectors needed and or the angles of detection may vary depending on factors such as but not limited to a selected laser wavelength types of particles being measured a desired sensitivity of the measurement or a desired accuracy in particle size measurement.

The mass concentration of particulate matter in an exhaust emission may be correlated with the absolute intensity of the scattered light i.e. the absolute intensity of scattered light at all detection angles . Calibration for the variation of absolute intensity of the scattered light with mass concentration of particulate matter may be done using another technique that measures mass concentration. For example values of the absolute intensity of scattered light may be correlated to values of mass concentration measured with another device simultaneously.

Light source may be coupled to the perimeter of cylinder section . Light source may be a laser. Light source may be capable of producing light at a selected wavelength e.g. 1064 nm or any other suitable wavelength or in a range of wavelengths e.g. between about 400 nm and 2 m . The wavelength of light source may be selected based on for example an expected size distribution of particulate matter in cylinder section . In an embodiment light source is a diode laser. Generally light source is a compact durable light source that is operable in a field testing environment.

One or more detectors may be coupled to the perimeter of cylinder section . In certain embodiments three or more detectors are coupled to the perimeter of cylinder section . In one embodiment as shown in three detectors are coupled to the perimeter of cylinder section . The number of detectors may be selected based upon factors such as but not limited to a particle size detection range of sensor or a desired sensitivity of the sensor.

In an embodiment detectors are placed at various selected scattering angles from light source . The scattering angles may be selected to provide a relatively good estimate of particulate matter size based upon scattering profiles for a log normal particulate matter size distribution. For example the scattering angles may be selected based on the theoretical Mie scattering profiles depicted in . The scattering profiles may be dependent on such factors as the wavelength of light source the index of refraction of particulate matter detected by sensor and or the distribution pattern e.g. the type of distribution e.g. log normal the width of the distribution or the standard deviation of the distribution of particulate matter sizes. Various theoretical scattering profiles may be generated for varying attributes of a detection system or combustion engine and the scattering angles of detectors may be chosen accordingly. In an embodiment three detectors may be placed at angles of about 20 about 35 and about 70 from light source .

Detectors may include any type of detector that measures light intensity at a wavelength of light source or in the range of wavelengths of the light source. In certain embodiments detectors may include photodiodes avalanche photodiodes and or photomultipliers.

In some embodiments more than one light source may be used in sensor . Multiple light sources may be used to determine particulate matter size distributions over a wider range of size distributions. Multiple light sources may be placed at various angles along the perimeter of cylinder section . Detectors could be used for one light source or more than one light source depending on the scattering angle of the detectors and or the sensitivity of the detectors to each wavelength of light.

In an embodiment beam dump may be coupled to the perimeter of cylinder section substantially 180 from light source . Beam dump may be used to collect extraneous light in cylinder section and to inhibit multiple scattering in cylinder section . In certain embodiments beam dump may be a light power meter e.g. a laser power meter used to measure light attenuation in cylinder section . The measurement of light attenuation in cylinder section may be used to determine light absorption by particles in the cylinder section.

Light source detectors and beam dump may be aligned in a single plane around the perimeter of cylinder section . Light source detectors and beam dump are typically arranged to provide maximum sensitivity for light detection with minimal back scattering of light in cylinder section . Holes may be formed in cylinder section to allow light to propagate out of light source and into detectors and beam dump . Holes may be rectangular or circular shaped holes formed in cylinder section . Holes may have a cross sectional area selected to allow the wavelength or range of wavelengths of light from light source to propagate in the holes.

In some embodiments conduits e.g. tubes may be coupled to holes and extended into cylinder section . The conduits may be coupled to holes for detectors . The conduits may be extended into cylinder section to minimize attenuation of light scattering from particles in the cylinder section.

Electronics system may be coupled to sensor . Electronics system may be coupled to sensor with wires . Wires may include power and or signal wires for light source and detectors . Electronics system may include electronics to power light source and detectors and electronics to obtain and process data from detectors . In some embodiments the electronics to power light source the electronics to power detectors and the electronics to obtain and process data from detectors may be located in two or more different electronics systems.

In an embodiment electronics system is located in vehicle . In other embodiments electronics system may be located external to vehicle . For example electronics system may be located on an apparatus e.g. a transportable apparatus such as a cart that may be moved from one vehicle to another and or located between two or more vehicles. An electronics system located on such an apparatus may be coupled to more than one sensor either consecutively or simultaneously.

Electronics system may be used to process data from detectors and characterize particulate matter emissions from the engine of vehicle . This data may be used to adjust operating parameters of the engine to control emissions e.g. reduce the mass concentration and or the particulate matter size from vehicle . In an embodiment electronics system may be used to characterize particulate matter emissions from the engine of vehicle during actual use of the engine. Operating parameters e.g. fuel injection timing injection pressure an engine speed load relationship etc. of the engine may be modified based on the characterization of particulate matter emissions provided by sensor and electronics system . The operating parameters may be modified to calibrate the engine of vehicle . In certain embodiments the operating parameters are modified to comply with emission requirements e.g. government environmental emission regulations or guidelines .

In an embodiment sensor and electronics system may continuously monitor particulate matter emissions from vehicle . Continuous monitoring of particulate matter emissions may allow for real time and or time resolved measurement of the particulate matter mass concentration and particulate matter size distribution in the field i.e. on board vehicle . Time resolved measurement may allow for detection of trends in the particulate matter mass concentration and or size distribution. In other embodiments the particulate matter mass concentration and or size distribution may be measured on a non time resolved basis if so desired. Sensor and electronics system may provide a simple compact low cost method for real time monitoring of particulate matter mass concentrations and size distributions in the emissions of a vehicle.

In some embodiments a gas e.g. air may be allowed to flow along optical surfaces in cylinder section . The flow of gas may keep the optical surfaces substantially free of particulate matter contamination. In an embodiment the gas may be allowed to flow into through holes of cylinder section . In certain embodiments a compressor may be used to provide the flow of gas. The compressor may be small and compact so that the compressor may be coupled to the perimeter of cylinder section .

Further modifications and alternative embodiments of various aspects of the invention may be apparent to those skilled in the art in view of this description. Accordingly this description is to be construed as illustrative only and is for the purpose of teaching those skilled in the art the general manner of carrying out the invention. It is to be understood that the forms of the invention shown and described herein are to be taken as the presently preferred embodiments. Elements and materials may be substituted for those illustrated and described herein parts and processes may be reversed and certain features of the invention may be utilized independently all as would be apparent to one skilled in the art after having the benefit of this description of the invention. Changes may be made in the elements described herein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as described in the following claims.

