---

title: Presenting an alternative product package offer from a web vendor
abstract: The server system, communicatively connected to multiple client systems via a network, facilitates at least one web page for download to the client systems, where the web page offers multiple products for purchase. Responsive to the server system detecting a particular product selection from a particular client system, the server system downloads to the particular client system a first package offer of the client selected product and at least one second product from among at least one vendor selected product at a first price at a first discounted rate for purchase of both the client selected particular product and the at least one second product. In addition, the server system includes a selectable option for replacing the first package offer in the download of the first package offer. Responsive to detecting, at the server system a user selection of the selectable option from the particular client system, the server system creates at least one alternative product package offer for purchase of both the client selected product and at least one third product from among a different set of vendor selected products. The server system downloads the alternative product package offer to the client system for selection for purchase by the user, wherein the user is enabled to select a final product package including the client selected product and at least one third product form the different set of vendor selected products at a total price having a final discounted rate.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07672875&OS=07672875&RS=07672875
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 07672875
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050606
---
The present invention relates in general to improved electronic commerce and in particular to a web vendor offering alternative product package offers. Still more particularly the present invention relates to enabling a user responsive to initially offering the user a package with a user selected product and a vendor selected additional product at a price discounted by a rate for purchase via a web site a selectable option to receive an alternative package offer with the user selected product and an alternative additional product at a price discounted also discounted by a rate for purchase.

Network environments such as the Internet provide the infrastructure for vendors to connect with customers all over the world. In particular electronic commerce continues to expand as more and more vendors provide product offerings on line and more and more customers are able to access the Internet.

Web vendors may organize web storefronts in many different ways. Many web vendors will have a main web page that represents the entry point to the store and organizes the available products into a searchable directory. A main web page may include promotions for certain items or advertisements for a sale on a selection of items.

Many web vendors will organize multiple selectable products on a single page and responsive to a user selection of one of the products will then open a product specific web page. A product specific web page may show a more detailed description of the product with specifications photos customer reviews and other information. In addition a selectable button to add the product to a shopping cart or to purchase the product immediately may be offered on the product specific page.

One of the disadvantages of a web based storefront is that because products are typically described on product specific web pages it is more difficult for a web vendor to offer the same types of deals to entice customers to purchase multiple products or groups of products as are provided in a physical store front. In an effort to persuade customers to purchase more products or groupings of products some web vendors have pre specified a single pairing of products to be offered to customers at a discounted price and only show the paired product offering to the user when the user selects to access the product specific web page of one of the products in the pair.

The disadvantage of pre specified pairings is that the offering is static and only allows for the user to select or reject the offer but not to access other special offers with the first selected product and the discount. A user may already have the other item in the pair may not want the other item in the pair or may not find the discount sufficient to want to purchase the other product.

In view of the foregoing it would be advantageous to provide a method system and program for triggering alternative product pair offerings and in particular for placing a selectable option on a web page to enable a user to select to trigger an alternative product package offering with an alternative product but a similar discount when a pre specified pairing or other deal is already made by a web vendor.

Therefore the present invention provides for improved electronic commerce and in particular provides an improved method system and program for a web vendor offering alternative product package offers. Still more particularly the present invention provides a method system and program for enabling a user responsive to initially offering the user a package with a user selected product and a vendor selected additional product at a price discounted by a rate for purchase via a web site a selectable option to receive an alternative package offer with the user selected product and an alternative additional product at a price also discounted by a rate for purchase.

In one embodiment at least one server system is communicatively connected to multiple client systems via a network. The server system facilitates downloading at least one web page to the client systems where the web page offers multiple products for purchase. Responsive to the server system receiving a particular product selection from a particular client system the server system downloads a first package offer of the client selected product and at least one second product from among at least one vendor selected product at a first price at a first discounted rate for purchase of both the client selected particular product and the at least one second product. In addition the server system includes a selectable option for replacing the first package offer in the download of the first package offer. Responsive to detecting at the server system a user selection of the selectable option from the particular client system the server system creates at least one alternative product package offer for purchase of both the client selected product and at least one third product from among a different set of vendor selected products. The server system downloads the alternative product package offer to the client system for selection for purchase by the user wherein the user is enabled to select a final product package including the client selected product and at least one third product form the different set of vendor selected products at a total price having a final discounted rate.

The server system may detect user selection of the particular product from multiple user inputs including but not limited to the user selecting to view a description of the particular product the user selecting to purchase the particular product the user selecting the particular product from an on line advertisement and the user entering a search term for the particular product. Additionally when a user returns to a web page specified for a particular product the server system may detect user selection of the particular product.

A web page specification may specify the first package offer and the selectable option. In another embodiment a web page specification may specify the first package offer and the server system upon detecting a request for the web page inserts the selectable option into the web page for download with the first package offer. Further a server may detect a user selection of the particular product and create the first package offer and insert the first package offer with the selectable option into a web page accessed responsive to the user selection of the particular product.

In creating the alternative product package offer the server system may first determine the different set of vendor selected products to offer to the user for selection as the third product. The server system downloads the different set of vendor selected products to the user and responsive to a user selection of at least one of the different set of vendor selected products the server system creates the alternative product package offer with the client selected product and the user selection from among the different set of vendor selected products.

In addition in creating the alternative product package offer the server system may access offer rules that specify the price ranges product categories and other criteria for selecting the third product. Offer rules may include variables that are dependent upon current web site statistics customer history product history and other accessible information.

Referring now to the drawings and in particular to there is depicted one embodiment of a computing system through which the present method system and program may be implemented. The invention may be executed in a variety of systems including a variety of computing systems and electronic devices.

Computer system includes a bus or other communication device for communicating information within computer system and at least one processing device such as processor coupled to bus for processing program code and data. Bus may include low latency and higher latency paths that are connected by bridges and adapters and controlled within computer system by multiple bus controllers. Processor may be a general purpose processor such as IBM s PowerPC PowerPC is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation processor. When implemented as a server system computer system typically includes multiple processors designed to improve network servicing power.

Processor is coupled directly or indirectly through bus to memory elements. During normal operation processor processes data under the control of program code accessed from the memory elements. Memory elements can include local memory employed during actual execution of the program code such as random access memory RAM bulk storage such as mass storage device and cache memories not depicted which provide temporary storage of at least some program code to reduce the number of times code must be retrieved from bulk storage during execution. In one example the program code accessible in RAM is an operating system and application software . Operating system includes program code that facilitates for example a graphical user interface GUI via a display and other output interfaces.

The invention can take the form of an entirely hardware embodiment an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment containing both hardware and software elements. In a preferred embodiment the invention is implemented in software which includes but is not limited to firmware resident software microcode etc. For example in one embodiment operating system and or application software contains program code that when executed on processor carry out the operations depicted in the flow diagrams and flowcharts of and other operations described herein. Alternatively the steps of the present invention might be performed by specific hardware components that contain hardwired logic for performing the steps or by any combination of programmed computer components and custom hardware components. Additionally RAM may include an application programming interface API or other interface that provides extensions to enable application developers to develop application software that extend the functionality of operating system .

In addition the invention can take the form of a computer program product accessible from a computer usable or computer readable medium providing computer readable program code for use by or in connection with computer system or any instruction execution system. For purposes of this description a computer usable or computer readable medium can be any apparatus that can contain store communicate propagate or transport the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device. In one example a computer usable or computer readable medium is any apparatus that participates in providing program code to processor or other components of computer system for execution.

Such a medium may take many forms including but not limited to electronic magnetic optical electromagnetic infrared or semiconductor system or apparatus or device or a propagation medium. Examples of a computer readable medium include but are not limited to a semiconductor or solid state memory magnetic tape a flexible disk a hard disk a removable computer diskette random access memory RAM read only memory ROM punch cards or any other physical medium with patterns of holes a rigid magnetic disk and an optical disk. Current examples of optical disks include a compact disc ROM CD ROM a compact disc read write CD R W and a digital video disc DVD . In another example a computer readable medium may include mass storage device which as depicted is an internal component of computer system but may be provided as a device external to computer system .

A communication interface including network adapters may also be coupled to the system to enable computer system to become coupled to other computer systems such as server or client remote printers or storage devices through intervening private or public networks. Network adapters within communication interface may include but are not limited to modems cable modems and Ethernet cards.

In particular communication interface enables coupling to other devices through a network link to a network . For example a local area network LAN wide area network WAN or an Internet Service Provider ISP may facilitate network link . Network link may provide wired and or wireless network communications to one or more networks such as network . Network may refer to the worldwide collection of networks and gateways that use a particular protocol such as Transmission Control Protocol TCP and Internet Protocol IP to communicate with one another.

In general network link and network both use electrical electromagnetic or optical signals that carry digital data streams. The signals through the various networks and the signals on network link and through communication interface which carry the digital data to and from computer system are examples of forms of carrier waves transporting the information. In one example a remote computer such as server transfers the program code for the invention to requesting computer system by way of data signals embodied in a carrier wave or other propagation medium via a network link to a communications interface coupled to bus .

When implemented as a server system computer system typically includes multiple communication interfaces accessible via multiple peripheral component interconnect PCI bus bridges connected to an input output controller. In this manner computer system allows connections to multiple network computers such as client via network .

In addition computer system typically includes multiple peripheral components e.g. input output devices that facilitate communication. These peripheral components are coupled to computer system either directly or indirectly through connections to multiple input output I O controllers adapters and expansion slots coupled to one of the multiple levels of bus . For example an audio output device and audio input device are connectively enabled on bus for controlling audio outputs and inputs. A display device is also connectively enabled on bus for providing visual tactile or other graphical representation formats and a cursor control device is connectively enabled on bus for controlling the location of a pointer within display device . A keyboard is connectively enabled on bus as an interface for user inputs to computer system . In alternate embodiments of the present invention additional input and output peripheral components may be added.

Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the hardware depicted in may vary. Furthermore those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the depicted example is not meant to imply architectural limitations with respect to the present invention.

With reference now to a block diagram depicts a network environment for supporting electronic commerce in accordance with the method system and program of the present invention. As illustrated a distributed network is a network of multiple computer systems such as computer system through which web pages are accessed and downloaded. In alternate embodiments distributed network may include other embodiments of computing systems enabled to communicate with one another via a connection.

In the embodiment distributed network includes network which is the medium used to provide communications links between various devices and computer connected together within distributed network . Network may include permanent connections such as wire or fiber optics cables and temporary connections made through telephone connections and wireless transmission connections for example.

In particular in the embodiment distributed network includes at least one server such as web server and at least one client such as client systems and communicatively connected via network . It will be understood that each of web server and client systems and may be distributed in geographically disparate locations throughout heterogeneous types of computer systems operating within disparate local networks. In addition it will be understood that web server may represent a single server system a cluster of server systems a grid of server systems or other combination of systems providing access to a particular web page or multiple web pages. In addition it will be understood that distributed network may include additional servers clients and other devices not shown.

Web server and client systems and may communicate within distributed network in conformance with different network environment architectures. In the embodiment depicted distributed network conforms to a client server network architecture where web server performs as a server for providing web services to client system and client system responsive to requests for web services from client system and client system . In facilitating the client server environment in one example network represents the worldwide collection of networks and gateways that use the TCP IP suite of protocols to communicate with one another. In another example network is implemented as an intranet a local area network LAN or a wide area network WAN . It will be understood that distributed network may conform to other network environments or a combination of multiple types of network environments. Further it will be understood that in the client server environment any of client systems and may perform as a server if providing web services to another computer system via network . Additionally it will be understood that distributed network may support peer to peer network communications between client system and client system where one client system distributes a web page to another client system.

Although not depicted in following the description of computing system in general each of web server and client systems and includes at least one processor and memory for supporting an operating system APIs and application programs. In addition web server may include middleware applications loaded into memory that support server functions where the middleware applications may include for example IBM s Websphere or NetFinity Websphere and NetFinity are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation .

A web site controller of web server maintains separate communications with and downloads web pages and other data from web page files to client systems and responsive to requests and communications received from client systems and . In particular web page files include at least one web page stored in or across at least one data storage system or memory accessible to web server . In particular a web page is a document consisting of a particular web protocol based file with associated files for graphics embedded audio and video players and scripts in a particular directory such as web page files on a particular server system such as web server . A web page may be identified and requested by a uniform resource locator URL where the URL specifies the protocol to be used in accessing the web page and the name of the web server on which the web page resides e.g. web server is registered with network through a particular URL in the example . In addition a web page may include selectable links to other web pages located on the same web server or another web server.

In one embodiment web site controller downloads web pages that include selectable purchasable products from one or more electronic web vendors. In particular selectable purchasable products may be represented in multiple forms including but not limited to an electronic advertisement a search result listing an auction result listing a product directory listing a product description listing and other selectable output forms. Web site controller may control both the creation of dynamic web pages with purchasable product offerings for download to client systems and and the management of purchase requests for purchasable products as received from client systems and . Further web site controller may be controlled by the actual product vendor or an entity acting on behalf of the actual product vendor.

According to an advantage web server also includes an offer controller . Offer controller controls the creation and management of package offers to users at client systems and . In particular package offers may include a general package offer of a user selected product and a vendor selected additional product at a price discounted by a particular discount rate and an alternative product package offer of the user selected product and an alternative additional product at a total price discounted by a final discount rate.

In one embodiment the coding for a web page that includes a selectable representation of a purchasable product includes a pre specified general package offer for the purchase of the purchasable product and an additional product at a price discounted by a particular discount rate. Offer controller detects the pre specified general package offer and creates a selectable option button that is dynamically added to the web page. If a user selects the selectable option button then offer controller controls the creation and presentation of an alternative product package offer with the user selected purchasable product and at least one alternative product at a price discounted by the discount rate.

In another embodiment the coding for a web page may trigger offer controller to access a pre specified general package offer for the purchasable product or to create a general package offer with the selectable option of an alternative product package offer. Responsive to a user access to the web page offer controller controls presentation of the general package offer with the selectable option of an alternative product package offer within the web page downloaded by web site controller .

In yet another embodiment offer controller monitors user inputs communicated from client systems and to web server for the indication of a selection of a purchasable product by the user. In particular a selection may include the user selecting an electronic advertisement for the purchasable product a user entering a search term for the purchasable product a user selecting to view a description of a purchasable product and other selections that indicate user interest in a particular purchasable product. Upon detection of a selection of a purchasable product by the user offer controller controls the creation and presentation of a general package offer with a selectable option for an alternative product package offer. In particular it is important to note that while web site controller and offer controller are depicted as located within a single web server web site controller and offer controller may be located in physically disparate web servers and may be operated by disparate web vendors. Further it is important to note that offer controller may create and present general package offers and alternative product purchase offers that include products from a single or multiple vendors controlled by a single or different web site controllers and are displayed within a web page window independent of the vendor or vendors actually selling the products. Thus offer controller may act as a broker or distributor for other web vendors in the creation and presentation of general package offers and alternative product package offers.

Client systems and include software that facilitates communication with web server . In particular in the example client systems and include web browsers and respectively where a web browser is application software that facilitates web page access requests and the display of accessed web pages through a browser interface or for example. In one example browser interface or includes a browser window displayed within a GUI. In another example browser interface or may include an audio interface where the contents of a web page are output in an audible format. A browser interface such as browser interface or may be supported by an operating system not depicted and controlled by web browser or for example. It will be understood that web browsers and may be integrated within an operating system such as operating system or other application software or may function as stand alone application software. In addition it will be understood that browser interfaces and may be incorporated within a user interface consisting of the peripherals accessible to each client system.

In general web browsers and receive web page downloads from web server and facilitate the display of the web pages as downloaded through browser interfaces and . Web pages may include representations of purchasable products that when selected by a user via browser interface or trigger web browsers and respectively to communicate selections of purchasable products to web server . In addition web pages may include offers to purchase products general package offers to purchase a user selected purchasable product and a vendor selected additional product selectable options to receive an alternative product package offer and alternative product package offers.

In another embodiment a web browser such as web browser may detect the presentation of a general package offer of a user selected purchasable product and an additional vendor selected product at a discounted price in a web page download. Responsive to detecting the presentation of the general package offer web browser may add a selectable button or trigger a selectable menu option for a user to select to request an alternative product package offer from the web vendor. Then responsive to a user selection of the option or a browser setting to automatically select the option web browser communicates a request to web server to trigger offer controller to return an alternative product package offer if available.

With reference now to a block diagram depicts components of an offer controller in accordance with the method system and program of the present invention. As illustrated offer controller includes a general package offer controller and an alternative package offer controller .

General package offer controller controls the creation and presentation of general package offers made to a user of products included in product products database based on rules such as offer rules . In one embodiment general package offer controller is triggered to create a general package offer when a user selects a product. A user selection of a product may include but is not limited to a user selection to purchase a product a user selection to view a description of a product a user selection of an electronic ad featuring a product and a user entry of a search term for a product or range of products. General package offer controller creates a general package offer that includes the user selected product and at least one additional vendor selected product at a discounted price. Offer rules may designate the type of discounting and the type of additional product to be included in the general package offer. For example if a user selects to view a description of a book by a particular author then offer rules may specify that a package offer with the selected book and another book by that author can be offered for a price discounted by 10 . Alternatively offer rules may designate the specific product and the specific discount to be included in the general package offer. Further general package offer controller need not create a general package offer for one to be made through a web page a web page may include a general package offer of the user selected product and an additional product at a discounted price within the web page file.

According to an advantage a web page for a user selected product may include a selectable option with a general package offer for the user to select an alternative product for the offer. Alternatively according to an advantage alternative package offer controller controls the creation and the presentation of a selectable option for a user to select to trigger the creation and presentation of an alternative product package offer by alternative package offer controller . The selectable option for an alternative product package offer may be included within an existing web page as a selectable button or within a new web page window for example.

Once a user selects to receive an alternative product package offer alternative package offer controller controls the creation and presentation of alternative product package offers made to a user. It will be understood that an existing vendor web page may be adapted to include the alternative product package offers or that additional windows may be opened in a user interface to display the alternative product package offers.

In one embodiment alternative package offer controller creates a single alternative product package offer that includes the user selected product and a vendor selected alternative additional product selected according to offer rules . For example where a general package offer includes a compact disc for a particular artist as selected by the user and another compact disc by the same artist the alternative product package offer may include an alternative product of another alternate compact disc by the same artist.

In another embodiment alternative package offer controller creates multiple alternative product package offers according to offer rules . For example where the general package offer includes the compact disc for a particular artist as selected by the user multiple alternative product package offers may be created where alternative additional products include additional compact discs by the same artist compact discs by artists in the same genre compact discs by artists in the same genre that are from the overstock inventory and a DVD video from the same artist.

Further alternative package offer controller may create an alternative product package offer where the user first selects the alternative additional product from among a constrained selection of available alternative products according to offer rules and then alternative package offer controller creates and presents the alternative product package offering with the initial user selected product and the alternative user selected product at a price discounted by the discount rate. For example the alternative additional product may be constrained to any product offered by the web vendor with a price that is between 10 and 15 wherein alternative package offer controller first performs a search for all products that meet the price range requirement and presents the search products to the user for selection of an alternative additional product for the alternative product package offer.

With reference now to a block diagram illustrates examples of types of offer rules in accordance with the method system and program of the present invention. It will be understood that offer rules may include multiple types of rules grouped according to multiple categories in addition to those groupings depicted in the example.

Offer rules may include rules for defining package offers generally. For example depicts examples of the basic types of offer rules . First as depicted at reference numeral the rule when general package offer controller creates a general package offer requires the offer to include a user selected product and a vendor selected additional product with a price discounted by a particular discount rate. It is important to note that general package offer controller may create a general package offer that includes a pre specified pairing or that the coding for a web page may include a pre specified offering that is detected by alternative package offer controller as a general package offer according to the offer rules.

The rule when alternative package offer controller creates an alternative product package offer as illustrated at reference numeral requires the offer to include the user selected product from the general product offer package with an alternative additional product at a price discounted by the discount rate from the general product package offer. Other rules may specify the discount rate and which products may be selected as an alternative additional product for the alternative product package offer. In addition it is important to note that the alternative additional product may include a grouping of alternative products from a single or multiple vendors and that the discount rate may be normalized or adjusted to reflect variations between the vendor selected additional product and the alternative additional product. Further it is important to note that other basic structures may be implemented for the general package offer and the alternative product package offer. Additionally it is important to note that the product or set of products available for selection as the alternative additional product may be the same set of products or a different set of products from the product or set of products specified for the general package offer.

In addition as illustrated in offer rules may include vendor specific rules as illustrated at reference numeral . For example one web vendor may specify a discount rate of 5 while a second web vendor specifies a discount rate of 4.5 . In particular offer controller may control general and alternative package offers for a single or multiple web vendors at a single web site or across multiple web sites. For example a search engine web site may enable offer controller to detect product search terms create a general package offer from a single or multiple web vendors with the user selected search term product and an additional product and add the general package offers and a selectable option for an alternative product package offer to the search results display. In another example an electronic auction web site may enable offer controller to detect product search terms detect vendors with the user selected product who also offer other products create a general package offer for single or multiple web vendors auctioning the user selected product and offer a selectable option for an alternative product package offer to the auction products results display.

Further as illustrated in offer rules may include web site traffic based rules as illustrated at reference numeral . For example a discount rate used in creating a general package offer or alternative product package offer may vary based on web site traffic based rules that set the current discount rates. In another example the vendor selected additional product or alternative additional products available for package offers may vary based on web site traffic based rules. Web site traffic based rules may include factors such as number of visits per hour actual purchases per hour number of searches per hour and other current web site statistics.

Offer rules may also include customer based rules as illustrated at reference numeral . In one example customer based rules may specify that a customer with a particular threshold of previous purchases receives a first discount rate and a customer with a second threshold of previous purchases receives a second discount rate. Offer controller may access customer information from customer database that includes customer identifiers billing and sales profiles previous purchase history and other information gathered information about a customer. Additionally offer controller may access customer information from cookies located locally at a customer computer or from customer data gathering service providers.

In addition offer rules may include product based rules as illustrated at reference numeral . In one example product based rules specify which product or products listed in product database can be selected as an alternative additional product for a particular user selected product. In particular a product based rule may specify a category of products or a grouping of products available as an alternative product. Product database includes product identifiers categories groupings descriptions prices vendors shipping specifications and other product related information. In one example a product based rule may specify that if the user selected product is a compact disk then the alternative additional product must be a book or a compact disk. In another example a product based rule may specify that if a user selects an alternative product package offer then a product that is considered overstock is to be offered.

Further offer rules may include price based rules as illustrated at reference numeral . Price based rules may specify the pricing constraints for the selection of an alternative additional product. For example a price based rule may allow selection of any product in inventory as the alternative additional product as long as the price of the product is within 5 of the price of the vendor selected additional product. In another example a price based rule may specify that a user may select any other product but that the discount rate will be adjusted by some factor of the difference between the price of the vendor selected additional product and the alternative additional product. For example if the vendor selected additional product costs 5 and the user selects an alternative additional product that costs 1000 then the original discount rate of 10 may be adjusted to compensate for the difference is cost.

Referring now to an illustrative diagram depicts a product selection page for a particular web vendor. As illustrated a window illustrates a web page for a web vendor with multiple products. The web page illustrated in window includes multiple selectable product buttons labeled product 1 product 2 product 3 product 4 and product 5 under the category of Books written by Author A . For purposes of description the web vendor specifies the display of available products and the selection process for viewing product descriptions or selecting to purchase products. Therefore it will be understood that the web page illustrated in window merely shows one example of a web vendor displaying selectable products but that other methods for displaying selectable products may be implemented. Further it will be understood that selectable products from multiple web vendors may be displayed in a single web page window.

As illustrated a user indicates a selection from among the selectable product buttons by positioning cursor over the product button labeled product 1 and entering an additional input. Responsive to a user selection of a particular product general package offer controller creates a general package offer with product 1 and a vendor selected product with a selectable option for an alternative product package offer.

With reference now to an illustrative diagram depicts a general package offer with a selectable option for an alternative product package offer. As depicted responsive to the user selection of product 1 in window the web page illustrated in window is downloaded with a picture and description of product 1 as illustrated at reference numeral and a selectable button for purchase of product 1 for 10.00 as illustrated at reference numeral .

In addition the web page illustrated in window displays a general package offer as illustrated at reference numeral . The general package offer illustrated at reference numeral includes product 1 and product 2 at a price discounted by a discount rate of 10 . Additionally the web page illustrated in window displays a selectable package offer button the selection of which triggers a purchase of the general package offer. Further the web page illustrated in window displays a selectable option button the selection of which triggers the creation of an alternative product package offer. In the example the user indicates a selection of selectable option button through the positioning of cursor and entry of an additional input such as depressing a button on a mouse.

Referring now to an illustrative diagram depicts an alternative package selection window with multiple alternative product package offers. In the example responsive to a user selection of selectable option button in the web page illustrated in window alternative package offer controller creates multiple alternative product package offers and triggers an additional window for display of the alternative product package offers. In an alternate embodiment the multiple alternative product package offers may be displayed within an existing web page window such as window or other browser output interfaces. In addition in an alternate embodiment only one of the multiple available alternative product package offers may be offered at a time or a user may be provided the option to first select from among multiple products available as alternative products and then offer a package with the selected alternative product.

In the example alternative package selection window includes a first alternative offer illustrated at reference numeral of product 1 and product 3 at a price discounted by the discount rate of 10 . A second alternative offer depicted at reference numeral includes product 1 product 4 and product 5 at a price discounted by the discount rate of 10 . A third alternative offer illustrated at reference numeral includes product 1 and a book by a related author that costs 10.00 for a price discounted by the discount rate of 10 . In one example an additional offer may be made to the user to select the exact book by the related offer to include in the alternative offer responsive to a user selection of the offer as illustrated by the positioning of cursor . A fourth alternative offer depicted at reference numeral includes product 1 and a book from overstock priced at 10.00 for a price discounted by the discount rate of 10 . In one example a specific book from the overstock category of books may be specified in the offer or a user may be provided the option to select from books listed in the overstock category of books within the particular price range. A fifth alternative offer illustrated at reference numeral includes an option to selection additional package products. Responsive to a user selection of the fifth alternative offer alternative package offer controller may select a list of other alternative products to offer for the user selection as part of an alternative package offer.

With reference now to a flow diagram depicts the communication between a client system accessing a server system that controls product package offers made to the user at the client system. As illustrated at reference numeral at client system web browser facilitates the display of a particular web vendor s product web page. A user at client system selects a particular product from the vendor s web page as illustrated at reference numeral . Client system communicates the user selection of the particular product to server as illustrated at reference numeral . Server detects the selection of the particular product and web site controller accesses a web page for the particular product as illustrated at reference numeral and offer controller creates a first general product package offer with the user selected product and a second product at a price discounted by a particular rate as depicted at reference numeral . Offer controller may select the second product and the particular rate for discounting the price according to offer rules.

Server downloads the web site with the first product package offer to client system as illustrated at reference numeral . Web browser at client system displays the downloaded web page with selectable option as illustrated at reference numeral . A user at client system selects the selectable option for an alternative product package offer as depicted at reference numeral and client system communicates the user selection to server as illustrated at reference numeral .

Server responsive to receiving the communication of the user request for an alternative package offer triggers offer controller to create alternative package offers with the user selected product as illustrated at reference numeral . Server downloads the alternative package offers to client system as illustrated at reference numeral . In addition to downloading alternative package offers server may download an offer for the user to select specific alternative package products. Web browser controls the display of the alternative package offers and the offer to select specific products either in the same web page as the previous offers or within a separate window. In the example the user at client system selects the offer to select other package products rather than selecting from one of the alternative package offers as illustrated at reference numeral and client system communicates the selection of the offer to server as illustrated at reference numeral . Alternatively the user at client system may select to purchase one of the alternative package offers triggering server to initiate a purchase process.

Server responsive to receiving the communication of the user request to select from specific alternative products triggers offer controller to access additional specific package products as illustrated at reference numeral and downloads the additional alternative products for user selection as illustrated at reference numeral . Web browser responsive to receiving the download of alternative products for user selection displays the alternative products as illustrated at reference numeral . In one example a separate window is opened to display the selectable alternative products. The user at client system selects one of the alternative products as illustrated at reference numeral and client system communicates the user selection to server as illustrated at reference numeral . Server upon receipt of the alternative product selection triggers offer controller to create an alternative product package offer with the user selected alternative product as illustrated at reference numeral and downloads the offers to client system as illustrated at reference numeral . Web browser displays the alternative package offer as illustrated at reference numeral .

It is important to note that throughout the illustrated flow diagram a user may select to purchase the current offer rather than selecting a next option to continue defining the alternative offer. Further it is important to note that each offer presented to a user may include additional restrictions. For example a user may be given the option to save an offer for later purchase or an offer may include an expiration time.

With reference now to there is depicted a high level logic flowchart of a process and program for a server controlling package offers made to a user at a client system communicatively connected to the server in accordance with the method system and program of the present invention.

As illustrated the process starts at block and thereafter proceeds to block . Block depicts a determination whether the server system detects a user selection of a particular product. The server system may detect a user selection of a particular product from multiple types of communications from a client system including but not limited to a user selection to view a description of the particular product a user selection to purchase the particular product a user selection of an advertisement for the particular product or a user entry of a search term for a particular product. A user selection of a particular product may be inferred where a user indicated interest in a particular product during a previous visit to the web site and the user has returned again to the web site. It will be understood that additional inputs by a user may indicate user interest and thus user selection of the particular product.

At block if the server system does not detect a user selection of a particular product then the process passes to block . Block depicts a determination whether the server system detects access to a web page with a deal or offer that matches the general package offer rule. In particular the offer rules may specify a general package offer rule such as the general rule illustrated at reference numeral in for a general package offer. If the server system does not detect access to a web page with an offer that matches the general package offer rule then the process returns to block . Otherwise if the server system detects access to a web page with an offer that matches the general package offer rule then the process passes to block .

Otherwise returning to block if the server system detects a user selection of a particular product then the process passes to block . Block illustrates the server system creating a general package offer of the user selected product and a vendor selected additional product with a price discounted at a particular rate and the process passes to block . Alternatively a web page may specify the vendor selected additional product and rate for discounting the price.

Block depicts the server system sending the general package offer to the client system with a selectable option for an alternative product package offer and the process passes to block . In particular the selectable option for an alternative product package offer may include an offering to view multiple variations of alternative product package offerings including but not limited to a single alternative product package offer multiple alternative product package offers or a selection of alternative products that may be combined with the user selected product into an alternative product package offer.

Block illustrates a determination whether the server system detects a user selection of the selectable option for an alternative package product offer. The server system may detect a user selection of the selectable option from a communication from the client system. At block if the server system does not detect a user selection of the selectable option then the process ends. In particular if the server system detects a user selection to purchase the product alone or one of the product package offers presented to the user then the server system may infer that it does not detect a user selection of the selectable option and the process ends. Otherwise at block if the server system detects a user selection of the selectable option then the process passes to block . Block depicts the server system creating at least one alternative product package offer for purchase by the user where the alternative product package offer includes the user selected product and an alternative product at a price discounted by the particular rate. Additionally creating at least one alternative product package offer may include sending the user a selection of available products for combination with the user selected product in an alternative product offer detecting the user selection of a particular alternative product and creating the alternative product package offer with the original user selected product and the user selected alternative product. Next block illustrates the server system sending the alternative product package offer to the client system with a selectable option for an alternative package offer and the process passes to block .

While the invention has been particularly shown and described with reference to a preferred embodiment it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes in form and detail may be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

