---

title: System and method for managing sleep disorders
abstract: The present invention provides a method for managing a patient having a sleep disorder, e.g. sleep apnea, snoring, sleep bruxism, upper airway resistance syndrome, etc. The method comprises monitoring physiological information from the patient, converting the physiological information to digital data, storing the digital data in a digital memory, identifying and characterizing epochs based on the digital data, and storing the identifying and characterizing information of the epochs in a digital memory. The method further comprises organizing the epochs according to an organization function that considers at least characterization information of the epochs, selecting an epoch based on the organizing of the epochs, and generating sound derived from the stored digital data associated with the selected epoch such that the patient hears the sound. In a specific embodiment, the physiological information monitored may include sound, e.g. respiratory sound emanating from the trachea, and/or tooth-grinding sounds.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08226569&OS=08226569&RS=08226569
owner: 
number: 08226569
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050527
---
This application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent No. 60 574 916 filed May 26 2004 commonly assigned and hereby incorporated by reference for all purposes.

The present invention generally relates to health related disorders. More particularly the invention provides a method and apparatus for managing behaviors related to sleep disorders. Merely by way of example the invention is applied using digital hardware and software.

Sleep apnea is a common disorder associated with severe adverse health consequences in some patients. It is generally recognized that continuous positive airway pressure CPAP and other forms of positive airway pressure PAP can be effective treatments for the obstructive type of sleep apnea OSA . Unfortunately studies have found that compliance with CPAP among OSA patients is poor L. GROTE et. al. Therapy with nCPAP incomplete elimination of sleep related breathing disorder. Eur Resp J. 2000 16 921 7. N. McARDLE et. al. Long term use of CPAP therapy for sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999 159 4 Pt 1 1108 14. .

The medical profession often views non compliance or under compliance with advice ecommendations from a healthcare professional as undesirable i.e. a negative behavior on the part of the patient. Thus there have been efforts to increase CPAP PAP compliance among OSA patients. Some such efforts have for example employed alternate types of facemasks humidified air alternate pressure schedules e.g. bi level positive airway pressure and the like. Compliance enhancing efforts have also included support or behavioral cognitive elements C. J. HOY et. al. Can intensive support improve continuous positive airway pressure use in patients with the sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999 159 4 1096 1100. .

In their review of CPAP compliance Zozula and Rosen R. ZOZULA R. ROSEN. Compliance with continuous positive airway pressure therapy assessing and improving treatment outcomes. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2001 7 6 391 8. observe 1 Motivational factors are strongly associated with both acceptance of the diagnosis of OSA as well as overall treatment compliance 2 Evidence suggests that patients initial perception of improvement after initiating CPAP therapy is a strong predictor of subsequent treatment compliance use 3 Successful compliance is often affected by the type and degree of patient education about the specific medical condition 4 Initial perceptions are often decisive therefore the timing of an intervention aiming to increase compliance is essential 5 There is an increasing demand to find effective interventions to increase CPAP compliance.

Zozula and Rosen further note that social psychological models are used widely to account for patient behavior change in medical settings. As one example they summarize the stages of change model usually attributed to Prochaska in which individuals progress through predictable psychological stages in their efforts to adopt new health related behaviors. Under the Prochaska model a patient who transitions to a stage characterized by greater readiness to change is more apt to adopt new behaviors.

Issues of compliance and other patient behaviors are not restricted to OSA or CPAP. In general any phase of a diagnostic or therapeutic process that requires action from a patient or the patient s caretaker may carry a risk of noncompliance. Some patients for example may delay action until convinced they have a problem. Furthermore convincing some patients that they have a problem can be difficult especially those unwilling to accept a physician s pronouncement of illness without accompanying proof they can understand. This difficulty may be a significant factor in many patients having a sleep disorder associated with no noticeable manifestations during or only minor noticeable manifestations wakefulness.

In the case of snoring recording and playing back the sounds of a person s snoring have been used to prove to the person that they snore. There are limitations however to expanding the use of this technique for snoring and to extending this general approach to laypersons having other sleep disorders such as sleep apnea.

For example although the sound of snoring is generally recognized correctly and readily by many laypersons other abnormal sleep breathing events e.g. hypopneas and respiratory effort related arousals most likely cannot be readily and correctly recognized from their sound by the vast majority of laypersons without explanation or training. This suggests that mere audio recording and playback of sleep breathing sounds will have little influence on the behavior of an untrained lay patient who has a sleep disorder predominantly characterized by these pathological events.

An additional shortcoming arises because events associated with sleep disorders may vary in occurrence and severity during the course of a sleep period. For example a sleeping person may snore at some times and not at others during the night. As an additional example a sleeping person may have frequent apneas in the hours just before awakening but not in the hours immediately after going to bed. Thus proper characterization of a patient s sleeping may require assessment of audio recordings that span several hours of patient sleep time. Because human attention spans are generally limited most people are unlikely to listen to such recordings for periods of hours.

From the above it is desirable to have improved techniques for managing health related disorders. It is also desirable to have improved techniques to increase compliance with therapy and or lead to other desired behavioral changes.

According to the invention techniques including a system and method for managing certain types of behaviors in patients with a sleep disorder are provided. More specifically the invention relates to a system and method for increasing the likelihood that a patient will adopt desirable behaviors with respect to his or her sleep.

In a specific embodiment the present invention provides a method for managing a patient having a sleep disorder e.g. sleep apnea snoring sleep bruxism upper airway resistance syndrome etc. The method comprises monitoring physiological information from the patient converting the physiological information to digital data storing the digital data in a digital memory identifying and characterizing epochs based on the digital data and storing the identifying and characterizing information of the epochs in a digital memory. The method further comprises organizing the epochs according to an organization function that considers at least characterization information of the epochs selecting an epoch based on the organizing of the epochs and generating sound derived from the stored digital data associated with the selected epoch such that the patient hears the sound. In a specific embodiment the physiological information monitored may include sound e.g. respiratory sound emanating from the trachea and or tooth grinding sounds.

Various additional objects features and advantages of the present invention can be more fully appreciated with reference to the detailed description and accompanying drawings that follow.

We have discovered that some persons who listen to selected sounds they made while sleeping will as a result the listening change elements of their behavior in a positive direction i.e. behave more in line with the recommendations of a health care professional such as a physician . This discovery may be used in some cases to improve the management of patients with a sleep disorder.

We believe this phenomenon arises at least in part from the nature of the sounds and their emotional overtones. For example in the case of a person with sleep apnea respiratory sound may vanish completely or almost completely during an apnea. In the case of a person with obstructive sleep apnea the relative quiet of an apnea may be punctuated by struggle sounds we prefer the term quackles which sound very much like choking noises. Persons with sleep apnea may also have post apnea hyperventilation the sound of which can sometimes give the impression of almost desperate attempts to catch one s breath. Similarly in the case of sleep bruxism the sound of teeth grinding may sometimes be distressing to a human listener.

Several sources teach the use of electronic equipment and respiratory sound in the diagnosis of sleep apnea but fewer mention the playback of recorded sleep breathing sounds to human ears.

Gavriely U.S. Patient No. 6 168 568 teaches the playback of recorded breath sounds to the operator of his invention but does not describe the playback of recorded sound to the patient. He specifically mentions as a feature of his invention that playback of sound from his invention may be done while the patient is acoustically isolated from the invention.

Sullivan U.S. Pat. No. 5 989 193 Lynn and Lynn U.S. Pat. No. 6 223 064 and Raviv and Weingarten U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 671 733 5 782 240 5 879 313 5 961 447 6 045 514 teach listening to breathing sounds recorded from a sleeping subject but only in the context of a physician clinician or operator of their respective inventions analyzing potential breathing problems of the patient. Publications in the medical literature teach playback of respiratory audio recorded from a sleeping patient but again in the context of analysis they do not mention playback to the patient or in the case of children to the patient s parent R. R. MARSH et al. Recorder for assessment of upper airway disorders. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1983 91 584 585. M. S. SCHECHTER et al. Technical report diagnosis and management of childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Pediatrics. 2002 April 109 4 e69. 

The present disclosure teaches a method and system for using sleep sounds to influence patient behavior. It aims to provide a flexible and efficient approach to acquiring selecting and delivering sounds that have a high likelihood of positively impacting a patient behavior.

One or more physiological and or environment parameters related to the patient are monitored . In cases where parameter values are in analog form they may be converted to data in digital form. For example sound arising in the patient s airway may be picked up by a microphone and converted into corresponding digital values by an analog to digital converter with or without additional processing. Persons with ordinary skill in the art will know of similar examples.

There are several possible patient parameters that may be monitored including but not restricted to electrocardiographic parameters electroencephalographic parameters electrooculographic parameters myographic parameters oximetric parameters movement and location parameters e.g. body position limb movement chest motion abdominal motion pressure and or flow parameters e.g. oronasal airflow positive pressure delivery esophageal pressure gas exchange parameters e.g. end tidal carbon dioxide concentrations temperature parameters sound parameters e.g. tracheal sound tooth grinding sound musculo skeletal sound cardiovascular sound parameters related to or indicative of arterial tone and the like. Similarly there are several possible environmental parameters that may be monitored including but not restricted to instrumentation status parameters noise sound parameters ambient temperature and lighting movement parameters and the like. If two patients share a sleep environment physiological parameters of the first patient may sometimes be considered as environmental parameters for the second patient.

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 721 115 for example teaches a system and method for monitoring parameters related to tracheal sound body position arm movement and battery voltage.

In one embodiment epochs of data are identified and characterized . In this context identification may refer to determining temporal boundaries that define an epoch of time and characterization may refer to assigning attribute values reflecting the data associated with an epoch. For example data obtained during a polysomnogram is often divided into 30 second epochs i.e. each epoch normally has a start time and also has an end time that is 30 seconds later. To continue the example a state of consciousness is normally assigned to each epoch on the basis of epoch associated polysomnographic data. Wakefulness stage 1 sleep stage 2 sleep rapid eye movement sleep etc. are examples of states of consciousness. Thus in this example each 30 second epoch can be conceptualized as having an attribute called STATE OF CONSCIOUSNESS and for each epoch this attribute may take the values WAKEFULNESS STAGE 1 SLEEP etc.

Epochs may be defined by a start time and a stop time or equivalently by a start time and a duration. Times that define an epoch may be expressed in absolute terms e.g. as given by a clock or in relative terms e.g. a quantity of time before or after a reference event . In one embodiment there is no requirement for epochs to be of uniform duration. Epochs of several durations may be present in a single patient study.

A plurality of attributes may be associated with a given epoch. We call the set of all possible attributes and attribute values for epochs the attribute scheme. In some cases the same information may be captured with different attribute schemes. For example in some circumstances the two attribute schemes A and B below capture approximately the same information 

Different embodiments may use different attribute schemes. Merely by way of example attribute schemes may differ when different physiological parameters are monitored. In one embodiment epoch attributes but not attribute values are pre determined and stored in memory .

Some attributes may take more than one value for a given epoch e.g. under one attribute scheme a RESPIRATION TYPE attribute for a certain epoch could simultaneously take both the SNORING and RERA values since both phenomena can occur simultaneously .

In one embodiment all attributes could also take the value INDETERMINATE or UNCERTAIN. In some embodiments a measure of certainty may be attached to attribute values. For example a set of computer codes may classify an epoch s RESPIRATORY TYPE as HYPOPNEA but with only 51 confidence that is the correct classification. In some embodiments epoch attribute values may have associated confidence limits derived statistically.

In one embodiment the duration of an epoch is not an attribute of the epoch duration and start time define an epoch. Equivalently start time and stop time define an epoch. 

Epochs may overlap in an embodiment. That is a given point in time may be included within the boundaries of a plurality of epochs. For example 20 minutes of monotonous uninterrupted snoring may be classified as one epoch and each of the individual snoring breaths within the 20 minutes may also be classified as an epoch and the inspiratory and expiratory phases of each breath may themselves each be an epoch. As a further example epoch X may be defined to correspond to the period of apnea and epoch Y may include both the period of apnea and the snort that terminates the period of apnea.

Identification and characterization of epochs may include dependent sub steps. For example the start and end times of epoch Y see paragraph above can be determined with finality only when the beginning of the apneic period is known and the end of the snort is known.

Returning to in one embodiment identification and characterization information produced by step may be stored in memory.

In one embodiment steps through may proceed at least partially in parallel. For example identification and characterization of epochs associated with previously acquired data may occur while monitoring continues.

In one embodiment organization of epochs involves ranking and or collecting epochs. In one embodiment organization of epochs occurs on the basis of one or more attribute values of the epochs. Timing characteristics of an epoch may also be considered. In one embodiment organization is performed by applying an organization function not shown in to epochs stored in memory. Merely by way of example an organization function may be implemented as software codes. In another embodiment organization may be performed by a human. In still another embodiment both software codes and a human may be involved in the organization step .

In one embodiment one or more epochs are presented to a human in a way that reflects some or all of the results of organization . For example a computer interface may display a collection of epochs having APNEA as a value for the RESPIRATION TYPE attribute. B and C shows examples of web pages displaying information related to identification characterization and organization of epochs in a sleep study of unspecified type performed on a patient named Jim Smith. shows information about several categories of epochs including the number and summed duration of all epochs within each category. Category is an epoch attribute in the examples shown in approximately corresponding to RESPIRATION TYPE. shows information about a subset of epochs having the APNEA RESPIRATION TYPE. is the same as except that the epochs are sorted according to the value of epoch attribute END SNORT indicating whether an apnea was terminated by a snort or not . In the sleep study shown only one apnea epoch was terminated by a snort and so it is listed first in . Presentation is an optional step.

Returning to one or more epochs are selected for playback . In one embodiment a human user makes the selection in conjunction with presentation e.g. using a mouse or other computer pointing device to indicate an epoch having a visible reference on an interactive computer display. In another embodiment a set of software codes implemented on a digital computing device may perform selection . Selection may select a collection of epochs rather than just one epoch. In one embodiment selection may select one or more epochs.

An epoch selected in step is prepared for audio playback . Preparation may employ data stored earlier e.g. in step in step etc. in cases where digital sound data were stored such data may be retrieved and readied for conversion to hearable sound.

Preparation assembles data associated with the selected epoch s . For example preparation may retrieve tracheal sound data corresponding to the selected epoch s and convert them into a Quicktime audio file. Preparation is discussed further in connection with .

A human not shown in listens to the sound played back . The human is normally the patient but may be a caretaker or loved one of the patient. Before hearing playback the human may be conceptualized as being in a certain state A with respect to his or her readiness to change one or more sleep related behaviors. After hearing playback and after receiving explanation of the sound played back the human may be conceptualized as being in state B with respect to his or her readiness to change one or more sleep related behaviors. Advice to the human may further influence the human s readiness to change. In one embodiment explanation is optional.

In one embodiment change may include but is not restricted to altering starting and stopping. In another embodiment behavior may include but is not restricted to decisions e.g. to undergo or decline surgery externally visible actions and mental actions e.g. counting sheep as an insomniac might . In still another embodiment a sleep related behavior may be a behavior that is expected to have an effect on the sleep of the patient. Note that sleep related behavior may occur during wakefulness .

Thus examples of changes in sleep related behavior include but are not restricted to increasing compliance with a prescribed treatment for a sleep disorder e.g. continuous positive airway pressure wearing of an oral appliance for the treatment of sleep bruxism or obstructive sleep apnea sleeping with positional therapy weight loss increasing compliance with a preventive regimen forestalling a sleep disorder e.g. maintaining weight avoiding alcohol near bedtime and deciding to accept more vigorous treatment of a sleep disorder e.g. opting for uvulopalatopharyngoplasty as a surgical treatment for sleep apnea after failure of weight loss .

In one embodiment explanation of the sound played back is brief and is delivered to the human at or near the time of playback . For example after the sound of a hypopnea is played the patient s physician could say to the human That was a near stoppage of breathing or more dramatically That was a near choking. We have found that a short explanation is often adequate for even a lay human listener as he or she can afterwards generally associate the sound with a past experience from life often an experience with a significant emotional overlay e.g. choking . There are several possible routes by which to deliver explanation including but not restricted to orally in print by an animation by a physical model and electronically e.g. as on a computer or telephone display .

In one embodiment advice may include but is not restricted to a recommendation from a health care professional or an ostensibly neutral statement of fact e.g. the mortality rate of the operation is 1 that may factor into one or more changes the human is contemplating. Advice may be delivered by one or more routes as was taught for explanation .

Having transitioned to state B the human may be confront the same or different possible changes as in state A .

If multiple epochs are selected in one embodiment the order of their playback optionally reflects a ranking within organization .

The timing of playback may be controlled in various ways. For example the selection step when performed by a human may function to initiate preparation and playback soon thereafter. In another example a separate trigger step not shown in may be employed between preparation and playback such that playback occurs only when the trigger step has been completed e.g. a human user indicates he or she is ready to hear the playback . As a further example when multiple epochs are selected their associated sounds may be played back sequentially and uninterruptedly or with a trigger step between epochs. shows still another example of controlling playback a computer interface with controls that allow a user among other actions to start and pause sound playback. Other approaches are possible.

After listening to some or all sounds played back the human may act in zero or more ways. For example human may deliver one or more inputs not shown in to selection step and or organization step . Such input s may specify different epochs for playback or replay already played sounds. Merely by way of example such input s may occur through an interactive computer interface coupled to selection step and or organization step .

In one embodiment organization may involve ranking and or collecting epochs. In such an embodiment ranking may involve an ordering of epochs according to at least one or more attribute values e.g. according to the value of the MEAN SOUND INTENSITY attribute epochs may then be treated differently in subsequent processing depending on their rank. Collecting may involve dividing a set of epochs into subsets e.g. according to the value of each epoch s RESPIRATION TYPE attribute subsets may then be treated differently in subsequent processing. Organization may include both ranking and collecting e.g. first creating collections of epochs according to their RESPIRATION TYPE then ranking within each collection according to MEAN SOUND INTENSITY.

Organization is often an important step. Some patients may have hundreds of epochs of abnormal breathing during a single night e.g. a patient having severe obstructive sleep apnea. Determining which epochs and when the epochs should be played back to the human may become important in cases where a all epochs cannot be reasonably played back e.g. owing to limited human attention span and b playback sounds associated with different epochs have different effects on the human s readiness to change. We believe such cases are the norm.

In one embodiment choosing and or configuring organizing function may be influenced by various factors. For example choosing configuring may be performed on the basis of one or more inputs from a human user e.g. a command to select only epochs with a RESPIRATION TYPE of APNEA from a database of user models or from a database of algorithms . To choose or configure items from the databases it is possible to use inputs characteristics of the patient and or desired effects . Other approaches are possible. We consider constructing and configuring an organizing function as equivalent.

Characteristics of the patient may derive from information obtained during monitoring e.g. characterized epochs or other sources e.g. age sex suspected sleep disorder .

In an embodiment a user model is an organizing function that has been adapted for a specific listener or group of listeners or class of listeners . Thus a user model may relate one or more characteristics of the patient plus minus the human listener if different an effect and one or more possible organizing functions or templates for organizing functions . For example one user model might represent the heuristic If the patient has a known diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea OSA and is not compliant with CPAP therapy then organize epochs so that the most distressing epoch sounds compatible with OSA are given the highest priority so that the patient will be scared into complying with CPAP afterwards . In this example diagnosis of OSA and noncompliant with CPAP are characteristics of the patient prioritizing distressing sounds compatible with OSA refers to a possible organizing function and complying with CPAP afterwards refers to an effect. All of a user model s relations need not be explicit. 

Thus in an embodiment it is possible to choose user model s from database that have patient characteristic s and or effect s which match supplied patient characteristics and desired effects . In one embodiment user models may be implemented as software objects.

A potential advantage of embodiments of the present invention is flexibility in determining which epoch associated sounds to playback . For example separate user models may be implemented for snorers for children for persons in denial for tooth grinders for sleep talkers for persons with sleep apnea and so on. Over time users of the invention may increase their ability to predict what types of sounds are most likely to positively affect behavior in certain classes of patients. The ability of a component of the present invention to identify and characterize epochs may be advantageous because it could spare a human operator from the potentially tedious work of listening to hours of sleep sound in order to identify the most impactful subsets.

The invention aims to allow experimentation with heuristics for organizing epochs. We have already discovered certain characteristics of impactful sounds e.g. sounds similar to choking noises sounds conveying a sense of abnormally high work of breathing prolonged absence of respiratory sound and hyperventilatory sounds after a period of absent or choking sound among others. These sounds often carry an emotional overtone when perceived by an adult human. It is generally desirable to present such impactful sounds to a patient before the patient s attention span wanes or the patient s time with a healthcare provider ends.

We have also found that tracheal sounds are a useful source of sleep breathing sounds for playback . Tracheal sounds when reproduced to within a reasonable degree of fidelity to the original sound through a loudspeaker or through headphones can frequently be impactful if the patient has a sleep breathing disorder.

In one embodiment selected epoch associated sounds may be included in a highlight reel of a sleep study. The term is borrowed from sports broadcasting a sports highlight reel normally consists of dramatic or otherwise noteworthy images and comprises only a fraction of all images collected during a sports contest.

By analogy an embodiment of a highlight reel for a sleep study will usually contain dramatic or noteworthy occurrences found in the playback audio associated with the sleep study. There are several possible definitions for dramatic and noteworthy in this context such definitions may be implemented as user models or algorithms as noted above. For example all other factors being equal an apnea having struggle sounds is often more dramatic sounding than one that does not a louder snore is generally more dramatic sounding than a softer snore and so on.

In one embodiment the contents of a highlight reel of a study is determined via one or more organization steps possibly with the aid of a user model. In one embodiment the results of one or more preparation steps become the highlight reel. A highlight reel may contain images in addition to sound similar to the playback step .

A highlight reel may be composed automatically e.g. by a computer manually e.g. by a physician or a combination of both. For example a human may edit or approve the contents of a highlight reel compiled or proposed by a computer.

In one embodiment the highlight reel contains epoch related data that are anticipated to have the highest or a significant effect on influencing the behavior of the human that listens to and possibly watches the highlight reel. In many cases the highlight reel will be relatively short when compared to the duration of the sleep study. A highlight reel offers a venue for the concentration of the most impactful sounds identified in a sleep study.

After receiving a reference to an epoch from selection step information retrieval step may retrieve epoch related digital data stored in step and or epoch related attributes and attribute values stored in step .

In one embodiment context generation may occur. Here context refers to those elements of an epoch s playback that are strictly speaking outside the temporal boundaries of the epoch. For example if an epoch of apnea is to be played back the audio data corresponding to that epoch may be nearly silent because apnea can be nearly silent . A human listener may better appreciate the significance of the silence if additional sound is presented e.g. the sound made in the few seconds before the apnea and the few seconds after the apnea. In this example these few seconds of sound are context for the apnea epoch. Thus context generation is an optional step that may add additional data for playback of an epoch.

In one embodiment synthesis uses data retrieved in step to create an intermediate digital representation IDR of the playback. The IDR contains audio data that may later be rendered into sound. For example synthesis may generate a file formatted for playback using Quicktime Windows Media Viewer Real Player Flash or a structured vector graphics player etc. In one embodiment audio elements such as narration may be added to the IDR. Graphical elements may optionally be included as well. When included certain graphical elements may optionally change appearance in synchrony with certain audio elements.

Optionally the IDR may be copied to a non volatile medium e.g. audio tape hard disk optical disk certain MP3 players Apple iPod and the like. In one embodiment IDRs corresponding to a plurality of epochs may be so copied. In some cases digital to analog conversion may occur e.g. in copying to analog audio tape . Some persons may find it convenient to be able to transport a playable version of one or more epoch associated playback sounds.

Optionally the IDR may be distributed over an electronic network e.g. a local area network the Internet etc. possibly in a streaming fashion.

Playback takes the output of step as its input. In cases where the input is in digital format a digital to analog conversion will ordinarily be necessary. During playback sound is emitted possibly with an accompanying graphical display . We have found that sound derived from 16 bit digital sampling at 2000 Hz yields an acceptable tradeoff between storage space and fidelity.

In an embodiment where sound data were not stored in step sonification of non audio data may be performed as part of synthesis . Sonification i.e. the conversion of non audio data into sound may be useful when it discloses a pattern or transient in time varying data that is detectable by the human ear brain system.

As one example of sonification oxygen saturation data acquired during a sleep study may be used to modulate the frequency of an audible sound e.g. a 440 Hz sine wave . For example if the oxygen saturation level drops at some point the frequency of a sine wave can be made to drop at a corresponding point. If the frequency change were above some threshold s a human listener would be able to hear it. Rapid variations in oxygen saturation might therefore be perceivable as rapid variations in the frequency of the sine wave. In one embodiment modulation occurs at a faster rate than the sampling rate of the original data so that long segments of data may after sonification occupy a shorter time. As an additional example a library of sounds may be used for sonification e.g. an epoch with a RESPIRATION TYPE of HYPOPNEA could be represented acoustically by emitting a hypopnea sound of the proper duration taken from the library of sounds. These are merely examples.

The present invention may be applied for example in a standalone sleep laboratory in conjunction with polysomnography or in cases where the patient is tested in his or her home using a portable diagnostic device. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 094 911 teaches a method and system compatible with the current invention.

We have discovered several potential advantages of playing back sleep related sound as an intervention to affect a patient s behavior. These potential advantages include but are not restricted to 1 Timing The intervention can be applied early in the patient s course e.g. almost immediately upon notifying the patient of the diagnosis 2 Simplicity Given elements of the present invention the intervention can be simple to perform 3 Impact The intervention can have a powerful impact on the patient e.g. an emotional impact 4 Retention The intervention is in many cases inherently memorable 5 Expense It is possible to implement the intervention inexpensively in comparison with the cost of protracted teaching by health care professionals 6 Language independence Although the intervention will usually require some communication with the patient in a language he or she understands the crux of the intervention is generally sounds that are independent of the patient s ability to speak a given language e.g. the language of the health care professional interacting with the patient .

It should be noted that the above sequence of steps is merely illustrative. The steps can be performed using computer software or hardware or a combination of hardware and software. Any of the above steps can also be separated or be combined depending upon the embodiment. In some cases the steps can also be changed in order without limiting the scope of the invention claimed herein. One of ordinary skill in the art would recognize many other variations modifications and alternatives. It is also understood that the examples and embodiments described herein are for illustrative purposes only and that various modifications or changes in light thereof will be suggested to persons skilled in the art and are to be included within the spirit and purview of this application and scope of the appended claims.

