---

title: System for providing collaborative communications environment for manufacturers and potential customers
abstract: A software program and associated web-based portal is provided for industry-specific product comparison. The program and an associated web portal allows the user the ability to search multiple manufacturers' catalogs and to enter a query based upon customized search criteria. Query results are returned of products that satisfy the user's search criteria. The query is made available to manufacturers whose products are identified in the query results and a communication link is provided whereby such manufacturers can contact the user to discuss the product identified in the search. The user can respond using the message board associated with the web portal. The program and portal can also integrate updates to pump manufacturers' catalogs and can also produce best-fit solutions for users' design criteria.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08473470&OS=08473470&RS=08473470
owner: Bentley Systems, Incorporated
number: 08473470
owner_city: Exton
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050523
---
This invention relates generally to systems for providing communications and search features to users in a particular industry over a network such as the Internet.

As more and more businesses in a variety of industries use computers to supply content and information to potential customers there is an increased need for communications services that can be provided in order to make connections between manufacturers suppliers and customers. The Internet and worldwide web WWW provide a continuous worldwide communication structure that is open to individual manufacturers suppliers and customers. However in the global community so much information exists and so many manufacturers and suppliers have individual web sites that it becomes an overwhelming task for a user such as a potential customer to search and evaluate each individual manufacturer s or supplier s web site for performance data costs and other particulars regarding competing products in the field.

Various commerce systems over the Internet have been known in the art for matching a prospective buyer with a seller using which a prospective buyer may place a bid on an item. For example U.S. Pat. No. 6 058 379 Odom et al. describes a real time network exchange with seller specified exchange parameters and interactive seller participation. But such services typically assume that the buyer is aware of the item in the first place and or these services may not provide the level of detailed information required for making a purchase of a large piece of engineering or manufacturing equipment for a particular engineering design project.

Furthermore even if a customer knows one or more manufacturers in the field those manufacturers each may publish catalogs of information about their products and these catalogs may or may not be available on the Internet. Even if they are available online the volume of information contained in each catalog on each web site makes product comparisons a time consuming and difficult task. In addition though the information may be accessible there still may not be a tool for evaluating the suitability of the product in the design project for which the product is being considered.

Furthermore customers may be reluctant to contact manufacturers directly until they have more information about the products in order to avoid the time involved in being contacted by sales representatives. Up to now there has not been a forum in which users could make queries about products anonymously and manufacturers could contact those users in a neutral site while the user s identity is maintained as confidential.

There remains a need therefore for a service that provides users with a unified source of the most relevant information within their particular industry on a single web site and which allows for users to find the most suitable products and alternatives and to make an informed comparison to aide in the ultimate decision as to the selection of the product that best fits the user s needs.

The disadvantages of prior techniques are overcome by the present invention which provides a method and system for an integrated Internet based solution that is industry specific and provides a unified collection of searchable information and a collaborative communications environment for members within the industry with the invention being embodied in a software program and associated Internet tool comprising a web portal. The software program and web portal which is a robust web site that provides a variety of services access an associated database that contains information about products including manufacturers catalogs and other information for the relevant industry involved in the specific application of the invention. Using the software program and the web portal of the present invention a user can construct a query to search the database for products that meet that user s unique design criteria. The query can be submitted under a unique key or user name either of which will maintain the user s identity as confidential. Query results are returned that provide the best fit solutions for the user s proposed design.

These query results are also made available on a web page targeted for manufacturers and suppliers in the industry whose products are featured on the web portal. The manufacturer s page also includes a link using which the manufacturer can initiate an open dialog such as through a message board to the user. However the user s identity is concealed from the manufacturer. The user can reply with further questions or other items. The user can also choose to reply and provide further information or request that the manufacturer contact the user directly.

Other features include pages that provide detailed product performance comparisons. Links to manufacturers and suppliers web sites can also be included if desired in a particular application of the invention.

As noted the system of the present invention can be directed to a particular industry. More specifically the illustrative embodiment of the invention involves the hydraulic pump industry in which pumps are manufactured and supplied for users who are civil design engineers in the field of municipal water distribution fire flow sanitary sewer services and storm water management and other hydraulic applications. In the illustrative embodiment the system includes a database that contains multiple manufacturer and supplier catalogs of pump and other related products which the user can simultaneously reference to evaluate products in the context of the users customized design criteria.

The method and system of the present invention further employ a search engine that runs searches based upon a query designed by the user involving design criteria for a particular project or application. For example in the hydraulic pump embodiment the search criteria may include target flow in gallons per minute and target head in feet. Battery or other power requirements may also be provided. The search is performed and the best fit solutions are returned as search results i.e. the optimal pumps for the system that meet those criteria. As well as listing the pump model and manufacturer a link to the manufacturer s catalog for the product and a link to the manufacturer s web site may be provided. The associated electronic database also includes up to date pump performance curves for each product which can also be displayed for the user s information.

In addition to returning the results of the query the query is posted on an associated message board so that communication can be established between pump manufacturers and the users. Manufacturers can contact potential customers via a screen name using the communication link in order to provide up to date product information or to discuss custom requirements. And the user can reply but can maintain confidentiality if desired.

With all of this information readily at hand the user can make an informed comparison which aids in the ultimate decision for selecting the best fit pumps for the user s design. The system also includes superior graphing and reporting capabilities and an ability for the user to save information in a customized webpage designed specifically for that user.

It should be understood that though the invention as described herein for purposes of illustration is discussed with reference to a hydrology and hydraulics solution the invention is equally applicable and readily adaptable for use in other technologies and industries where users may have an interest in comparative evaluations of products and the information associated therewith from various manufacturers being provided in a central location.

The system of the present invention is schematically illustrated in . The system includes a portal server which is a suitable application that is used to develop deliver and maintain a web portal . As will be understood by those skilled in the art the portal server is a network server that deploys portal services to a public website or internal intranet. It includes a variety of tools and functions one of is a user authentication program using which manufacturers and or customers register and the registered manufacturers or customers can then avail of the services provided by the web portal depending upon the particular application with which the invention is used.

The portal server establishes and maintains the web portal . Appropriate software for performing searches is schematically illustrated as search engine . The search engine communicates with an associated database which may or may not be co located with the portal server . In fact the database can be located at a separate site or can be constructed of information drawn from many sources. Additional information can be entered into the database and or current information can be updated if necessary.

The web portal includes graphic user interfaces GUIs collectively identified by reference character and they include for example a GUI that allows a user to enter a query . The query relates to the particular products available in the industry being served by the web portal . The query GUI as discussed hereinafter includes search criteria that the user can select that can then be used to perform a search via the search engine . Query results are returned in response to the query and these query results are schematically illustrated as the GUI .

In the illustrative embodiment the industry is water distribution sewer and waste management storm water drainage and other hydrology and hydraulic applications. The query results thus may include properties of the product a model number cost operational cost performance characteristics performance curves physical characteristics and manufacturer contact information. It should be understood by those skilled in the art that many other items of information could be included in the web portal content as may be necessary or desirable for providing a complete response to the query.

Another aspect of the invention is that the web portal also provides the ability to compare multiple products that fit the search criteria. This is illustrated schematically as item under the GUI . These functions include side by side displays of performance curves of competing products for comparison.

In addition to allowing the user to enter search criteria and obtain query results listing products that meet the search criteria the web portal of the present invention also provides an opportunity for communication between manufacturers of those products and the user who has entered the query. Several communication vehicles are provided. A message board for example is provided for open collaborative communication between manufacturers and users. For example as discussed hereinafter a manufacturer will have the information about any queries that are made that have involved that manufacturer s products. The manufacturer can then post a message to that user employing the users screen name that provides a communication link between the manufacturer and the user but which maintains the confidentiality of the user s identification unless the user would choose to provide that information directly to the manufacturers for example. The communication vehicles also include links to the manufacturer s website which may include additional information that the user may wish to consider when evaluating that manufacturer s products.

From the query results the user may want to select a product from those returned in the query results . A select function is provided which involves the search engine returning a best fit solution that provides an accurate match to the design criterion created by the user. This can also include modeling and prediction curves that predict the operation of that pump in the system as designed by the user.

The method of the present invention is illustrated in a procedure set forth in greater detail in the flow chart of . For various aspects of the method graphic user interfaces GUIs are provided to access to the web portal for introducing and retrieving information. As the process of the invention is discussed with the GUIs that are relevant to particular steps are referenced as they arise.

As illustrated in step of a portal is generated and contains appropriate programs for authentication web linking searching functions and industry specific content which in the hydraulic pump illustrative example product catalogs from hydraulic pump manufacturers that include model numbers and associated performance characteristics such as discharge diameter maximum speed maximum sphere size maximum stages maximum temperature motor frequency suction diameter and the like. Physical characteristics can indicate what applications the pump has such as water sludge or other liquid. Performance curves which are plots of flow versus head or flow versus horsepower or efficiency are also an important item of information in the field. All of this information is introduced into the associated database. Once all of this is provided the web portal is launched and ready to provide services.

From time to time a manufacturer may have updates to the catalog information which is included in the database and this can be provided in the portal in a special manufacturer s page using which the professional can enter updates and additional information about or new information about new products as illustrated in the step . If there are manufacturer s updates the portal administrator can from time to time update the database as illustrated in step .

If there are no updates then the procedure simply continues to wait for a user to enter a query. When a user accesses the portal the user already registered enters a password in a manner that is well understood by those skilled in the art. The password is authenticated and if the user is correctly identified the program then continues to step . If the password is not correct then a routine will be initiated instructing the user to reenter the password step or otherwise an error page if this routine times out prior to the user entering the correct password.

Assuming the correct password is entered the query information is obtained from the user as shown in step . This can be accomplished using the GUI of which illustrates a screen that has a series of dialog boxes and pull down windows using which the search criterion can be entered. More specifically in the example of the user may enter a Query Name in the box . Then the target flow and target head can be entered into boxes and respectively. The required battery configuration can be selected in the area . A preferred manufacturer can be selected from the pull down window . In addition the flow tolerance can be entered into the box .

Returning now to the procedure of once the search criteria is entered by the user that search criteria is used and a search is run as shown in step and query results are returned as illustrated in step .

In the meantime while the user is reviewing search results the query is made visible to manufacturers that may log on to the portal as illustrated in step . In this way a manufacturer can determine that users have been provided with an opportunity to consider that manufacturer s products and can also see the query results which return other manufacturers products.

As illustrated in the GUI of a spreadsheet provides the manufacturer with information about queries that have been made. A contact user link is provided for each user. Selecting this link sets up a communication link such a message board that allows a manufacturer to post a message to the user. It is noted that the user s screen name is a fictitious ID selected by the user which maintains the user s confidentiality. Yet the web portal of the present invention allows the manufacturer to contact the user in a collaborative neutral environment and for example point out advantages of that manufacturer s products and compare those to the other products that may have been returned in the query results.

This can be performed in real time so that for example an instant message can immediately be returned to the user or can simply be on a message board that the user can check periodically. Should the user be interested in contacting the manufacturer directly in addition to the message board a link to the manufacturer s website will also be provided in the portal. This provides an open environment for the manufacturer to contact the user and point out advantages of his or her products and identify other products identified in the query and this is illustrated in step and .

From the user s perspective a list of results that satisfy the user s search criterion is shown in the panel of the GUI of . For each of the pumps listed in the Query results i.e. the best fit solutions for that user s search criterion performance curves can be displayed for evaluation as illustrated in step of . In addition comparative results of the several solutions can be displayed in a number of ways step . More specifically as illustrated in the screen displays performance curves for two candidates. The user can then compare these curves.

The user can then save the query as illustrated in step for later evaluation and this can be done using the Open Query panel in the pump selection screen of . A user can decide to delete the query and begin with a new set of search criteria.

It should be understood that the web portal system of the present invention provides an open environment for manufacturers in an industry to communicate with potential customers and for customers to search for best fit solutions for design projects such as pumping stations. The optimum pump can be selected for a user s system using all of the information available via the web portal.

The foregoing description has been directed to specific embodiments of the invention it will be apparent however that other variations and modifications may be made to the described embodiments with the attainment with some or all of the advantages of such. Therefore it is the object of the appended claims to cover all such variations and modifications as come within the true spirit and scope of the present invention.

