---

title: Architectural design for service request and order management application software
abstract: Methods, systems, and apparatus, including computer program products, for implementing a software architecture design for a software application implementing service request and order management. The application is structured as multiple process components interacting with each other through service interfaces, and multiple service interface operations, each being implemented for a respective process component. The process components include an Outbound Delivery process component, a Site Logistics Processing process component, a Confirmation and Inventory process component, a Customer Requirement Processing process component, a Supply and Demand Matching process component, a Logistics Execution Control process component, a Service Request Processing process component, a Customer Quote Processing process component, a Service Order Processing process component, a Service Contract process component, and a Service Confirmation Processing process component.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08660904&OS=08660904&RS=08660904
owner: SAP AG
number: 08660904
owner_city: Walldorf
owner_country: DE
publication_date: 20051230
---
The subject matter of this patent application relates to computer software architecture and more particularly to the architecture of application software for service request and order management.

Enterprise software systems are generally large and complex. Such systems can require many different components distributed across many different hardware platforms possibly in several different geographical locations. Thus the architecture of a large software application i.e. what its components are and how they fit together is an important aspect of its design for a successful implementation.

Methods systems and apparatus including computer program products for implementing a software architecture design for a software application implementing service request and order management. The application is structured as multiple process components interacting with each other through service interfaces and multiple service interface operations each being implemented for a respective process component. The process components include an Outbound Delivery process component a Site Logistics Processing process component a Confirmation and Inventory process component a Customer Requirement Processing process component a Supply and Demand Matching process component a Logistics Execution Control process component a Service Request Processing process component a Customer Quote Processing process component a Service Order Processing process component a Service Contract process component and a Service Confirmation Processing process component.

The invention can further be implemented as methods systems and apparatus including computer program products implementing a software architecture design for a software application that is adapted to interact with external software systems through the service operations described in reference to external process components or a subcombination of them.

The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented to realize one or more of the following advantages. Effective use is made of process components as units of software reuse to provide a design that can be implemented reliably in a cost effective way. Effective use is made of deployment units each of which is deployable on a separate computer hardware platform independent of every other deployment unit to provide a scalable design. Service interfaces of the process components define a pair wise interaction between pairs of process components that are in different deployment units in a scalable way.

Details of one or more implementations of the subject matter described in this specification are set forth in the accompanying drawings and in the description below. Further features aspects and advantages of the subject matter will become apparent from the description the drawings and the claims.

As shown in the Service Request and Order Management design includes seven deployment units a Financial Accounting deployment unit a Logistics Execution deployment unit a Supply Chain Control deployment unit a Due Item Management deployment unit a Payment deployment unit a Customer Invoicing deployment unit and a Customer Relationship Management deployment unit .

The Financial Accounting deployment unit contains an Accounting process component that records all relevant business transactions.

The Logistics Execution deployment unit includes three process components an Outbound Delivery process component a Site Logistics Processing process component and a Confirmation and Inventory process component .

The Outbound Delivery process component combines tasks concerning outbound delivery processes and enables communication with a vendor and a process component within the Invoice deployment unit. For example the Outbound Delivery process component may prepare and trigger execution of physical operations associated with an invoice.

The Site Logistics Processing process component supports all preparation and execution tasks concerning internal inventory movement in a warehouse type environment.

The Site Logistics Processing process component may provide stock information such as special stock items. Exception and alert information may also be provided by the Site Logistics Processing process component .

The Confirmation and Inventory process component combines all tasks required to confirm inventory changes and provided activities. The Confirmation and Inventory process component may provide services to maintain current stock handling unit content logistics operating unit content and allocation content.

The Supply Chain Control deployment unit includes three process components a Customer Requirement Processing process component a Supply and Demand Matching process component and a Logistics Execution Control process component .

The Customer Requirement Processing process component combines the tasks required for processing customer requirements and provides an interface to presales sales and services. The Customer Requirement Processing process component receives the customer requirements prepares them and passes them on to the Supply and Demand Matching process component as supply planning requirements.

The Supply and Demand Matching process component combines all the tasks necessary to ensure that sufficient material receipt elements exist to cover material demand while taking available capacity into account. For example the supply and demand matching process component may collect all the various material demands from customer requirement processing the in house requirement processing the demand forecast processing and the sales scheduling agreement processing and attempt to assign all the existing material receipts. The matching component may also plan the internal or external procurement of further material receipts where necessary.

The Logistics Execution Control process component controls and monitors the supply chain execution activities necessary for the fulfillment of an order. For example sales order activities or purchase order activities may be controlled and monitored by the logistics execution control process component. The Logistics Execution Control process component sends information to the logistics execution to trigger the necessary supply chain execution activities receives information about the supply chain execution progress and updates data relevant for both fulfillment and supply and demand planning.

The Due Item Management deployment unit includes a Due Item Processing process component . The Due Item Processing process component is used to manage all payables receivables from service and supply and corresponding sales including a withholding tax.

The Payment deployment unit includes a Payment Processing process component . The Payment Processing process component is used to handle all incoming and outgoing payments as well as represent the main database for a liquidity status.

The Customer Invoice deployment unit includes a Customer Invoice Processing process component used to charge a customer for the delivery of goods or services.

The Customer Relationship Management deployment unit includes five process components a Service Request Processing process component a Customer Quote Processing process component a Service Order Processing process component a Service Contract process component and a Service Confirmation Processing process component .

The Service Request Processing process component covers requests from a customer to a service provider to answer a question or solve a problem about a product that the customer possesses. The goal is to solve this problem as quickly as possible for example solving the problem on the phone by a service desk agent with the help of a knowledge base.

The Customer Quote Processing process component is used to offer to a customer for the delivery of goods or services according to fixed terms. The offer legally binds the company for a certain period of time.

The Service Order Processing process component deals with short term agreements between a customer and a service provider in which the customer orders one off services. For example an order could be to maintain or repair some equipment making it necessary to send a technician along with spare parts. Typically these services are billed services. The service order is also used to schedule resources and plan availability of spare parts and can include extra expenses required to execute service jobs for example travel expenses .

The Service Contract Processing process component deals with long term agreements between a customer and a service provider specifying the scope of services and general conditions for example service levels and prices used for processing service requests and service orders.

The Service Confirmation Processing process component is used to deal with services rendered for a service order. This includes reporting back working times materials used as well as any expenses incurred during the service activities. These particulars are used as a basis for keeping track of working times updating stock levels for spare parts processing invoices and cost accounting.

A number of external process components described below will be used to describe the architectural design. These include a Service Request Processing in External Requester System process component a Service Request Processing in External Provider System process component a Supplier Invoice Processing at Customer process component a Payment Processing at Business Partner process component a Bank statement creation at bank process component and a Payment order processing at house bank process component .

Not explicitly represented in the figures is a foundation layer that contains all fundamental entities that are used in multiple deployment units. These entities can be process components business objects and reuse service components. A reuse service component is a piece of software that is reused in different transactions. A reuse service component is used by its defined interfaces which can be e.g. local APIs Application Programming Interfaces or service interfaces.

In contrast to a deployment unit the foundation layer does not define a limit for application defined transactions. Deployment units communicate directly with entities in the foundation layer which communication is typically not message based. The foundation layer is active in every system instance on which the application is deployed. Business objects in the foundation layer will generally be master data objects. In addition the foundation layer will include some business process objects that are used by multiple deployment units. Master data objects and business process objects that should be specific to a deployment unit are assigned to their respective deployment unit.

A process component of an external system is drawn as a dashed line process component drawn as icon . Such a process component may be referred to as an external process component and it is used to represent the external system in describing interactions with the external system however this should be understood to require no more of the external system that it be able to produce and receive messages as required by the process component that interacts with the external system.

Interactions between process component pairs involving their respective business objects process agents operations interfaces and messages are described as process component interactions which determine the interactions of a pair of process components across a deployment unit boundary i.e. from one deployment unit to another deployment unit. Interactions between process components are indicated in by directed lines arrows . Interactions between process components within a deployment unit need not be described except to note that they exist as these interactions are not constrained by the architectural design and can be implemented in any convenient fashion. Interactions between process components that cross a deployment unit boundary will be illustrated by the figures of this patent application these figures will show the relevant elements associated with potential interaction between two process components but interfaces process agents and business objects that are not relevant to the potential interaction will not be shown.

The architectural design is a specification of a computer software application and elements of the architectural design can be implemented to realize a software application that implements the end to end process mentioned earlier. The elements of the architecture are at times described in this specification as being contained or included in other elements for example a process component is described as being contained in a deployment unit. It should be understood however that such operational inclusion can be realized in a variety of ways and is not limited to a physical inclusion of the entirety of one element in another.

The architectural elements include the business object. A business object is a representation of a type of a uniquely identifiable business entity an object instance described by a structural model. Processes operate on business objects.

A business object represents a specific view on some well defined business content. A business object represents content which a typical business user would expect and understand with little explanation. Business objects are further categorized as business process objects and master data objects. A master data object is an object that encapsulates master data i.e. data that is valid for a period of time . A business process object which is the kind of business object generally found in a process component is an object that encapsulates transactional data i.e. data that is valid for a point in time . The term business object will be used generically to refer to a business process object and a master data object unless the context requires otherwise. Properly implemented business objects are implemented free of redundancies.

The architectural elements also include the process component. A process component is a software package that realizes a business process and generally exposes its functionality as services. The functionality contains business transactions. A process component contains one or more semantically related business objects. Any business object belongs to no more than one process component.

Process components are modular and context independent. That they are context independent means that a process component is not specific to any specific application and is reusable. The process component is the smallest most granular element of reuse in the architecture.

The architectural elements also include the operation. An operation belongs to exactly one process component. A process component generally has multiple operations. Operations can be synchronous or asynchronous corresponding to synchronous or asynchronous process agents which will be described below. An operation is the smallest separately callable function described by a set of data types used as input output and fault parameters serving as a signature.

The architectural elements also include the service interface referred to simply as the interface. An interface is a named group of operations. Each operation belongs to exactly one interface. An interface belongs to exactly one process component. A process component might contain multiple interfaces. In one implementation an interface contains only inbound or outbound operations but not a mixture of both. One interface can contain both synchronous and asynchronous operations. All operations of the same type either inbound or outbound which belong to the same message choreography will belong to the same interface. Thus generally all outbound operations to the same other process component are in one interface.

The architectural elements also include the message. Operations transmit and receive messages. Any convenient messaging infrastructure can be used. A message is information conveyed from one process component instance to another with the expectation that activity will ensue. An operation can use multiple message types for inbound outbound or error messages. When two process components are in different deployment units invocation of an operation of one process component by the other process component is accomplished by an operation on the other process component sending a message to the first process component.

The architectural elements also include the process agent. Process agents do business processing that involves the sending or receiving of messages. Each operation will generally have at least one associated process agent. A process agent can be associated with one or more operations. Process agents can be either inbound or outbound and either synchronous or asynchronous.

Asynchronous outbound process agents are called after a business object changes e.g. after a create update or delete of a business object instance.

An output process agent will generally perform some processing of the data of the business object instance whose change triggered the event. An outbound agent triggers subsequent business process steps by sending messages using well defined outbound services to another process component which generally will be in another deployment unit or to an external system. An outbound process agent is linked to the one business object that triggers the agent but it is sent not to another business object but rather to another process component. Thus the outbound process agent can be implemented without knowledge of the exact business object design of the recipient process component.

Inbound process agents are called after a message has been received. Inbound process agents are used for the inbound part of a message based communication. An inbound process agent starts the execution of the business process step requested in a message by creating or updating one or multiple business object instances. An inbound process agent is not the agent of a business object but of its process component. An inbound process agent can act on multiple business objects in a process component.

Synchronous agents are used when a process component requires a more or less immediate response from another process component and is waiting for that response to continue its work.

Operations and process components are described in this specification in terms of process agents. However in alternative implementations process components and operations can be implemented without use of agents using other conventional techniques to perform the functions described in this specification.

The architectural elements also include the deployment unit. A deployment unit includes one or more process components that are deployed together on a single computer system platform. Conversely separate deployment units can be deployed on separate physical computing systems. For this reason a deployment unit boundary defines the limits of an application defined transaction i.e. a set of actions that have the ACID properties of atomicity consistency isolation and durability. To make use of database manager facilities the architecture requires that all operations of such a transaction be performed on one physical database as a consequence the processes of such a transaction must be performed by the process components of one instance of one deployment unit.

The process components of one deployment unit interact with those of another deployment unit using messages passed through one or more data communication networks or other suitable communication channels. Thus a deployment unit deployed on a platform belonging one business can interact with a deployment unit software entity deployed on a separate platform belonging to a different and unrelated business allowing for business to business communication. More than one instance of a given deployment unit can execute at the same time on the same computing system or on separate physical computing systems. This arrangement allows the functionality offered by a deployment unit to be scaled to meet demand by creating as many instances as needed.

Since interaction between deployment units is through service operations a deployment unit can be replaced by other another deployment unit as long as the new deployment unit supports the operations depended upon by other deployment units. Thus while deployment units can depend on the external interfaces of process components in other deployment units deployment units are not dependent on process component interaction within other deployment units. Similarly process components that interact with other process components or external systems only through messages e.g. as sent and received by operations can also be replaced as long as the replacement supports the operations of the original.

Interactions between Process Components Customer Quote Processing and Customer Requirement Processing 

The Customer Quote Processing process component includes a Customer Quote business object . The Customer Quote business object is a document containing an offer by a vendor to a customer for the delivery of goods or services according to fixed terms. The offer is legally binding for a specific period of time. The Customer Quote business object uses a Synchronous Request Availability Information from the Customer Quote to Customer Requirements outbound process agent to send update information into a Fulfillment Out interface .

The Fulfillment Out interface may invoke one or more of three operations depending on the received data instructions a synchronous Request Product Availability Information operation to request availability information for customer quote items a Request Product Availability Information and provisional Reservation operation that requests availability information including the creation of a provisional reservation for customer quote items or a Register Customer Requirement Deletion Notification operation that registers provisional requirement reservation for deletion and triggers deletion in case of failure or cancellation of transaction processing 

In addition a second outbound process agent Request Reservation from Customer Quote to Customer Requirement may send update information to the Fulfillment Out interface which may invoke a Request Customer Requirement Reservation operation that requests fulfillment planning for customer quote items. A Customer Requirement Fulfillment Request message may be sent to a Maintain Customer Requirement operation in the Customer Requirement Processing process component .

If the Request Product Availability Information operation is performed then an Availability Information Query message is generated and sent to the Customer Requirement Processing process component where the update is sent on to a Customer Requirement business object using a Check Availability outbound process agent . This update may be performed by a synchronous Check Availability operation . The Customer Requirement business object is a requirement document that is derived from a sales order or quotation and to which details on the anticipated availability date are added. It may contain the quantities of required products at specific dates and information about which products and quantities will be available or delivered at which dates. In addition to forwarding information to the Customer Requirement business object the Check Availability operation may send an Availability Information Response message back to the Customer Quote Processing process component .

Upon receiving the update the Customer Requirement business object sends the update to a Fulfillment Out interface using a Confirm Customer Requirement outbound process agent . The Fulfillment Out interface invokes a Notify of availability update operation that notifies the creator of a customer requirement about an updated availability situation for the products requested within the customer requirement. An Availability Update Notification message is generated and sent into the Fulfillment In interface in the Customer Quote process agent .

The Fulfillment In interface may invoke a Change Customer Quote based on Availability Update operation that changes customer quote with availability and reservation information based on changes in fulfillment planning. An inbound process agent Change Customer Quote based on Availability Update may send update information to the Customer Quote business object .

If the Request Product Availability Information and Provisional Reservation operation is performed an Availability Check Request message may be generated and sent to a Check availability and Reserve operation that checks the availability of specific amounts of certain materials and confirms this availability to the caller in the Customer Requirement Processing process component . The message may be sent on to the Customer Requirement business object and an Availability Check Confirmation message may be sent back to the Customer Quote Processing process component .

If the Register Customer Requirement Deletion Notification operation is performed a Customer Requirement Deletion Notification message is generated and sent to a Delete Provisional Customer Requirement operation that deletes provisional customer requirements that have been created by a sync check availability and reserve operation. The message may be sent on to the Customer Requirement business object using a Maintain Customer Requirement inbound process agent .

The Purchase Request Processing process component includes a Service Request business object . The Service Request business object contains a service notification reflecting the initial inquiry of a customer when contacting a customer service and support center.

In the Service Request Processing process component a Request Invoicing from Service Request to Customer Invoice Processing outbound process agent requests the execution of a service request. The outbound process agent uses a Request Invoicing operation to send a Customer Invoice Request Request message to the Customer Invoice Processing process component . The Request Invoicing operation is part of a Request Invoicing Out interface .

The Customer Invoice Request Request message is received by a Maintain Customer Invoice Request operation which creates updates deletes or requests cancellation of customer invoice requests in a Request Invoicing In interface . The operation initiates a Maintain Customer Invoice Request inbound process agent .

The Customer Invoice Processing process component includes a Customer Invoice Request business object . The Customer Invoice Request business object is used to charge a customer for delivery of goods or services.

The customer Invoice Processing process component also includes a Customer Invoice business object . A Confirm Customer Invoice outbound process agent requests the execution of a Confirm Invoicing operation that confirms that a customer invoice was created or cancelled to process components which requested the invoicing. The outbound process agent uses a Confirm Invoicing operation to send a Customer Invoice Issued Confirmation message to the Service Request Processing process component . The Confirm Invoicing operation is part of a Request Invoicing Out interface .

The Customer Invoice Issued Confirmation message is received by a Change Service Request based on Customer Invoice operation that documents information about issued customer invoice in the service request in a Request Invoicing In interface . The operation initiates a Change Service Request based on Customer Invoice inbound process agent . The inbound process agent updates the Service Request business object .

Interactions between Process Components Service Confirmation Processing and Customer Invoice Processing 

The Customer Invoice Processing process component may send a confirmation into a Request Invoicing Out interface using a Confirmation Customer Invoice outbound process agent . The Request Invoicing Out interface may invoke a Confirm Invoicing operation that confirms that customer invoice was created or cancelled to process components which requested invoicing. A Customer Invoice Issued Confirmation message may then be generated and sent to the Request Invoicing In interface in the Service Confirmation Processing process component . Next a Change Service Confirmation based on Customer Invoice operation is invoked to document information about issued customer invoice in the service confirmation. A Change Service Confirmation based on Customer Invoice inbound process agent updates the Service Confirmation business object .

Interactions between Process Components Service Request Processing and Service Request Processing in External Provider System 

The Service Request Processing process component includes a Service Request business object . The Service Request business object is a service notification reflecting the initial inquiry of a customer when contacting a Customer Service and Support Center. The Service Request business object includes customer data the nature of the request and the customer s product in question. In addition text notes describing the issue and attributes that classify the request the problem reason severity and so on can be maintained. Service requests might also include immediate validation of existing service entitlements such as agreed service levels and existing service contracts or product warranties. To ensure an appropriate reaction prioritization and scheduling of request processing is set accordingly.

The Service Request business object sends a request to an External Requesting Out interface using a Request Service from Service Request to External Provider outbound process agent . The External Request Out interface invokes a Request Service operation that sends Service Request Creation Update data to an external provider system thereby generating a Service Request message to update the Service Request Processing in External Provider System process component .

The Service Request Processing process component may receive an incoming Service Request Confirmation message from the Service Request Processing in External Provider System process component . An External Requesting In interface receives the message and invokes a Change Service Request based on Provider s Confirmation operation that updates a service request based on a confirmation message of a service request creation update or processing progress received from an external provider system. A Change service Request based on External Provider s Request Confirmation inbound process agent updates the Service Request business object .

Four business objects from the Demand Matching process component are used in the Logistics execution Demand process component Planning View on Inventory which is a planning view on Inventory is an object that represents the inventory object from logistics execution Supply Planning Requirement which is a requirement object that is used as the target for the supply planning run and the availability check Procurement Planning Order which defines the requested or expected material receipt in a specific quantity and at a specific availability date Planned Material Flow which is an object that defines the relationship between material receipt elements stock planned order and a production order purchase requisition purchase order etc. and material requirements elements sales order forecast demand dependent demand transfer demand of a material within a location.

The business object uses a Request Site Logistics Processing from Site Log Req to Site Logistics Processing outbound process agent to send an update to the Request Site Logistics Processing process component .

The Site Logistics Processing Out interface includes a Request Site Logistics operation to send a request in order to maintain the site logistics request. The Site Logistics Request message may then be generated and sent to the Site Logistics Processing process component .

The Site Logistics Processing In interface includes a Maintain Site Logistics Request operation that creates or updates a Site Logistics Processing Request. A Maintain Site Logistics Request inbound process agent may send an update into a Site Logistics Request business object . The Site Logistics Request business object performs Site Logistics operations supporting outbound inbound and site internal logistics activities at a certain time. A Confirm Site Logistics Request to Logistic Execution Control outbound process agent may send updated information into a Site Logistics Processing Out interface which includes a Confirm Site Logistics Request operation that confirms receipt of request and acknowledges quantities and delivery dates. This operation generates a Site Logistics Request Confirmation message which will be sent to update the Logistics Execution Control process component .

A Site Logistics Confirmation business object may also send updated information into the Logistics Execution Control process component using a Notify of Site Logistics Confirmation to Logistic Execution Control outbound process agent . The Site Logistics Confirmation business object is a document that collects actual data posted with reference to a site logistics order or site logistics request. The site logistics confirmation updates inventory finance and planning. A Notify of Site Logistics Request Progress operation may be invoked that informs logistics execution control about inventory changes and fulfillment of Site Logistics Processing. A Site Logistics Request Progress Notification message may be generated to update the Logistics Execution Control process component .

Upon receiving messages and the Logistics Execution Control process component may perform the following operations 1. The Site Logistics Processing In interface contains a Change Site Log Request Progress Notification operation which notifies Logistics execution control of inventory changes and confirmation of Site Logistics Processing. 2. The Site Logistics Processing In interface also contains a Change Site Logistics Requisition based on Site Logistics Request Confirmation operation that receives confirmation data from Site Logistics Request. A Maintain Site Logistics Requisition Based on Site Logistics inbound process agent may then update the Site Logistics Requisition business object .

Interactions between Process Components Payment Processing at Business Partner and Payment Processing 

A payment advice is created at a business partner and a Payment Advice Notification message is generated. The Payment Processing process component receives the Payment Advice Notification message into the Incoming Payment Advicing In interface where a Create Payment Advice operation creates a Payment Advice concerning future payment transactions. A Maintain Payment Advice inbound process agent updates a Payment Advice business object with a new or modified payment advice. The payment advice may be sent to the Due Item Processing deployment unit for post processing.

The Service Order Processing process component includes a Service Order business object that represents customer orders to service providers for the delivery of services which can possibly include the exchange of spare parts in an after sales situation.

In the Service Order Processing process component a Request Invoicing from Service Order to Customer Invoice Processing outbound process agent uses a Request Invoicing operation to send a Customer Invoice Request Request message to the Customer Invoice Processing process component . The Request Invoicing operation is part of a Request for Quote Out interface .

The Customer Invoice Request Request message is received by a Maintain Customer Invoice Request operation that creates updates deletes or requests cancellation of a customer invoice request in an Invoice Verification In interface . The Maintain Customer Invoice Request operation initiates a Maintain Customer Invoice Request inbound process agent which creates or updates a Customer Invoice Request business object to take over the billing relevant data from the initiator of the billing process.

Next the Confirm Customer Invoice outbound process agent receives the Customer Invoice business object information and initiates a Confirm Invoicing operation in a Request Invoicing Out Interface . A Customer Invoice Issued Confirmation message is generated and sent to the Service Order Processing process component .

The message is received in the Request Invoicing In interface . The interface includes a Change Service Order based on Customer Invoice operation that documents information about issued customer invoices in the service order. The update is sent to the Service Order business object using a Change Service Order based on Customer Invoice inbound process agent .

The Confirmation and Inventory process component includes a Goods and Activity Confirmation business object that contains all actual data reflecting an ad hoc executed work. For example actual data may include a notification of scrap material a goods issue for account assignment or a change of stock category update. In particular the execution was not pre planned based on a production or site logistics order.

The Notify of Inventory Change From Goods and Activity Confirmation to Accounting outbound process agent can invoke a Notify of Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation operation to update an inventory change or to update an action consumption posting. Alternatively a Request Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation Cancellation operation may be invoked to send Inventory Change Accounting Cancellation updates to Accounting. Both operations may be used in an Inventory and Activity Accounting Out interface . If the Notify of Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation operation is invoked then an Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation Accounting Notification message is sent to the Accounting process component . If the Request Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation Cancellation operation is invoked the Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation Accounting Cancellation Notification message is sent to the Accounting process component .

The messages and are received by an Inventory and Activity Accounting In interface where operations may be performed. If a notification message is received then a Create Accounting Document operation is performed to receive Inventory Change Accounting Notifications from Confirmation and Inventory Site Logistics Processing or Production. If a cancellation message is received then a Cancel Accounting Document operation is performed to Receive Inventory Change Accounting Cancellation Request from Confirmation and Inventory Site Logistics Processing or Production. Cancellations and updates may be sent by a Maintain Accounting Document based on Inventory and Activity inbound process agent to an Accounting Notification business object .

Interactions between Process Components Payment Processing and Payment Order Processing at House Bank 

The Payment Processing process component includes four business objects a Bill of Exchange Receivable business object that represents a Bill of Exchange received from or a Bill of Exchange Request sent to a business partner an Outgoing Check business object that represents a check sent to a business partner that is created via payment order a Bill of Exchange Payable business object that represents a Bill of Exchange sent to a business partner that is created only via payment order and a Bank Payment Order business object which is a Payment Order that will be sent to a house bank and may contain bank transfers as well direct debits.

The Request Payment Order from Bill of Exchange Receivable to House Bank creates an electronic Bill of Exchange Receivable Request . The Request Payment Order from Outgoing Check to House Bank creates an outgoing check to be printed externally. The Request Payment Order from Bill of Exchange Payable to House Bank creates an electronic Bill of Exchange Payable. The Request Payment Order from Bank Payment Order to House Bank creates a Payment order to House Bank.

The Payment Ordering out interface receives the updates from the outbound process agents . A Request Payment Order operation collects Bank Transfers or Direct Debits for payment submission to the business partner. A Collective Payment Order Request message is generated and processed by the Payment order processing at house bank process component . Upon completion of processing a Collective Payment Order Confirmation message is sent to the Payment Ordering In interface that includes a Maintain Payment Order Confirmation operation to confirm the status updates from processing a payment order. After completing the operation an update is sent to the Bank Payment Order business object using the Maintain Payment Order Confirmation from House Bank inbound process agent .

The Service Confirmation Processing process component includes a Service Confirmation business object that stores the actual resource consumption of performed service operations including working time parts and expenses related to service fulfillment. The Service Confirmation business object may use a Notify of Service Confirmation to Accounting inbound process agent to update an Order Accounting Out interface . The Order Accounting Out interface includes a Notify of Service Confirmation operation that notifies Accounting about the creation change or deletion of a service confirmation. An Order Accounting Notification message is generated and sent to the Accounting process component . The Accounting process component receives the notification message in an Order Accounting In interface which includes a Maintain Subledger Account operation that receives order accounting notifications from the following process components Service Confirmation Processing Service Contract Processing Service Request Processing Service Order Processing Purchase Order Processing and Sales Order Processing. The notification is to inform the Accounting process component about creation change or deletion of any kind of order business objects. A Maintain Subledger Account based on Order inbound process agent may then update an Accounting Notification business object . The Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting that is called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in Financial Accounting.

Alternatively the Service Confirmation business object may use a Notify of Resource Consumption from Service Confirmation to Accounting outbound process agent to send a Resource Consumption Notification message or a Resource Consumption Cancellation Request message . The Service Confirmation Processing process component passes information into a Resource Consumption Accounting Out interface which includes a Notify of Resource Consumption operation or a Request Resource Consumption Cancellation operation . The Notify of Resource Consumption operation informs Accounting Processing about service provisions such as activity consumption or resource consumption and generates the Resource consumption Notification message . The Request Resource Consumption Cancellation operation cancels a service provision and generates a Resource Consumption Cancellation Request message .

The Resource Consumption Notification message may be received by a Resource Consumption Accounting In interface which includes a Create Accounting Document operation that receives resource consumption notifications from Production Service Request Processing Service Confirmation Processing Time and Labor Management and Project Processing. A Cancel Accounting Document operation may also be invoked if a Resource Consumption Cancellation Request message is received. A Maintain Accounting Document based on Resource Consumption inbound process agent may then update the Accounting Notification business object .

The Notify of Inventory Change From Site Logistics Confirmation to Accounting outbound process agent includes a Notify of Inventory Change and Activity Provision operation to send an Inventory Change Accounting Notification to Accounting message to the Accounting process component . Alternatively a Request Inventory Change and Activity Provision Cancellation operation may be invoked to request inventory change and activity provision cancellation. Both operations may be used in an Inventory and Activity Accounting Out interface . If the Request Inventory Change and Activity Provision Cancellation operation is invoked the Inventory Change and Activity Confirmation Accounting Cancellation Request message is sent to the Accounting process component .

The messages and are received by an Inventory and activity Accounting In interface where operations may be performed. If a notification message is received then a Create Receivables Payables operation is performed to Receive Inventory Change Accounting Notification from Confirmation and Inventory or Site Logistics Processing or Production. If a cancellation message is received then a Cancel Accounting Document operation is performed to Receive Inventory Change Accounting Cancellation Request from Confirmation and Inventory or Site Logistics Processing or Production. Cancellations and updates may be sent by a Maintain Accounting Document based on Inventory and Activity inbound process agent to an Accounting Notification business object.

The Customer Invoice Processing process component includes a Customer Invoice business object . The Customer Invoice business object is used to charge a customer for delivery of goods or services. A customer invoice is then sent into a Notify of Customer Invoice to Accounting outbound process agent which notifies accounting of the existence of the customer invoice.

The processing agent provides an Invoice Accounting Out interface with the notification and additional data such as invoice billing numbers or a credit memo. Here the interface includes a Notify of Invoice operation and a Request Invoice Cancellation operation . The Notify of Invoice operation may be invoked if the invoice accounting out interface receives a notification to post an invoice. Upon performing the Notify of Invoice operation the outbound process agent transmits an Invoice Accounting Notification message with the invoice accounting notification. Alternatively the Request Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked if the Invoice Accounting Out interface receives information requesting a cancellation. For example the Request Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked in order to cancel an invoice. Upon performing the Request Invoice Cancellation operation the Notify of Customer Invoice Accounting outbound process agent transmits an Invoice Accounting Cancellation message with the invoice accounting cancellation request.

The Accounting process component may receive messages sent by the Supplier Invoice Processing process component . Here an Invoice Accounting interface includes a Create Accounting Document operation that creates an accounting document for a customer invoice or supplier invoice if accounting receives the Invoice Accounting Notification message . The Invoice Accounting interface also includes a Cancel Accounting Document operation that cancels a customer or supplier invoice.

The Accounting process component includes a Maintain Accounting Document based on Invoice inbound process agent that can maintain accounting documents. For example the inbound process agent may update the accounting document if a creation or cancellation operation is received. After updating the accounting document the inbound process agent may forward information about the updated document into an Accounting Notification business object . The Accounting Notification business object may receive input from operational business transactions such as the invoice notification above and record the business transactions in the Financial Accounting deployment unit.

The Service Order Processing process component includes the Service Order business object which passes information into a Notify of Service Order to Accounting outbound process agent . The information may contain notifications about created changed or cancelled purchase orders.

The outbound process agent sends notification into an Order Accounting Out interface which includes a Notify of Service Order operation . The Notify of Service Order operation may be called when a service order has been created changed or cancelled. An Order Accounting Notification message may then be sent to the Accounting process component .

The Accounting process component receives the Order Accounting Notification message in the interface which includes a Maintain Subledger Account operation that receives order accounting notifications from the Service Order Processing process component . The notification message informs the Accounting Processing process component about the creation the change or the deletion of any kind of order business objects. The notification may then be sent to the Accounting Notification business object using an inbound process agent . The Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting that is called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in Financial Accounting.

Interactions between Process Components Service Request Processing External Requester System and Service Request Processing 

The Service Request Processing process component receives a Service Request message into an External Providing In interface which includes a Maintain Service Request operation . The Maintain Service Request operation creates or updates service requests using messages received from external requester systems. A Maintain Service Request inbound process agent updates a Service Request business object . The Service Request business object is a service notification reflecting the initial inquiry of a customer when contacting a Customer Service and Support Center.

After the update occurs a Confirm Service Request from Service Request to External Requestor outbound process agent sends an update to a Confirm Service Request operation that creates updates or processes confirmations to the external requester systems. The operation is part of an External Providing out interface . A Service Request Confirmation message is generated and transmitted to the Service Request Processing External Requester System process component .

The process components include business objects to create and update data by passing messages between the Payment Request process component and the Due Item Processing process component . Multiple operations can be carried out within the interfaces. Both inbound and outbound process agents carry the business object data to and from the interfaces.

A due payment business object may create payment requests manually or automatically for payment processing. The due payment business object is responsible for the payment and clearing of payables and receivables for goods and services. A product tax declaration business object is a declaration of the product tax liabilities receivables of a company to the responsible tax authority according to the tax declaration arrangement and country specific legal requirements that triggers the payment to the tax authority.

A Synchronous Request Payment Reservation interface from Due Payment to Payment Processing outbound process component may create a payment reservation request from Due Payment. The Payment Request Out interface includes several operations which go on to create messages and updates to business objects in the Payment Processing process component . The operations messaging and business objects are discussed in the following paragraphs.

The Payment Request Out interface includes a synchronous Request payment information and provisional Payment Reservation operation that generates a Payment Order Reservation Request message to request a payment order reservation. A synchronous Create Payment Reservation operation receives the message and uses a Sync Maintain Payment Reservation inbound process agent to update a Payment Order business object . In addition a Payment Order Reservation Confirmation synchronous message is sent back to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Payment Request Out interface also includes a Notify of provisional Payment Reservation Deletion operation that registers the change of a provisional payment to the last transactional saved state. A Payment Order Reservation Cancellation Notification message may be generated and a Cancel Payment Reservation operation may be invoked that cancels a previously sent payment reservation by reference. Next a maintain Payment Order inbound process agent sends an update to the Payment Order business object .

The Payment Request Out interface further includes a synchronous Request Payment Information and provisional Payment Reservation Change operation that requests payment information with a provisional reservation of money in payment processing. A Payment Order Reservation Change Request synchronous message is generated and a synchronous Sync Change Payment Reservation operation is invoked that changes a reservation of payment and confirms the change to the caller. Next a Payment Reservation Confirmation synchronous message may be generated and sent back to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Payment Request Out interface further includes a Notify of provisional Payment Reservation Change Deletion operation that registers the change of a provisional payment to the last transactional saved state. A Payment Order Reservation Change Deletion Cancellation Notification message may be generated and a Change Payment Reservation operation may be invoked that changes a previously sent payment reservation by reference. Upon completion of the operation the Maintain Payment Order inbound process agent updates the Payment Order business object .

A Request Payment from Due Payment to Payment Processing outbound process agent may send a payment update to the Payment Processing process component from a Due Payment business object . A Request Payment operation is then invoked that sends a request for payment to Payment Processing. Upon completion of the operation a Payment Order Request message is sent the Payment Processing process component where a Create Payment Order operation begins. Then the Maintain Payment Order inbound process agent updates the Payment Order business object to create or cancel a payment order.

A Request Payment from Product Tax Declaration to Payment Processing outbound process agent may send an update from a Product Tax Declaration business object . The update is sent into the Payment Request Out interface and a Request Payment Cancellation operation is invoked to cancel a provisional requested or ordered payment. A Payment Order Cancellation Request message is then generated and sent to the Payment Processing process component where a Cancel Payment Order operation is invoked.

The payment order business object may use a Confirm Payment Request from Payment Order to Due Item Processing outbound process agent to confirm the processing status of a payment to the sender of a payment request. A Confirm Payment Request operation may then be invoked thereby generating a Payment Order Request Confirmation message to send to the Due Item Processing process component . The message is received in a Change payment based on Payment Request Confirmation operation that uses a Change Due Payment based on Payment Request Confirmation outbound process agent to update the processing status of Due Payment based on the confirmation of a payment request.

Interactions between Process Components Payment Processing and Payment Processing at Business Partner 

The interaction model begins in the Payment Processing process component with a Payment Order business object . The Payment Order business object creates payment media for either a bank a credit card a settlement institute or a business partner on the base of payment requests. After the payment media is created the Payment Order business object sends a notification using a Notify of Payment from the Payment Order to the Business Partner outbound process agent . A Payment Order can create different sub items within a payment that is sent if the payment medium is subject to amount limitations. The Payment Processing process component also contains an Outgoing Payment Advicing Out interface that includes a Notify of Payment operation . The Notify of Payment operation creates a payment advice and sends a Payment Advice Notification message to the Payment Processing at Business Partner processing component .

The Service Request Processing process component includes a Service Request business object . The Service Request business object contains a notification reflecting the initial inquiry of a customer when contacting a Customer Service and Support Center. In the Service Request Processing process component a Notify of Service Request to Accounting outbound process agent requests the execution of a request for quote. The outbound process agent uses a Notify of Service Request operation to send an Order Accounting Notification message notifying accounting about the creation change or deletion of a service request. The Notify of Service Request operation is part of a Order Accounting Out interface .

The Order Accounting Notification message is received by a Maintain Subledge Account operation in an Order Accounting In interface where the operation receives order accounting notification to inform Accounting Processing about creation change or deletion of any kind of order business objects. Next the Maintain Subledge Account based on Order outbound process agent receives the request for quote and updates the Accounting Notification business object . The Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting that can be called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in Financial Accounting.

Alternatively the Service Request Processing process component may notify the Accounting process component of a particular resource consumption. shows a Notify of Resource Consumption from Service Request to Accounting outbound process agent using both a Notify of Resource Consumption operation and a Request Resource Cancellation operation to update the Accounting process component . Both operations are part of a Resource Consumption Accounting Out interface . If the Notify of Resource Consumption Operation is invoked a Resource Consumption Notification message is transmitted to the Accounting process component . The message is received in the Create Accounting Document operation . If the Request Resource Consumption Cancellation operation is invoked a Resource Consumption Cancellation Request message is transmitted to the Accounting process component . The message is received in the Cancel Accounting Document operation . After completion of the Create Accounting Document operation or the Cancel Accounting Document operation a Maintain Accounting Document based on Resource Consumption inbound process agent updates the Accounting Notification business object .

The a Payment Processing process component includes a Payment Allocation business object . The Payment Allocation business object documents a process step by which open payments of different type belonging to one another are indicated as confirmed or sent to other components for post processing. In the Payment Processing process component a Request Clearing Maintenance from Payment Allocation to Due Item Processing outbound process agent uses a Request Clearing operation to send a Clearing Request message to request the clearing of payments within the Due Item Processing process component . Alternatively the outbound process agent may invoke a Request Clearing Cancellation operation to cancel a payment clearing using a Clearing Cancellation Request message . Both operations are part of a clearing Out interface in the Payment Processing process component .

The messages are received in the Due Item Processing process component in a Create Clearing operation and a Cancel Clearing operation respectively. The Create Clearing operation and the Cancel Clearing operation are both part of a Clearing In interface . Upon creating or canceling clearing a Maintain Clearing inbound process agent may update a Due Payment business object or a Product Declaration business object or both.

The Due Payment business object creates payment requests for payment processing. A Confirm Clearing from Due Payment to Payment Processing outbound process agent may invoke a Confirm Clearing operation that sends a Clearing Confirmation message to payment processing for a clearing request. The operation is part of a Clearing Out interface The message is received by a Change Payment Allocation based On Clearing request Confirmation operation that confirms the execution or rejection of a sent Clearing Request. The operation is part of a Clearing In interface . An update may be sent to the Payment Allocation business object using a Change Payment Allocation Based on Clearing Request Confirmation inbound process agent .

The Product Tax Declaration business object is a declaration of the product tax liabilities receivables of a company to the responsible tax authority according to the tax declaration arrangement and country specific legal requirements that triggers the payment to the tax authority. The Product Tax Declaration business object may invoke the same sequence of events that the Due Payment business object above has completed.

Interactions between Process Components Customer Invoice Processing and Supplier Invoice Processing at Customer 

The Customer Invoice Processing process component contains a Customer Invoice business object a Notify Customer of Customer Invoice inbound process agent and a Notify Customer of Invoice operation in an Invoicing Out interface . The Customer Invoice business object is an object used to charge a customer for delivery of goods or services.

The Customer Invoice business object initiates the Notify Customer of Invoice operation to fill billing document with data for customer usage. Upon completion of the operation the Notify of Customer Invoice operation transmits an Invoice Request message requesting that the update be made.

As shown in a bank statement is created at a bank and a Bank Statement Notification message is created. The Payment Processing process component receives the Bank Statement Notification message into the Bank Statement Processing In interface where a Create Bank Statement operation is invoked to create a bank statement in the Payment Processing process component . A Maintain Bank Statement inbound process agent updates the Bank Statement business object with a new or modified bank statement. For example the bank statement may be a statement for a house bank account where modifications are made when bills are paid.

The Customer Invoice Processing process component includes a Customer Invoice business object which is a document used to charge a customer for delivery of goods or services.

A Notify of Customer Invoice to Due Item Processing outbound process agent invokes a Notify of Invoice operation to inform the Due Item Processing process component about a customer invoice in order to derive payment due data. Alternatively a Request Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked to cancel the previously sent notification for receivables payables due. Both operations may be used in a Receivables Payables Out interface . If the Notify of Invoice operation is invoked then a Receivables Payables Notification message is sent to the Due Item Processing process component . If the Request Invoice Cancellation operation is invoked the Receivables Payables Cancellation Request message is sent to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Receivables Payables Messages are received by a Receivables Payables In interface where operations may be performed. If the notification message is received then a Create Receivables Payables operation is performed to create a trade and or tax receivable or payable. If the cancellation message is received then a Cancel Receivables Payables operation is performed to cancel a trade and or tax receivable or payable. Cancellations and updates may be sent by a Maintain Trade and Tax Receivables Payables inbound process agent to one or more of three business objects a Trade Receivables Payables business object a Tax Receivables Payables business object and a Due Clearing business object . The Trade Receivables Payables business object may register for all trade receivables and payables from goods and services of a company from to its business partners. The Tax Receivables Payables business object may register for all tax receivables and payables of a company that are due for delivered goods and rendered services between buyers and sellers the consumption of goods and the transfer of goods that are withheld from payments to vendors. The Due Clearing business object is group of receivables and payables for clearing. Clearing means that the amounts of the receivables and payables of a group balance to zero taking cash discounts and other deductions into account. The group is typically payments and invoices that belong together but it can also be credit memos and invoices or customer and vendor invoices. A group results uniquely from the invoice reference information of a payment.

Interactions between Process Components Logistics Execution Control and Outbound Delivery Processing 

The Logistics Execution Control process component controls and monitors on a macro logistics level the supply chain execution activities necessary for the fulfillment of an order. The Logistics Execution Control process component sends information to Logistics Execution to trigger the necessary supply chain execution activities receives information about the supply chain execution progress and updates data relevant for both fulfillment and supply and demand planning.

The Logistics Execution Control process component includes a Logistics Execution Requisition business object that sends data into a Fulfillment Out interface using a Request Fulfillment from Logistics Execution Request to Outbound Delivery Processing outbound process agent . The Fulfillment Out interface includes a Request Delivery Fulfillment operation performed to maintain a delivery request The Logistics Execution Requisition business object may send instructions to Logistics Execution which supports the controlling triggering and monitoring of supply chain execution activities necessary for the fulfillment of an order.

A Delivery Fulfillment Request message is then transmitted to a Fulfillment In interface located in the Outbound Delivery Processing process component . The interface contains a Maintain Outbound Delivery Request operation which receives delivery fulfillment requests from Logistics Execution Control and sends the requests into an Outbound Delivery Request business object using a Maintain Outbound Delivery Request inbound delivery process agent . The Outbound Delivery Request business object is a document in the inbound delivery process containing all the relevant logistics data from the initiator of the inbound delivery process such as the purchase order for example . The inbound delivery request is used to validate an inbound delivery and an advanced shipping notification and to prepare inbound logistics for receiving the goods. Upon receipt of the inbound delivery request a Confirm Fulfillment of Outbound Delivery Request to Logistics Execution Control outbound delivery agent sends the confirmation data into a Fulfillment Out interface where a Confirm Fulfillment operation may take place. Upon completion of the Confirm Fulfillment operation a Delivery Fulfillment Confirmation message is created and transmitted back to the Logistics Execution Control process component to receive fulfillment confirmation data. Receiving the Delivery Fulfillment Confirmation message in the Logistics Execution Control process component may invoke a Change Logistics Execution Requisition based on the Delivery Fulfillment Confirmation operation . The operation may then send updates or changes by way of a Change Logistics Execution Requisition based on Delivery Fulfillment inbound process agent into the Logistics Execution Requisition business object .

The Payment Processing process component Payment Processing process component includes ten business objects a Bill of Exchange Submission business object an Incoming Check business object a Check Deposit business object a Payment Order business object a Bank Statement business object a Bill of Exchange Receivable business object a Cash Transfer business object a Payment Allocation business object a Clearing House Payment Order business object and a Cash Payment business object

The Bill of Exchange Submission business object sends incoming bill of exchange receivables to the house bank for cashing. The Incoming Check business object represents a check sent by a business partner. The incoming check will be sent to the house bank by a check deposit. The Check Deposit business object sends a collection of incoming checks to the house bank for cashing. The Payment Order business object creates payment media for either a bank a credit card a settlement institute or a business partner on the base of payment requests. The Bank Statement business object is a bank statement for a house bank account. The Bill of Exchange Receivable business object represents a Bill of Exchange received from a business partner or a Bill of Exchange Request sent to a business partner. The Cash Transfer business object is a document that shows an internal money transfer between a bank account and bank account bank transfer a cash account and bank account cash deposit a bank account and cash account cash withdrawal or a cash account and cash account cash transfer . The Payment Allocation business object documents a process step by which open payments of different types belonging to one another are indicated as confirmed or sent to other components for post processing. For example an incoming check may confirm a payment advice or a bank statement item may confirm a check deposit. The Clearing House Payment Order business object is an order document for clearing a collection of credit card payments to the clearing house. The Cash Payment business object is a document showing an incoming or outgoing cash payment from or to a business partner.

The Payment Processing process component also contains a number of outbound process agents each tied to a particular business object. The Notify of Payment from Bill of Exchange Submission to Accounting outbound process agent creates an accounting notification from the Bill of Exchange Submission business object . The Notify of Payment from Incoming Check to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a bounced or cancelled check. The Notify of Payment from Check Deposit to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a change in status of a check deposit. For example a notification may be sent stating that a deposit is ready for transfer to another account. The Notify of Payment from Payment Order to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment by payment order or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Bank Statement to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment by bank account or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Bill of Exchange Receivable to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by a bill of exchange or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Cash Transfer to Accounting outbound process component may notify the Accounting process component about a transfer of money between house bank accounts and or cash accounts or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Payment Allocation to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by a payment allocation or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Credit Card Settlement to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by credit card or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Cash Payment to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by cash or a cancellation of payment.

The outbound process agents above may cause invocation of a Notify of Payment operation or a Request Payment Cancellation operation to update accounting. The operations may be included in a Payment Accounting Out interface . The Payment Accounting Out interface may send a Payment Accounting Notification message or a Payment Accounting Cancellation Request message to a Payment Accounting In interface in the Accounting process component . The Payment Accounting In interface includes a Create Accounting Document operation or a Cancel Accounting Document operation depending on the received message. A Maintain Accounting Document based on Payment inbound processing component updates an Accounting Notification business object . The Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting that is called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in Financial Accounting.

The Due Item Processing component contains three business objects a Due Clearing business object to clear the amounts of the receivables and payables of a group balance to zero taking cash discounts and other deductions into account a Due Payment business object to create payment requests for payment processing and a Product Tax Declaration business object to declare the product tax liabilities receivables of a company to the responsible tax authority according to the tax declaration arrangement and country specific legal requirements that triggers the payment to the tax authority.

The business objects send updates into one of three outbound process agents a Notify of Payment from Due Clearing to Accounting which sends notification for a clearing of trade receivables and or payables to Accounting a Notify of Payment from Due Payment to Accounting which sends notification to Accounting for inward or outward trade receivables and or payables payments and a Notify of Payment from Product Tax Declaration to Accounting which sends notification for a payment of tax receivables and or payables to Accounting.

A Payment Accounting Out interface includes a Notify of Payment operation which sends a Payment Accounting Notification message to the Accounting process component notifying Financial Accounting about inward or outward movements of trade or tax receivables or payables. Alternatively a Request Payment Cancellation operation is invoked that sends a Payment Accounting Cancellation Request message to the Accounting process component to notify a cancelling of an inward or outward movement of trade or tax receivables or payables in Financial Accounting.

The Accounting process component receives the messages in a Payment Accounting In interface which includes a Create Accounting Document operation to receive Payment Accounting Notification from Payment Processing or Due Item Processing. If the received message was the cancellation message a Cancel Accounting Document operation is invoked to cancel the payment processing or due item processing. Updates are sent to the Accounting Notification business object using a Maintain Accounting Document based on Payment inbound process agent . An Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting that is called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in Financial Accounting.

Interactions between Process Components Service Order Processing and Customer Requirement Processing 

The Service Order Processing process component contains a Service Order business object inbound and outbound processing agents and several operations. The Service Order business object represents customer orders to service providers for the delivery of services which can possibly include the exchange of spare parts in an after sales scenario. The Service Order business object initiates one of four operations to send or request information to the Customer Requirement Processing process component .

The Service Order business object may send a request to fulfill a service order to the Sync Request Availability Information and Reservation from Service Order to Customer Requirement outbound process agent . Here the process agent may invoke a Sync Request Spare Part Availability Information and Provisional Reservation operation that requests availability information including the creation of a provisional reservation for service order spare part items operation. Upon completion of the operation the operation transmits an Availability Check Request message . The Availability Check Request message is received by a Check Availability and Reserve operation that checks the availability of certain amounts of materials and confirms this availability to the caller. The process agent updates the Customer Requirement business object to complete the operation . In addition an Availability Check Confirmation message may be transmitted back to the Service Order Processing process component .

The Service Order business object may also send a notification to a Register Spare Part Requirement Deletion Notification operation that registers provisional spare part requirement reservation for deletion. The operation also triggers deletion in case of failure or cancellation of transaction processing. This operation generates a Customer Requirement Deletion Notification message and is received in a Delete Provisional Customer Requirement operation . The Delete Provisional Customer Requirement operation deletes provisional customer requirements that have been created by the sync check availability and reserve operation. An update may be sent to the Customer Requirement business object using the Check Availability inbound process agent .

The Service Order business object may also send a request to a Request Spare art Requirement Reservation and Fulfillment operation using a Request Requirement Reservation and fulfillment from Service Order to Customer Requirement outbound process agent . The Request Spare Part Requirement Reservation and Fulfillment operation requests fulfillment planning and fulfillment execution for service order spare part items. A Customer Requirement Fulfillment Request message is generated and transmitted to a Maintain Customer Requirement operation that creates or changes a customer requirement. An update may be sent to a Customer Requirement business object using the Maintain Customer Requirement inbound process agent .

The Customer Requirement business object is derived from a sales order or quotation for which details on the anticipated availability date are added. The Customer Requirement business object sends information or notifications to the Service Order Processing process component using a Confirmation Customer Requirement outbound process agent . The process agent invokes a Notify of availability update operation which notifies the creator of a customer requirement about an updated availability situation for the products requested within the customer requirement. The process agent may also invoke a Confirm Fulfillment operation that confirms the partial or complete fulfillment of a customer requirement to the creator of the requirement. If the Notify of availability update operation is invoked an Availability Update Notification message may be generated and transmitted to a Change Service Order based on Spare Part Availability Update operation to update a service order with spare part availability and reservation information based on customer requirement fulfillment planning data. If the Confirm Fulfillment operation is invoked a Customer Requirement Fulfillment Confirmation message may be generated and transmitted to a Change Service Order based on Spare Part Fulfillment Confirmation operation that updates a service order with spare part quantity delivered to customer or picked up by service technician. A change Service Order based on Customer Requirement inbound process agent may then update the Service Order business object .

The subject matter described in this specification and all of the functional operations described in this specification can be implemented in digital electronic circuitry or in computer software firmware or hardware including the structural means disclosed in this specification and structural equivalents thereof or in combinations of them. The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented as one or more computer program products i.e. one or more computer programs tangibly embodied in an information carrier e.g. in a machine readable storage device or in a propagated signal for execution by or to control the operation of data processing apparatus e.g. a programmable processor a computer or multiple computers. A computer program also known as a program software software application or code can be written in any form of programming language including compiled or interpreted languages and it can be deployed in any form including as a stand alone program or as a module component subroutine or other unit suitable for use in a computing environment. A computer program does not necessarily correspond to a file. A program can be stored in a portion of a file that holds other programs or data in a single file dedicated to the program in question or in multiple coordinated files e.g. files that store one or more modules sub programs or portions of code . A computer program can be deployed to be executed on one computer or on multiple computers at one site or distributed across multiple sites and interconnected by a communication network.

The processes and logic flows described in this specification can be performed by one or more programmable processors executing one or more computer programs to perform functions by operating on input data and generating output. The processes and logic flows can also be performed by and apparatus can also be implemented as special purpose logic circuitry e.g. an FPGA field programmable gate array or an ASIC application specific integrated circuit .

Processors suitable for the execution of a computer program include by way of example both general and special purpose microprocessors and any one or more processors of any kind of digital computer. Generally a processor will receive instructions and data from a read only memory or a random access memory or both. The essential elements of a computer are a processor for executing instructions and one or more memory devices for storing instructions and data. Generally a computer will also include or be operatively coupled to receive data from or transfer data to or both one or more mass storage devices for storing data e.g. magnetic magneto optical disks or optical disks. Information carriers suitable for embodying computer program instructions and data include all forms of non volatile memory including by way of example semiconductor memory devices e.g. EPROM EEPROM and flash memory devices magnetic disks e.g. internal hard disks or removable disks magneto optical disks and CD ROM and DVD ROM disks. The processor and the memory can be supplemented by or incorporated in special purpose logic circuitry.

To provide for interaction with a user the subject matter described in this specification can be implemented on a computer having a display device e.g. a CRT cathode ray tube or LCD liquid crystal display monitor for displaying information to the user and a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse or a trackball by which the user can provide input to the computer. Other kinds of devices can be used to provide for interaction with a user as well for example feedback provided to the user can be any form of sensory feedback e.g. visual feedback auditory feedback or tactile feedback and input from the user can be received in any form including acoustic speech or tactile input.

The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented in a computing system that includes a back end component e.g. a data server a middleware component e.g. an application server or a front end component e.g. a client computer having a graphical user interface or a Web browser through which a user can interact with an implementation of the subject matter described herein or any combination of such back end middleware and front end components. The components of the system can be interconnected by any form or medium of digital data communication e.g. a communication network. Examples of communication networks include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN e.g. the Internet.

The computing system can include clients and servers. A client and server are generally remote from each other and typically interact through a communication network. The relationship of client and server arises by virtue of computer programs running on the respective computers and having a client server relationship to each other.

While this specification contains many specifics these should not be construed as limitations on the scope of the invention or of what may be claimed but rather as an exemplification of preferred embodiments of the invention. Certain features that are described in this specification in the context of separate embodiments may also be provided in combination in a single embodiment. Conversely various features that are described in the context of a single embodiment may also be provided in multiple embodiments separately or in any suitable subcombination. Moreover although features may be described above as acting in certain combinations and even initially claimed as such one or more features from a claimed combination can in some cases be excised from the combination and the claimed combination may be directed to a subcombination or variation of a subcombination.

The subject matter has been described in terms of particular variations but other variations can be implemented and are within the scope of the following claims. For example the actions recited in the claims can be performed in a different order and still achieve desirable results. As one example the processes depicted in the accompanying figures do not necessarily require the particular order shown or sequential order to achieve desirable results. In certain implementations multitasking and parallel processing may be advantageous. Other variations are within the scope of the following claims.

