---

title: Diagnostic methods for branching catheter systems
abstract: Branching catheter systems with diagnostic components for detecting and isolating fluid flow problems (e.g., leaks, occlusions, etc.) and methods for detecting and isolating fluid flow problems are disclosed. Among the fluid flow problems that may potentially be detected are leaks in the branching catheter systems (e.g., cuts, disconnected components, etc.). Another fluid flow problem that may be detected using the diagnostic systems of the present invention is the presence of occlusions or other blockages that prevent fluid flow within the catheter systems. In addition to identifying that a problem exists, the diagnostic components may preferably also be used to identify the location of the fluid flow problem as discussed herein. Connectors for use in the branching catheter systems are also disclosed. Among the diagnostic components that may be used in branching catheter systems of the present are valves to control fluid flow through the various sections of the branching catheter system, fluid flow detectors to detect flow through the one or more sections of the branching catheter system and a control system for operating the diagnostic components.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07763007&OS=07763007&RS=07763007
owner: Medtronic, Inc.
number: 07763007
owner_city: Minneapolis
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050422
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 564 473 titled CATHETER SYSTEM HAVING FLOW RESTRICTION AND DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM FOR USE WITH SAME filed Apr. 22 2004 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates generally to implantable medical devices and more particularly to branching catheter systems that include diagnostic components for detecting and isolating fluid flow problems e.g. leaks occlusions etc. .

Implantable drug infusion systems are used to provide programmable long term delivery of a therapeutic agent e.g. infusate drug to a target site such as the brain or the spinal canal or epidural space. These systems typically include a pump implanted at a remote location e.g. within the abdominal or chest cavity and a catheter tunneled from the pump to the target site. A drug may be delivered from a reservoir in the pump to the target site via the catheter.

Some therapies e.g. treatment of many neurological diseases may benefit from infusion of a therapeutic agent to multiple locations within the body. For instance for the treatment of Parkinson s Disease it may be beneficial to deliver a substance e.g. Glial Derived Neurotrophic Factor GDNF to both hemispheres of the brain bilaterally . Infusing a drug to such multiple target sites is typically accomplished by separate infusion systems e.g. a separate pump and catheter system for each target site. However duplicate systems result in not only increased costs and patient invasiveness as compared to single target site systems but also increased complexity that is inherent in such dual systems.

Branching catheter systems such as those described in e.g. U.S. Patent Application Publication No. US 2004 0199128 A1 Morris et al. and titled CATHETER FOR TARGET SPECIFIC DRUG DELIVERY have been developed to address some of the issues associated with using multiple systems for delivering drugs to multiple locations within a patient.

The present invention is directed at branching catheter systems with diagnostic components for detecting and isolating fluid flow problems e.g. leaks occlusions etc. and methods for detecting and isolating fluid flow problems. Among the fluid flow problems that may potentially be detected are leaks in the branching catheter systems e.g. cuts disconnected components etc. . Another fluid flow problem that may be detected using the diagnostic systems of the present invention is the presence of occlusions or other blockages that prevent fluid flow within the catheter systems. In addition to identifying that a problem exists the diagnostic components may preferably also be used to identify the location of the fluid flow problem as discussed herein.

Among the diagnostic components that may be used in branching catheter systems of the present are valves to control fluid flow through the various sections of the branching catheter system fluid flow detectors to detect flow through the one or more sections of the branching catheter system and a control system for operating the diagnostic components.

In some embodiments the diagnostic components may preferably include a supply valve to control flow to all of the branches of the branching catheter and branch valves in each of the branches to control the flow of fluid into the selected branch. The valves may preferably operate as shut off valves to occlude flow at the their location within the branching catheter system.

The flow detector may preferably be positioned and operable to detect fluid flow delivered by a pump mechanism. The flow detector may take a variety of different forms e.g. a pressure sensor operable to sense pressure at a location within the catheter system where pressure is indicative of flow a flow sensor operable to detect fluid moving through a lumen e.g. a mass flow sensor etc.

Branching catheter systems that incorporate diagnostic components of the present invention may preferably include a branching catheter connector that includes an inlet port and two or more outlet ports in fluid communication with the inlet port. Each of the outlet ports may preferably feed fluid into a branch of the branching catheter system while the inlet port may preferably be adapted to receive fluid from a pump mechanism operably connected to a reservoir containing a supply of a drug to be delivered to a patient.

Although it may be preferred that the branching catheter systems include diagnostic components such as valves to control fluid flow past a selected point methods of the present invention may alternatively involve manual occlusion of lumens at selected locations within the branching catheter systems. For example occlusion may involve manual compression of a catheter at a selected location such that the catheter is pinched at that location.

In another embodiment a method for detecting and isolating leaks and occlusions in a branching catheter system is provided. The method may include detecting a change in a characteristic e.g. pressure of a fluid within the system. Valves associated with one or more of an inlet port a first outlet port and a second outlet port of a branching connector of the system may be activated independently to disrupt flow through one or more sections of the system. The method may also include monitoring fluid flow e.g. pressure after valve activation and determining a location of a catheter leak and or occlusion based upon the pressure detected.

To assist in diagnosis of fluid flow problems in branching catheters it may be preferred to include flow restrictors at selected locations within the branching catheters. In addition to assisting with diagnosis of fluid flow problems the flow restrictors may also be useful for balancing flow between different branches in a branching catheter system.

Branching catheter systems including diagnostic components in accordance with the present invention or methods of the present invention may provide intuitive and systematic techniques in conjunction with appropriate hardware for troubleshooting infusion systems including implantable branching catheter systems. For example the systems and or methods as described herein may be used to detect catheter failures as well as identify failure locations in branching catheter systems. In other words these systems and or methods may enable not only detection of a catheter failure e.g. the presence of a leak or clog but may also isolate that failure to a particular section i.e. supply catheter or specific branch catheter of the branching catheter system.

The systems and or methods of the present invention may also allow confirmation of successful implantation while the patient is still on the operating table. Moreover revision surgeries to correct problems can be focused to the appropriate component s of the system thus making surgery potentially less invasive and time consuming.

In addition to potentially increased robustness of the implant procedure and potentially improved ability to focus repairs revisions the systems and or methods as described herein may also reduce the risk of patient over under dosing. Moreover these systems and or methods may decrease the number of instances of therapies that might be inappropriately discontinued as inefficacious or classified as marginally efficacious. By using the feedback provided by systems and or methods of the present invention physicians may further be able to develop improvements in implant technique and hardware design.

In one embodiment a flow restrictor for use with an implantable catheter of the present invention may include an elongate male member having a helical groove formed in an outer surface thereof. The flow restrictor may fit with interference within a lumen of a catheter or other device or alternatively may fit with interference inside a separate sheath wherein the combined restrictor sheath may then be inserted within the catheter lumen.

The fluids delivered using the present invention may preferably contain one or more drugs. A drug of the present invention may include a therapeutic substance. Other substances may or may not be intended to have a therapeutic effect and are not easily classified such as e.g. saline solution fluoroscopy agents disease diagnostic agents etc. Unless otherwise noted in the following paragraphs the term drug as used herein may include any therapeutic diagnostic or other substance that is delivered using the implantable medical devices of the present invention. The drugs will typically be fluids e.g. liquids or contained in fluid carriers e.g. liquid carriers as either solutions or mixtures.

Therapeutic substances delivered using the present invention may preferably be intended to have a therapeutic effect such as pharmaceutical compositions genetic materials biologics and other substances. Pharmaceutical compositions are typically chemical formulations intended to have a therapeutic effect such as intrathecal antispasmodics pain medications chemotherapeutic agents and the like. Pharmaceutical compositions may be configured to function in an implanted environment with characteristics such as stability at body temperature to retain therapeutic qualities concentration to reduce the frequency of replenishment and the like. Genetic materials include substances intended to have a direct or indirect genetic therapeutic effect such as genetic vectors genetic regulator elements genetic structural elements DNA and the like. Biologics include substances that are living matter or derived from living matter intended to have a therapeutic effect such as stem cells platelets hormones biologically produced chemicals and the like.

In one aspect the present invention provides an implantable branched catheter system that includes a supply catheter section having a proximal end and a distal end and two or more delivery branches in fluid communication with the distal end of the supply catheter section. Each delivery branch of the two or more delivery branches includes a delivery catheter section having a proximal end and a distal end along with a flow restrictor located along the delivery catheter section wherein the flow restrictor restricts flow through the delivery catheter section. Each delivery branch further includes a branch valve located between the distal end of the supply catheter section and the proximal end of the delivery catheter section. The system also includes a supply valve located proximate the distal end of the supply catheter section wherein the supply valve controls flow through the distal end of the supply catheter section and a flow detector located proximate the proximal end of the supply catheter section wherein the flow detector detects flow through the supply catheter section.

In another aspect the present invention provides an implantable branched catheter system that includes a supply catheter section having a proximal end and a distal end and two or more delivery branches in fluid communication with the distal end of the supply catheter section. Each delivery branch of the two or more delivery branches includes a delivery catheter section having a proximal end and a distal end a flow restrictor located proximate a distal end of the delivery catheter section wherein the flow restrictor restricts flow through the delivery catheter section and a branch valve located between the distal end of the supply catheter section and the proximal end of the delivery catheter section. The system further includes a supply valve located proximate the distal end of the supply catheter section wherein the supply valve controls flow through the distal end of the supply catheter section and a bleeder valve located proximate the distal end of the supply catheter section wherein the bleeder valve is located distal of the supply valve and wherein the bleeder valve shunts flow out of the branched catheter system. The system also includes a flow detector located proximate the proximal end of the supply catheter section wherein the flow detector is a pressure sensor.

In another aspect the present invention provides a branching catheter connector for use in an implantable branching catheter system the connector including an implantable connector body defining a fluid path having a branch point at which the fluid path separates into two or more branches an inlet port located within the connector body the inlet port in fluid communication with the fluid path two or more outlet ports in fluid communication with the inlet port through the branching fluid path wherein the branch point is located between the inlet port and the two or more outlet ports a supply valve located proximate the inlet port wherein the supply valve is located in the branching fluid path between the inlet port and the branch point and a branch valve located proximate each outlet port of the two or more outlet ports wherein the branch valve of each outlet port is located in the fluid path between the branch point and the outlet port.

In another aspect the present invention provides a method of diagnosing flow conditions in a branched catheter system. The method includes providing an implantable branched catheter system that includes a supply catheter section having a proximal end and a distal end wherein moving from the proximal end towards the distal end defines a downstream direction within the system and wherein moving from the distal end towards the proximal end defines an upstream direction within the system. The system further includes a flow detector located proximate the proximal end of the supply catheter section wherein the flow detector detects flow through the supply catheter section and two or more delivery branches in fluid communication with the distal end of the supply catheter. Each delivery branch of the two or more delivery branches includes a delivery catheter section having a proximal end and a distal end and wherein each delivery branch of the two or more delivery branches includes a flow restrictor located within the delivery branch wherein the flow restrictor restricts flow through the delivery catheter section. The method further includes delivering fluid into the proximal end of the supply catheter section and monitoring the flow detector while delivering the fluid and while selectively occluding flow through one or more of the supply catheter section and the delivery catheter sections.

In another aspect the present invention provides a method of diagnosing flow conditions in a branched catheter system. The method includes providing an implantable branched catheter system that includes a supply catheter section having a proximal end and a distal end wherein moving from the proximal end towards the distal end defines a downstream direction within the system and wherein moving from the distal end towards the proximal end defines an upstream direction within the system. The system further includes a flow detector located proximate the proximal end of the supply catheter section wherein the flow detector detects flow through the supply catheter section and two or more delivery branches in fluid communication with the distal end of the supply catheter. Each delivery branch of the two or more delivery branches includes a delivery catheter section having a proximal end and a distal end and wherein each delivery branch of the two or more delivery branches includes a flow restrictor located proximate a distal end of the delivery branch wherein the flow restrictor restricts flow through the delivery catheter section. The method further includes delivering fluid into the proximal end of the supply catheter section and monitoring the flow detector while delivering the fluid and while selectively occluding flow through one or more of the supply catheter section and the delivery catheter sections. The method further comprises selectively shunting the fluid delivered into the supply catheter section outside of the system before the fluid enters the two or more delivery branches while monitoring the flow detector

The above summary is not intended to describe each embodiment or every implementation of the present invention. Rather a more complete understanding of the invention will become apparent and appreciated by reference to the following Detailed Description of Exemplary Embodiments in view of the accompanying figures of the drawing.

In the following detailed description of illustrative embodiments of the invention reference is made to the accompanying figures of the drawing which form a part hereof and in which are shown by way of illustration specific embodiments in which the invention may be practiced. It is to be understood that other embodiments may be utilized and structural changes may be made without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Catheter cuts occlusions kinks and improper e.g. leaking connections together may represent a substantial portion of clinical complications with current implantable infusion systems. Such problems may be aggravated for infusion systems delivering drugs to one or more locations e.g. branching catheter systems that utilize a fixed rate pump because for example complete occlusion of one distal branch could result in the delivery of the full balance of the drug to the other branch. Normal techniques of detecting an occlusion in a single catheter system such as syringe extraction of the reservoir volume and subsequent comparison of the same to the expected volume would be inaccurate in these circumstances as the appropriate volume would still be dispensed albeit to only a single side. Embodiments of the present invention as described herein preferably enable reliable diagnosis of the above mentioned problems whether they were induced immediately as a inadvertent consequence of implantation or occurred during the course of therapy.

Although the embodiment of includes a bifurcating catheter system the present invention may include catheter systems with three or more branches. In other variations although the depicted system is implanted for delivery into the brain of a patient it should be understood that branching catheter systems of the present invention may be used to deliver fluids to other areas of the body.

Furthermore although the pump is depicted as implanted within the abdominal cavity it may alternatively be implanted in any suitable location e.g. in the chest cavity cranially etc. In some instances the pump mechanism itself may not even be implanted i.e. the pump may be located externally of the patient s body with the catheter used to deliver the fluid internally.

The pump may include a reservoir to hold a volume of fluid that may preferably contain one or more drugs. The reservoir may be periodically refilled via an injection port not shown and a pump mechanism e.g. pressurized bladder peristaltic pump piston pump etc. provided may propel the fluid through the proximal catheter and into the branches and . While not wishing to be bound to any particular configuration the pump may be a SYNCHROMED II manufactured by Medtronic Inc. of Fridley Minn. USA.

The pump may further include a flow detector e.g. a pressure sensor. The pressure sensor may be similar to that described in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. US 2005 0075624 A1 entitled Pressure Sensor for Medical Device see also U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 691 814 filed 23 Oct. 2003 and entitled Method for Monitoring Bolus Delivery U.S. Pat. No. 6 551 290 entitled Catheter for Target Specific Drug Delivery and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 625 751 filed 26 Jul. 2000 and entitled Catheter for Target Specific Drug Delivery . Alternatively the flow sensing device could detect fluid flow directly using any appropriate flow detection technologies.

The branching catheter system of includes a supply catheter that leads to two branches with branch catheters and . The supply catheter of the branching catheter system is depicted as attached to a pump although it should be understood that the branching catheter systems of the present invention may be supplied independently of the pump mechanisms used to deliver fluids into the branching catheter systems.

Although described herein as catheters it should be understood that the supply catheters and delivery catheters or branch catheters of some embodiments may be sections of a branching catheter system as opposed to separate independent components assembled into the branching catheter systems. In other words the different catheters may be sections of an integrally formed catheter system. Alternatively one or more of the different catheters may be provided as separate components that are assembled to provide a branching catheter system according to the present invention.

As discussed herein the pump may take any suitable configuration and may preferably include a reservoir containing a drug for delivery to a patient. Also depicted in is a flow detector used to detect flow into the branching catheter system . The flow detector is depicted as integral with the pump mechanism although it may be provided separately from the pump . It may however be preferred that the flow detector if separate from the pump be located close to the pump because as discussed herein diagnostics can typically be performed only on components of the branching catheter system that are located downstream of the flow detector .

The system of also includes valves used to control fluid flow within the system. It may be preferred that the valves prevent flow when closed although in some instances it may be sufficient if some small amount of fluid passes through the valves when closed. The depicted system includes a supply valve that is preferably located proximate the distal end of the supply catheter . Branch valves and are located within each of the branches and respectively. It may be preferred that the branch valves and be located as close as possible to the branch point at which fluid is divided to flow into the branch catheters and .

Each of the branches and may also preferably include a flow restriction and respectively. The flow restrictors may preferably serve to a ensure balanced delivery of infusate fluid through the branches of the system and or b provide sufficient backpressure to ensure robust detection of fluid flow problems such as cuts occlusions. Further discussions regarding the use of flow restrictors in branched catheters may be found in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. US 2004 0199128 A1 Morris et al. entitled CATHETER FOR TARGET SPECIFIC DRUG DELIVERY. As described therein the flow restrictors may be in the form of a component that functions to both provide flow restriction and deliver a drug to a selected body location using e.g. a permeable membrane small orifices etc. . Alternatively fluid delivery out of the catheter and flow restriction of fluid moving through the catheter may be performed by separate components.

The term flow restrictor as used herein is intended to represent a flow resistance that is added to a system to bring the total flow resistance above a specified value it does not necessarily refer to a singular component. For example two flow restrictors i.e. two components of equal resistance placed in series at the tip of a given catheter could be functionally equivalent to a single flow restrictor whose resistance is twice that of either of the serial flow restrictors taken by itself.

The various components such as valves pumps etc. in systems according to the present invention may be controlled by any suitable controller that may be implanted in or located outside of the body of the patient. For example the controller may be located within the pump or external thereto and connected to the various components by wires optical fibers etc. Control may also be effected by the use of telemetry which may be used for communication between components and a user for external programming etc. Telemetry control devices systems and methods that may be adapted for use in connection with the present invention may be described in e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 558 640 Pfeiler et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 820 589 Torgerson et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 5 999 857 Weijand et al. .

Also depicted in broken lines in is a branching catheter connector that may be used in connection with branching catheter systems of the present invention. The connector may house the supply valve and branch valves and as well as the branch point at which fluid flowing through the system is divided for delivery to the different branches and .

The body of the connector may in one embodiment be made from molded silicone e.g. Nu Sil MED 4870 LSR 65 75 Shore A durometer . This material may provide certain potentially desirable benefits e.g. desirable material properties such as elastic and creep characteristics at a relatively low cost. However other biocompatible materials such as ETR silicone urethane polyurethane etc. are also possible without departing from the scope of the invention.

Use of the connector may be advantageous in that the connector may be provided as an independent component that can be assembled with existing catheters to form a branching catheter system according to the present invention. As a result an existing catheter or tubing may be used as the supply catheter connecting the pump to the inlet port of the connector . Similarly existing catheters may also be connected to the outlet ports and of the connector to provide branch catheters and . The connector may preferably define a fluid path that includes the branch point inlet port and outlet ports and . The various valves may preferably be distributed along the fluid path as defined within the connector . For example a bleeder valve see ZA in may be located in the fluid path between the supply valve and the branch point . Similarly a controller may be operatively connected to the valves and other components in the connectors of the present invention.

The supply catheter leads to the first branch point at which the fluid flow separates into two branch catheters and . A supply valve is however preferably located upstream of the branch point . As with branching catheter system it may also be preferred that the valve be located proximate the distal end or downstream end of the supply catheter .

An optional component depicted in the branching catheter system is a bleeder valve . The bleeder valve preferably functions to prevent flow to the branch point and also to shunt or divert flow out of the branching catheter system . Use of the bleeder valve may allow for the detection of an occlusion in the supply catheter located between the flow detector and the bleeder valve as described elsewhere herein. Although the valve and bleeder valve are depicted as separate components it will be understood that they may be integrated into a single valve mechanism e.g. a three port valve that can perform the functions of both valves and .

The branching catheter system also includes branch valves and downstream of the branch point . It may be preferred that the branch valves and be capable of shutting off or occluding flow into their respective branch catheter or . As a result it may be preferred that the branch valves and be located as close as possible to the upstream or proximal ends of the branch catheters and such that the branch catheters can be isolated from the branching catheter system .

Branch catheter in the depicted branching catheter system also preferably includes a flow restrictor . It may be preferred that the flow restrictor be located proximate the distal end of the branch catheter as depicted in .

Branch catheter in the depicted branching catheter system leads to a second branch point from which branch catheters and extend. As a result the branch catheter may function in many respects like supply catheter . For example the branch catheter may also preferably include a valve proximate its distal or downstream end i.e. the end at which fluid flow is divided by the branch point . The branch catheter may also preferably include a bleeder valve proximate its distal end similar to the supply catheter . As with supply catheter the valve and bleeder valve are depicted as separate components although it will be understood that they may be integrated into a single valve mechanism e.g. a three port valve that can perform the functions of both valves and .

Branch valves and are preferably provided within each of the branch catheters and respectively downstream from the branch point . It may be preferred that the branch valves and be located as close as possible to the branch point at which fluid is divided to flow into the branch catheters and . Each of the branch catheters and may also preferably include a flow restrictor and respectively. It may be further preferred that the flow restrictors be located at or near the distal ends of the branch catheters and .

The branching catheter system include three delivery branches in branch catheters and . As discussed above it may be preferred that each of the branch catheters include a flow restrictor and respectively . If it is desired that the amount of fluid i.e. drug to be delivered from each of the three branches is to be roughly equal the flow restrictors may not necessarily be identical. It may be necessary for example to consider the effects of the valves and the length of the fluid flow path through the different catheters and adjust the amount of flow restriction provided in each of the branches to balance flow therethrough.

A flow restrictor may preferably be located near a distal end of each branch catheter L and R. As described above the flow restrictors may preferably serve to a ensure balanced delivery of infusate to the target regions and or b provide sufficient backpressure to ensure robust detection of cuts occlusions by the pressure sensor.

Along with the flow detector and the flow restrictors the diagnostic system may include a series of valves to assist in the diagnosis of fluid flow problems within the branching catheter system . In the embodiment of branching catheter system depicted in valves ZA located proximate the inlet port of the connector ZB located in the left outlet port of connector and ZC located in the right outlet port of connector may preferably when activated impede flow and more preferably prevent flow past the valve . For example the valves may preferably be pinch type shut off valves although any suitable valve construction may be used.

Also although the valves may preferably be used while performing methods of the present invention it should be understood that the methods may alternatively be performed using manual pressure on a selected segment of catheter tubing down against a hard surface e.g. the cranium in order to block flow.

Optional valve ZA as seen proximate the inlet port of the connector may preferably be a bleeder valve. That is when activated valve ZA may preferably both shut off flow downstream of the valve and shunt the flow path outside the catheter system e.g. into surrounding tissue. In some embodiments the shut off feature of valve ZA may be eliminated i.e. it may function as a bleeder valve only. In other embodiments valve ZA could be eliminated altogether. If no bleeder valve is present methods as described below in which the bleeder valve ZA is activated could alternatively be practiced by e.g. unplugging disconnecting the supply catheter from the connector . However by providing the bleeder valve ZA a physician may preferably have the ability to perform a wide range of diagnostics without having to perform e.g. subcutaneous cut down to access the proximal catheter to disconnect it manually.

In some embodiments in which e.g. the branching catheter system is implanted cranially the valves ZA ZA ZB and ZC may preferably be felt beneath the skin of the scalp after implantation. In such a situation the valves may be actuated by manually compressing the valve against a surface such as the cranium or other surface that allows for sufficient compression to close the valve.

Valves ZA ZC could be configured as separate metal or plastic components located inside the respective ports of the connector . Alternatively the valves could be integrally formed with the connector e.g. as part of the molded structure itself. Shunting hardware for managing hydrocephalic patients provide examples of the latter.

In reference letters A B C D E F G H and I are used to identify catheter fluid flow status. In particular reference letters A D and G are used to identify a cut in the supply catheter the left catheter L and the right catheter R respectively. Similarly reference letters B E and H are used to identify an occlusion in the supply catheter the left catheter L and the right catheter R respectively. Finally reference letters C F and I are used to identify the supply catheter the left catheter L and the right catheter R respectively as being normal or intact.

The configuration of the branching catheter system depicted in permits twenty seven possible status combinations i.e. combinations of cuts occlusions and intact free of cuts or occlusions catheter portions. These combinations are presented in tabular form in Table I. Each status combination can be distinguished from the others by some set of user actions. For example illustrates a flow chart describing the sensor states and user actions of Table I as well as the resulting conclusions that may be drawn therefrom. However these cases are not a unique set. For example redundant i.e. unnecessary or inconclusive actions might be performed before entering one of the paths shown in the flow chart of .

The following examples may illustrate an exemplary procedure for utilizing the diagnostic system illustrated in . Once implanted the flow detector of the branching catheter system may be interrogated e.g. via telemetry or other techniques to ascertain what is referred to herein as an initial sensor state. It may for example be desirable to interrogate the flow detector during or immediately after implantation to ensure that the branching catheter system is intact and functional. Similarly it may be beneficial over the course of treatment to interrogate the flow detector of the branching catheter system if patient response indicates a potential problem.

Where the flow detector is a pressure sensor and the pump is operating to deliver fluid through the branching catheter system the initial sensor state is preferably equivalent to the baseline pressure the predetermined pressure for which the branching catheter system was intended to operate as represented by the first column of the flow chart depicted in and summarized as case in Table I. In that state it may be concluded that catheter flow is normal and there are no occlusions or cuts in the supply catheter or the branch catheters L R.

However where the initial sensor state is at or near maximum i.e. at or near the maximum pressure output of the pump as shown in the second column of the flowchart of is about twice the baseline pressure as shown in the third column of or is at or near zero pressure as shown in the fourth column of additional valve activation manipulation may reveal the existence of a fluid flow problem within the branching catheter system e.g. catheter cut or occlusion . If the flow detector and valves are in the preferred locations as discussed herein it may also be possible to identify the general location of the fluid flow problem e.g. in the supply catheter and or branch catheters L R .

For instance where the flow detector is a pressure sensor and the initial sensor state is at or near maximum the physician may activate valve ZA to shunt flow though the supply catheter out of the branching catheter system and monitor the response of the flow detector which as discussed above may preferably be a pressure sensor . If the sensor reading remains at or near maximum after activation of bleeder valve ZA it may be concluded that an occlusion is present in the supply catheter that prevents or substantially impedes flow through the supply catheter . However where the activation of bleeder valve ZA results in a pressure reading at or near zero then it may be concluded that there is an occlusion in both the left and right branch catheters L R.

A more involved interrogation is illustrated by the fourth column of where an initial sensor state of a flow detector in the form of a pressure sensor is at or near zero. If the physician activates supply valve ZA and the reading does not change it may be concluded that there is a cut in the supply catheter or the supply catheter is disconnected at either end . Yet if activation of supply valve ZA results in a subsequent pressure reading that is at or near maximum pressure of the pump the physician may proceed to activate branch valve ZB.

If activation of branch valve ZB as depicted in the fourth column results in a third pressure reading that is at or near zero then branch valve ZC may be activated whereupon the identified sensor responses and resulting catheter failures conclusions may be identified as shown in . If after activation of branch valve ZC the fourth pressure reading is twice baseline then it may be concluded that there is a cut in the right branch catheter R. Alternatively if activation of branch valve ZC results in a sensor reading of at or near max then it may be concluded that the left branch catheter L is occluded and that the right branch catheter R includes a cut or is disconnected from the system . In another alternative activation of branch valve ZC may result in a sensor reading of at or near zero. In that situation it may be concluded that both of the left and right branch catheters L R are either cut or disconnected from the branching catheter system .

Still in the fourth column of the flow chart of if the third pressure reading after activation of branch valve ZB is at or near max then it may be concluded that there is an occlusion in the right branch catheter R and a cut in the left branch catheter L or disconnection of the left branch catheter L from the system . Alternatively if activation of branch valve ZB in the fourth column of the flow chart of results in a third sensor reading of twice baseline then it may be concluded that the left branch catheter L is either cut or disconnected from the system .

It should be noted that after activating supply valve ZA and noting an increase in the sensor response to at or near maximum as the second sensor reading a user could choose to activate branch valve ZC instead of branch valve ZB as the subsequent action. In this case activating branch valve ZB would be the third user action and the resulting conclusions depicted in column four of the flowchart could be revised to substitute left for right and vice versa.

Although flow restrictors located in the branch catheters preferably proximate the distal end or tip of the branch catheters may facilitate robust detection of fluid flow problems using a pressure sensor and may additionally be used to control e.g. equalize flow through the different branch catheters diagnostic systems in accordance with other embodiments of the present invention could be implemented without the use of such flow restrictors. Moreover while described herein in the context of pressure sensors it is contemplated that other flow detectors e.g. flow sensors could also be used.

Furthermore if only the detection of occlusions were desirable i.e. no desire to detect catheter cuts or disconnections then left and right restrictors could be located anywhere downstream of the branch valves along the length of the respective left and right branch catheters L and R rather than near the distal ends tips of the branch catheters.

If provided flow restrictors used in the branching catheter systems of the present invention may take any suitable form some examples of which may be described in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. US 2004 0199128 A1 Morris et al. entitled CATHETER FOR TARGET SPECIFIC DRUG DELIVERY as well as in the priority application on which the present application is based U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 564 473 titled CATHETER SYSTEM HAVING FLOW RESTRICTION AND DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM FOR USE WITH SAME filed Apr. 22 2004 and in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 112 007 titled CATHETER SYSTEMS HAVING FLOW RESTRICTORS filed on even date herewith.

As used herein and in the appended claims the singular forms a and and the include plural referents unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. Thus for example reference to a or the component may include one or more of the components and equivalents thereof known to those skilled in the art.

The complete disclosure of the patents patent documents and publications cited in the Background the Detailed Description of Exemplary Embodiments and elsewhere herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety as if each were individually incorporated.

Illustrative embodiments of this invention are discussed and reference has been made to possible variations within the scope of this invention. These and other variations and modifications in the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the scope of the invention and it should be understood that this invention is not limited to the illustrative embodiments set forth herein.

