---

title: Method, system, and computer program product for performing inventory management
abstract: A method, system, and computer program product for performing inventory management. The method includes determining excess inventory for a plurality of site locations, determining inventory shortfalls for a plurality of site locations, and applying business logic to the excess inventory resulting in an inventory balancing plan. The inventory balancing plan includes optimal redistribution of excess inventory to site locations determined to be in need of the excess inventory. The method also includes generating and transmitting orders for the excess inventory in accordance with the inventory balancing plan prior to developing a supplier forecast.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08386342&OS=08386342&RS=08386342
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 08386342
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050513
---
The present invention relates generally to inventory management and more particularly to a method system and computer program product for performing balancing and redistribution of excess inventory.

Inventory management processes can be very complex particularly with for large enterprises that have multiple sites situated in geographically diverse locations e.g. world wide . Generally when performing planning or forecasting operations these sites look directly to existing suppliers typically local suppliers for their inventory replenishment needs. While in some cases this may be the most suitable course of action at other times there may be readily available excess inventory at another site location. The ordering sites may of course inquire around at other site locations for a needed inventory item prior to sending its forecasts to suppliers. However in today s on demand market when inventory items require near instantaneous replenishment this would not be a practical solution. Additionally for enterprise models that handle e.g. dozens of world wide manufacturing locations including forecasts comprising millions of rows of data and calculate weekly forecasts over a long term horizon at least some degree of automation of the planning process is needed.

What is needed therefore is a way to improve inventory management processes that enable the efficient balancing and redistribution of excess inventory at an early stage in the forecasting process.

The foregoing discussed drawbacks and deficiencies of the prior art are overcome or alleviated by a method system and storage medium for performing inventory management. The method includes determining excess inventory for a plurality of site locations determining inventory shortfalls for a plurality of site locations and applying business logic to the excess inventory resulting in an inventory balancing plan. The inventory balancing plan includes optimal redistribution of excess inventory to site locations determined to be in need of the excess inventory. The method also includes generating and transmitting orders for the excess inventory in accordance with the inventory balancing plan prior to developing a supplier forecast.

A system for implementing inventory management includes a host system in communication with a plurality of site locations and an inventory balancing application executing on the host system. The inventory balancing application performs a method that includes determining excess inventory for the plurality of site locations determining inventory shortfalls for the plurality of site locations and applying business logic to the excess inventory resulting in an inventory balancing plan. The inventory balancing plan includes optimal redistribution of excess inventory to site locations determined to be in need of the excess inventory. The method also includes generating and transmitting orders for the excess inventory in accordance with the inventory balancing plan prior to developing a supplier forecast.

A computer program product for implementing inventory management includes instructions for performing a method. The method includes determining excess inventory for the plurality of site locations determining inventory shortfalls for the plurality of site locations and applying business logic to the excess inventory resulting in an inventory balancing plan. The inventory balancing plan includes optimal redistribution of excess inventory to site locations determined to be in need of the excess inventory. The method also includes generating and transmitting orders for the excess inventory in accordance with the inventory balancing plan prior to developing a supplier forecast.

Other systems methods and or computer program products according to embodiments will be or become apparent to one with skill in the art upon review of the following drawings and detailed description. It is intended that all such additional systems methods and or computer program products be included within this description be within the scope of the present invention and be protected by the accompanying claims.

Disclosed herein is a method system and storage medium for performing inventory management. The inventory balancing processes of the invention enable more efficient use of a business resources by moving inventory between sites when financially and or logistically feasible. The inventory balancing processes enable automatic identification of excess inventory at inventory holding sites and reduce the inventory requirements for supplier forecasts at the inventory ordering sites. The inventory balancing processes further place orders on the inventory holding site for the excess inventory.

Turning now to a system upon which the inventory balancing processes may be implemented in exemplary embodiments will now be described. For purposes of illustration the inventory balancing processes described herein relate to a manufacturing environment however it will be understood that the inventory balancing processes may be used for other applications that involve supply or inventory management. The system of includes inventory holding site IHS client systems A B a host system and storage device in communication with one another via a network . Also included are supplier systems A B that may communicate with host system and or IHS client systems A B via a network such as network .

Host system may comprise one or more servers executing within e.g. a server client architecture. Host system may be implemented by a central office of an enterprise for each of IHS client systems A B. Alternatively a third party service provider e.g. application service provider may implement the host system . In an exemplary embodiment host system is associated with a central office for IHS client systems A B and executes one or more applications for performing inventory balancing processes as described herein. The application s is referred to herein as inventory balancing application . Additionally host system may execute other applications typically found in a business enterprise environment. For example host system is executing a materials resource planning MRP application and a procurement application . The inventory balancing application may include an application programming interface API for integrating some of the functions performed by the MRP and procurement application such that information is passed between applications as needed. The inventory balancing application may further include logic or analysis engine for processing the inventory data as described herein.

IHS client systems A B refer to computer communication devices located at various enterprise site locations. For example IHS client system A may be associated with a site location in Boston while IHS client system B may be associated with a site location in San Francisco. While only two IHS client systems A B are shown in it will be understood that any number of IHS client systems may be serviced by the inventory balancing application and that additionally site locations may be selectively serviced by the inventory balancing application . Each of IHS client systems A B may be implemented using a general purpose computer executing a computer program for carrying out the processes described herein. Further each of IHS client systems A B may comprise a personal computer e.g. a lap top a personal digital assistant . IHS client systems A B may store one or more databases of inventory information supplier forecasts and other suitable types of information. In alternative embodiments one or more of IHS client systems A B may implement all or a portion of the inventory balancing processes described herein.

Network may be any suitable type of communications network e.g. a local area network wide area network inter network etc. . Further network may employ wireless communication technologies.

Storage device may be implemented using a variety of devices for storing electronic information. It is understood that the storage device may be implemented using memory contained in the host system or it may be a separate physical device as shown in . Storage device may be logically addressable as a consolidated data source across a distributed environment that includes network . Information stored in storage device may be retrieved and manipulated via the host system IHS client systems A B or a combination of both. In alternative embodiments authorized supplier systems A B may also retrieve information stored in storage device . Storage device stores reports inventory balancing orders supplier information etc. as will be described further herein.

Supplier client devices A B refer to computer communication devices operated by supplier entities that provide inventory replenishment to one or more of IHS client systems A B. While only two supplier client systems A B are shown in it will be understood that any number of supplier client systems may be associated with IHS client systems A B. Each of supplier client systems A B may be implemented using a general purpose computer executing a computer program for communicating with corresponding client systems. Further each of supplier client systems A B may comprise a personal computer e.g. a lap top a personal digital assistant .

The inventory balancing system improves inventory management processes and enables efficient balancing and redistribution of excess inventory at an early stage in an enterprise s forecasting process. The inventory balancing activities are implemented during e.g. explosion of an enterprise s bills of material BOM and prior to generating a supplier forecast.

Turning now to a process of implementing the inventory balancing processes in accordance with exemplary embodiments will now be described. For each IHS any excess inventory is determined at step . The inventory balancing application calculates excess inventory where supply exceeds forecasted demand over a variable time horizon. The time horizon may be specified by a user. The excess inventory is qualified in order to determine whether it is acceptable for balancing at step . Qualification may be performed in accordance with the needs of the enterprise. As an example one qualification process determines whether the excess value meets or exceeds a location s specified clip levels. The clip levels provide information concerning the cost benefits of implementing a balancing process. For example the clip levels may specify a requirement that the expected benefits derived from balancing the excess must be significant enough to offset the shipping costs including tariffs and duties along with order administration costs. The qualification may also be determined at least in part by the excess holding site. For example due to the uncertainties in forecasting the holding site may decide to hold onto a percentage of the excess inventory and allow the remaining excess inventory to be balanced.

Qualified excess inventory is then provided to the analysis engine also referred to as balancing engine of the inventory balancing application at step . The balancing engine processes the qualified excess inventory in accordance with adopted business rules at step . These business rules may be user defined by specific site locations e.g. IHS client systems A B and or by host system .

One consideration used for determining priority in balancing may be the location of the excess and the location of the need. For example the inventory balancing application may be configured such that due to the unusually high costs of shipping heavy machinery the priority for allocation of excess inventory the heavy machinery should be restricted to IHSs located within a limited geographic area. Thus as between two enterprise sites situated in two different locations both of which have a need for a particular item the excess inventory for the particular item would be allocated to the site which is closest to the excess inventory holding site. Another consideration that may be used in determining priority in balancing may be the criticality of the shortage or the severity of the need . Further considerations that may be taken into account in determining priority may include the amount of the need e.g. the quantity of the inventory items needed . It will be understood that other considerations may be utilized in determining priority as well.

A balancing plan is generated as a result of the analysis performed via the balancing engine at step . The balancing plan determines optimal redistribution of excess inventory items in accordance with the business rules adopted.

Once the candidates with excess inventory for balancing have been determined and the balancing plan adopted the inventory balancing application identifies where there is a need for this excess. A need may be defined as any uncovered demand within a time horizon. This time horizon can be set for each individual enterprise site location and may be approved by the process owner. This horizon indicates within how many weeks the excess can be consumed i.e. so that inventory is not shipped for a need that is a long way out in time .

At step the inventory information databases for each enterprise site location e.g. IHS client systems A B is updated to reflect redistribution of qualified excess inventory.

At step inventory balancing orders are generated by the procurement application using the balancing plan derived from step via e.g. an API of the inventory balancing application and are transmitted to both the shortage and excess inventory site locations. The inventory balancing orders may be stored in both the excess site locations and the demand site locations. Upon shipment of the excess inventory the inventory information may then be decremented from the excess inventory holding site s databases and upon receipt of the excess inventory by the demand IHS location the inventory information may be incremented within the demand or receiving inventory holding site s databases.

The host system executes MRP using the inventory data resulting from steps and via e.g. an API of the inventory balancing application at step and sends the results to each of the applicable IHS client systems A B.

At step the IHS client systems A B generate supplier forecasts that account for the decremented demand resulting from the balancing processes described above if applicable which are then sent to one or more of supplier systems A B.

As described above various reports and user interface screens for generating the reports are available through the inventory balancing application a sampling of which is shown in .

Turning now to a sample user interface screen for enabling a user of the inventory balancing application to search and view item inventory balancing information in exemplary embodiments is depicted. The user interface screen of enables a user to search for inventory balancing information by e.g. site location also referred to as Plant or by Analyzer. The Analyzer refers to the process owner for an enterprise site location that has qualified excess inventory or needs inventory.

Turning now to a sample report resulting from a different search implemented via the user interface screen of is shown. The report shown in provides the identification of the excess inventory holding site and corresponding ordering sites demand site locations .

As shown in a sample database table that may be used in generating inventory balancing orders in exemplary embodiments is provided.

As described above the inventory balancing processes of the invention enable more efficient use of a business resources by moving inventory between sites when financially and or logistically feasible. The inventory balancing processes enable automatic identification of excess inventory at inventory holding sites and reduce the inventory requirements for supplier forecasts at the inventory ordering sites. The inventory balancing processes further place orders on the inventory holding site for the excess inventory.

As described above the present invention can be embodied in the form of computer implemented processes and apparatuses for practicing those processes. The present invention can also be embodied in the form of computer program code containing instructions embodied in tangible media such as floppy diskettes CD ROMs hard drives or any other computer readable storage medium wherein when the computer program code is loaded into and executed by a computer the computer becomes an apparatus for practicing the invention. The present invention can also be embodied in the form of computer program code for example whether stored in a storage medium loaded into and or executed by a computer or transmitted over some transmission medium such as over electrical wiring or cabling through fiber optics or via electromagnetic radiation wherein when the computer program code is loaded into and executed by a computer the computer becomes an apparatus for practicing the invention. When implemented on a general purpose microprocessor the computer program code segments configure the microprocessor to create specific logic circuits.

While the invention has been described with reference to exemplary embodiments it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes may be made and equivalents may be substituted for elements thereof without departing from the scope of the invention. In addition many modifications may be made to adapt a particular situation or material to the teachings of the invention without departing from the essential scope thereof. Therefore it is intended that the invention not be limited to the particular embodiments disclosed for carrying out this invention but that the invention will include all embodiments falling within the scope of the claims.

