---

title: Child restraint system comprising event data recorder, and method for providing data relating to installation or adjustment
abstract: A child restraint system includes an electronic control unit having an event data recorder for storing data relating to proper adjustment or installation of the child restraint system. The control unit receives an electrical signal from one or more sensors mounted on the child seat and determines conditions of the child seat based upon the value of the property indicated by the signal. The event data recorder is configured to store the resulting data and to allow the stored data to be retrieved in response to an inquiry. Thus, in the event of a vehicle accident or other incident, the electronic control unit may be connected to an external diagnostic unit, and the relevant data may be downloaded to the diagnostic unit for evaluation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07439866&OS=07439866&RS=07439866
owner: Delphi Technologies, Inc.
number: 07439866
owner_city: Troy
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050809
---
This application claims the benefits of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 600 094 filed Aug. 9 2004 and U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 607 988 filed Sep. 8 2004 which are incorporated herein by reference.

This application is also related to the following United States Patent Applications filed Jun. 6 2005 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING WEIGHT SENSOR U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 921 CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 927 CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 928 CHILD SEAT MONITORING SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR DETERMINING A TYPE OF CHILD SEAT U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 939 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 146 926 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 147 148 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING CONTROL UNIT FOR EVALUATING HARNESS ADJUSTMENT U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 147 149. The contents of which are each incorporated herein by reference thereto.

This invention relates to a child restraint system that includes one or more sensors coupled to a control unit for evaluating one or more conditions pertaining to the proper adjustment or installation of the child restraint system in an automotive vehicle. More particularly this invention relates to such child restraint system wherein the control unit includes an event data recorder for recording data relating to such condition for retrieval in response to an inquiry for example following a vehicle accident or the like.

A child restraint system also referred to as a child car seat is used for safely transporting a child within an automotive vehicle so as to minimize the risk of injury to the child in the event of an accident. The design of the child restraint system is based upon the size of the child. A typical rear facing infant seat is designed for an infant up to about 11 kilograms about 25 pounds and comprises a removable carrier that is coupled to a base securely installed in the vehicle. As the child grows a forward facing seat is recommended and is typically designed for a child between about 9 kilograms about 20 pounds and about 20 kilograms about 45 pounds . A typical car seat for older children is a belt positioning booster seat and may be designed for a child between about 18 kilograms about 40 pounds and about 45 kilograms about 100 pounds .

To assist in the proper installation and adjustment of the child restraint system it is proposed to equip the system with one or more sensors coupled to an electronic control unit. The sensors detect conditions to alert the adult operator if the child restraint system is not properly installed in the vehicle or not adjusted properly for the child. The aforementioned related patent applications describe several sensors for measuring relevant conditions to determine that the child restraint system is properly installed and adjusted. For example improper adjustment may be indicated by a weight sensor that alerts the adult operator when the child is not within the recommended weight range for the particular child seat. Also sensors may also be provided to determine proper tension for tethers or belts that secure the child restraint system within the vehicle and proper orientation and attitude of the child restraint system.

In the event an accident involving the vehicle transporting a child data relating to the installation or adjustment of the child restraint system may be useful in assessing possible injury to the child. Therefore a need exists for storing data relating to data relating to the installation or adjustment of the child restraint system and obtaining the data from the electronic control unit at a later time for example following a vehicle accident.

In accordance with a preferred embodiment of this invention an electronic control unit for a child restraint system includes an event data recorder for storing data relating to proper adjustment or installation of the child restraint system. The child restraint system includes a child seat adapted to be installed in the vehicle and sized and shaped for receiving the child occupant. At least one sensor is associated with said child seat and senses a property useful in determining a condition of the child restraint system. As used herein the condition refers to the manner in which the child restraint system is installed in the vehicle or the manner in which the child restraint system is adjusted for the child or other conditions relating to the proper use of the child restraint system such as whether the child is within a recommended weight range. The sensor is electrically coupled to the electronic control unit and provides an electrical signal the value of which is indicative of the property being sensed. The electronic control unit is configured to process the electrical signal and determine a status of the condition based upon the value of the electrical signal. The event data recorder is configured to store the resulting data and allow the stored data to be retrieved in response to an inquiry. The data may include the value of the electrical signal from the sensor or the status determination by the electronic control unit or both and preferably also includes a time stamp. Thus in the event of an accident or other incident the data may be retrieved to assist in assessing possible injury to the child.

In a preferred embodiment referring to a child restraint system in accordance with this invention is a rear facing infant seat that includes a carrier and a base . Alternately this invention may be suitably used in a forward facing seat a belt positioning booster seat or other seat installable in a vehicle. In the illustrated embodiment base is installed in a rear seat of a vehicle and secured by a vehicle seat belt and optionally one or more additional tethers not shown that attach to the vehicle structure. The base is intended to remain in the vehicle for an extended period typically until the child has outgrown the recommended size range for seat . Carrier is adapted to accommodate a child for transport both inside and outside the vehicle. Accordingly carrier securely couples to base for transporting a child within the vehicle but may be disengaged from base for carrying the child outside the vehicle. A handle is provided to facilitate transport outside the vehicle. A suitable infant seat comprising a carrier and a base is commercially available from Graco Children s Products Inc. under the trade designation Snugride.

Carrier comprises a shell formed of a rigid polymeric material and defining a compartment sized and shaped for receiving child . The compartment is lined with a cushion to enhance child comfort. Carrier also includes a harness for restraining the child within the carrier. A suitable harness includes belts coupled by a buckle .

In accordance with this invention seat is equipped with sensors for detecting or measuring one or more properties relating to the seat in the vehicle. For the rear facing infant seat shown in the sensors may include one or more sensors mounted in carrier and one or more sensors mounted in base . The type of sensor depends upon the particular property to be measured which in turn depends upon the condition of the child restraint system to be determined. In general suitable sensors output an electrical signal having a value proportional to or indicative of the condition of the child restraint system. By way of preferred examples the following are examples of sensors that may be used to evaluate or monitor conditions relating to proper installation or adjustment of the child restraint system 

Referring to control module receives the output signal from the sensor and includes a microprocessor for processing the signal to determine the condition based upon the value of the signal. For example when a child is placed into carrier and carrier is assembled into base the control module may initiate an evaluation of the child size based a sensor that provides a signal related to the weight of the child and compare the child weight to the recommended weight range for seat . This may be in response to an operator pressing an activation button . Alternately the microprocessor may be initiated in response to a signal from an interlock sensor indicating that the carrier is assembled to the base.

Control module also comprises a display to alert the operator of the results of the determinations made thereby. In this embodiment display comprises a series of lights each representing a condition of seat . The lights include a series of lights such as green lights that confirm proper adjustment of seat and a series of lights such as red lights that provide a warning of improper adjustment of the seat. By way of an example display includes a green light that confirms that the child weight is within the recommended range and a red light that alerts the operator that the child weight is greater than the recommended range. While in this embodiment the alert signal activates a light the alert signal may activate an audible alert such as a chime or buzzer optionally in combination with the signal light. Alternately the readable display such as a liquid crystal display may be used to provide a descriptive alert.

In accordance with this invention control module comprises an event data recorder associated with a memory and configured to store data relating to installation or adjustment of the car seat based upon the value of the signal or the status of the condition determined by the microprocessor. In a preferred embodiment the microprocessor includes a program of computer instructions and the EDR is a subroutine of the program carried out by the microprocessor. Alternately EDR may be a separate microprocessor coupled to primary microprocessor and a discrete memory . The EDR preferably stores the data and a time stamp that indicates the date and time at which the data was obtained. Also the EDR preferably stores the data from multiple recording events each identified with appropriate time stamps to allow review of the conditions over an extended period.

To retrieve the stored data in accordance with the preferred embodiment control module is connected to an external diagnostic unit . A suitable diagnostic unit is a portable computer that is connectable to the control module by a wire connection . For this purpose module may comprises a port adapted for making a wire connection such as a USB port. Diagnostic unit comprises a program that includes instructions to transmit an inquiry command in a protocol recognizable by EDR . In response to receipt of the inquiry EDR downloads the stored data and associated time stamps to diagnostic unit . The operator of the diagnostic unit may then access the information for assessing the condition of the child seat at the times indicated by the time stamps. Alternately control module may include a button switch or other suitable input mechanism to cause the module to display stored condition using display for example the most recent conditions prior to a vehicle accident.

A preferred mode of operation of EDR is described with reference to the flow diagram in . At step the control module is turned on for example by a power supply or a switch.

At step the EDR determines whether the control module has been activated. A preferred mode of activation is by an operator depressing activation button . Alternately the control module may include a wake up feature to periodically activate the control module to update sensor values and status determinations thereby enabling the control module to alert the operator of changes in conditions. Also for car seat in the car seat may include an interlock sensor to detect attachment of carrier into base which may activate the control module. Also sensors may include an accelerometer for detecting a significant force exerted on the car seat such as a deceleration force indicative of a vehicle accident. The EDR may be activated in response to a signal from the accelerometer to store the data. In one alternative it is desired to obtain and store the data at the onset of a deceleration incident prior to alteration of the conditions of the child restraint system.

If the control module has not been activated the EDR updates the time stamp at step . If control unit has been activated step determines whether the system has completed the evaluation routine and made the determinations of the conditions based upon the sensor inputs. Preferably the program includes a time delay at step . The delay is provided to allow the operator to make adjustments to the car seat in response to the display to assure proper installation and conditions. Following the time delay the EDR stores the data at step . The stored data preferably includes the values of signals from the sensors the status for conditions determined by the control unit and the time stamp.

Referring to there is shown a flow diagram for downloading stored data to a diagnostic unit. At step the diagnostic unit is connected to the control module and the control module is activated. At step the EDR receives an inquiry command. In response to the inquiry command the EDR downloads the stored data at step .

Therefore this invention provides a method for obtaining information about the condition of the child restraint system at particular times during transport of a child. Thus following a vehicle accident the control module may be connected to a diagnostic unit to retrieve the data for purposes of assessing the condition of the child restraint system during the accident. This information may be useful in evaluating possible injuries to the child. For example the data when downloaded may reveal that the child restraint system was not properly installed and thus alert medical personnel of possible injuries to the child. Also following numerous accidents a database may be developed to show correlations between conditions and resulting child injuries to assist engineers in improving designs for child restraint systems.

In the described embodiment the control module is actuated to store data relating to the condition of the child seat installed in an automotive vehicle. The control module may also be used to assess conditions when the child restraint system is installed in other types of vehicles. For a rear facing infant seat of the type depicted in this may include when the carrier is installed in a stroller or bicycle.

While this invention has been described in terms of the preferred embodiments thereof it is not intended to be so limited but rather only to the extent set forth in the claims that follow.

