---

title: Interface system of subscriber information management, billing, prepaid system for mobile network system, and prepaid method using the interface system
abstract: Disclosed are an interface architecture of subscriber information management, billing, prepaid system for mobile network system, and a prepaid method using the interface architecture. The present invention is embodied by a Workflow engine classified as a business logic and a processing logic to access the interface rapidly for clients. The workflow engine is applicable to the subscriber information management and the billing through a voice subscriber, a data subscriber and contents provider. Interfacing is possible to apply changeable embodiment of system and adapt environment changes through a workflow engine. Therefore, the present invention provides a wireless portal platform to increase efficiency in subscribing procedures and using service. In addition, the present invention provides solution of obstacles on respective module between the prepaid billing client and the prepaid billing gateway, or between the prepaid billing gateway and the prepaid billing server.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08737960&OS=08737960&RS=08737960
owner: SK Planet Co., Ltd.
number: 08737960
owner_city: Seoul
owner_country: KR
publication_date: 20050819
---
This application is the National Phase application of International Application No. PCT KR2005 002741 filed Aug. 19 2005 which designates the United States and was published in English. This application in its entirety is incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention relates to a subscriber information management system of a mobile communication system and more particularly to a interface architecture of subscriber information management billing prepaid system for mobile network system and a prepaid method using the interface architecture which are applicable to the subscriber information management and the billing through a voice subscriber a data subscriber and contents provider by embodying a Workflow Engine classified as a business logic and a processing logic to access the interface rapidly for clients.

Generally in mobile communication network a system integration means that it is embodied wholly through routine processor. Routine processor responds to various events to makes the user to feel only one system. In addition the processor applies same principle to all environments including same different unit.

The system integration explained above is classified as data integration and process integration and the data integration aims to co ownership and definition production of data presented scatteringly on various system. This data integration is sub classified as logic step integration and physical step integration. The logic step integration is in the form that a consumer access to and consume data to co owned by data producer that is data or information is co owned by the producer and consumer. In physical step integration data base is handled directly using ODBC or Native River used previously in many cases or table is co owned using a common API.

In addition the process integration means the integration of data and Business Logic and recently changes into focusing on Workflow. Various models are presented depending on environment and product. For example in PC environment OLE by MS company and OpenDoc by Apple company are representative. Meanwhile recently a framework is provided that data and processor are integrated in the form of Object or Component using OMG mainly CORBA or Object Broker.

This framework stores various information on directory server and functions to provide user with information stored to meet his request. This framework makes it possible to provide user with information rapidly and efficiently on communication network. Therefore subscribers request various service. An operator of mobile communication system has a burden on meeting the respective request from the subscriber and contents provider who provides a terminal of subscriber with contents.

To meet the above requirement the operator of mobile communication system has to provide subscriber with service customer made interface to use intuitively and easily infallibility of security and convenience of access and rapid access to contents and qualitative time use. In addition the operator of mobile communication system has to provide a platform of terminal to meet the request from the contents providers. This platform is applied to the business and technical environment of contents provider rapidly and efficiently. This platform requests the framework to be developed. The framework has to provide subscriber with high qualitative and rapid service through proper application for example the function of addition changes and deletion of terminal and subscribing releasing and inquiring of additional service including the producing changing and inquiring of client information.

An interface architecture of subscriber information management system for mobile communication system makes it possible to embody Processing Logic without Core deformation to respond rapidly to Business Logic and business case from Business Logic. The information of subscriber enrolled through interface groups and additional service subscribing of subscriber is registered received modified produced inquired changed enrolled released deleted and validated rapidly through business logic and processing logic. Therefore the present invention provides effects on increasing the efficiency in subscribing procedures and using service on the ground that it is easily applicable to environment changes and changeable embodiment of it is possible.

In addition the present invention makes it possible to unify and simplify the billing procedures which are complicated as a whole. Therefore because each changing procedure of billing data related to is separated from each other totally even a format is changed residual modules are not effected therefrom.

Meanwhile the present invention provides the obstacle solving tool. The obstacle solving tool provides a solution of obstacles on respective module between the prepaid billing client and the prepaid billing gateway or between the prepaid billing gateway and the prepaid billing server.

Hereinafter preferable embodiments according to the present invention will be described with reference to the accompanying drawings. Here when one element is connected to another element one element may be not only directly connected to another element but also indirectly connected to another element via another element. Further irrelative elements are omitted for clarity. Also like reference numerals refer to like elements throughout.

As shown in the subscriber information management system comprises a subscriber management unit which is composed of a portal subscriber management unit for managing portal subscriber and an additional service subscriber management unit for managing additional service subscriber for registering the additional service and for managing the data subscriber received through the additional service subscriber management unit and voice subscriber received through Provisioning System a Contents Provider CP access management unit for accessing to the contents provided by contents provider and controlling it on the basis of request from subscriber terminal registered in additional service subscriber management unit of the subscriber management unit and an interface management unit for receiving approving registering inquiring billing prepaid billing etc. about the voice subscriber and data subscriber subscriber enrolled through the additional service and subscriber through common WEB . In some embodiments the subscriber information management system is an interface system comprising a computer system. The computer system of the interface system comprises at least one processor coupled to a memory for processing and or storing data. The processor is configured to access and execute a program in the memory. The executed program causes the processor to comprise the portal subscriber management unit the subscriber management unit the CP access management unit and the interface management unit .

The subscriber management unit allocates web mobile and voice subscriber channel for the accessing of portal subscriber. The subscriber management unit is associated with a delivery management unit accessed to web and mobile communication network for the accessing of the additional service subscriber. In addition the interface management unit includes a plurality of provider accessed to from the outside for example Email Provider Person Information Management System Unified Message System PIMS UMS Provider. The interface management unit receives the subscriber information from the provider of other service.

For example when the request of subscription is made from not portal subscriber but additional service subscriber the predetermined information web ID pass word a resident registration number of the additional service subscriber is inputted to the interface management unit . On the basis of predetermined information the interface management unit validates the subscriber and registers him. The register procedures of portal subscriber to receive additional service are the same. For voice subscriber the same procedures of subscription are presented through web and mobile.

Meanwhile the interface management unit performs the inquiry and validation on the basis of Lightweight Directory Access Protocol LDAP . The interface management unit performs the functions of registering the subscriber received through the additional service and also receiving and registering the contents provider. The interface management unit contains predetermined rule information presenting the subscription procedures and subscription information for voice subscriber and data subscriber.

Also the interface management unit establishes Common Information Module service on the basis of the request from clients. The CIM service supports Workflow presenting the LDAP association works CP association works and Rule application etc.

The Rule information manages CIM API Application Programming Interface for a plurality of external system. Not only the production changes inquiry of the client information primary information pass word etc. but also selective operation of information is possible through the rule information. Also the comprehensive use of information changed and produced is possible through the rule information to support plural terminals per a client including addition changes deletion of terminal. In addition the subscription release inquiry of VAS subscribed through contents provider and portal is applied selectively through the rule information. Thus the rule information present the inquiry and validation of a system comprehensively.

The interface management unit processes directly the billing which was done sporadically on each system. To this end the interface presents a wireless portal platform which can unify and simplify the complicate procedures of the billing.

In addition the interface management unit presents the functions that the prepaid billing can be done regardless of the size of prepaid billing server which is not standardized. The interface management unit includes a wireless portal platform to get rid of obstacles on respective module between the prepaid billing client and the prepaid billing gateway or between the prepaid billing gateway and the prepaid billing server.

As sown in FIG. the interface management unit consists of A CP interface for interfacing with the contents provider a voice subscriber system interface for receiving the voice subscriber information a WAP interface for accessing to the wireless to receive the subscriber information using the mobile a WEB interface for receiving the subscriber information using the wire terminal a interface group containing a interface of a Simple Network Management Protocol SNMP for receiving the subscriber information with accessing to single network a LDAP data base for storing the subscriber information of voice client a subscriber data base entraining the predetermined rule for storing the information of portal subscriber and value added subscriber and for processing procedures of the subscription and validation in association with the workflow engine a workflow engine for inquiring the subscription state of subscriber on the basis of the LDAP data base and the subscriber data base and for registering and managing the primary information and the information of value added service subscription about subscriber on the basis of the Rule a billing system in association with the workflow engine for producing the total using data format about predetermined value added service including the using information of subscriber and price information according to contents using and for processing the operation and management of billing and prepaid billing thereon a billing server in association with the billing system for calculating the billing and prepaid billing and for computing the deduction of the deposit of client a Recovery Management for storing the requests from a plurality of interface on error of the workflow engine for re working on the requests in releasing the error of workflow engine and a CP Query Engine for raising a Query about validation requests received through the interface group .

Said billing system consists of a billing unit for present a wireless portal platform to unify and simplify the billing procedures which was done sporadically on each system and a prepaid billing unit for performing the functions according to prepaid billing on wireless portal platform regardless of sizes of the prepaid billing server which are not standardized.

Also the workflow engine is in association with a Application Management for supporting co ownership of the information about Email Provider personal information management system provider PIMS UMS Provider and the provider of value added service including other services.

Meanwhile said workflow engine includes a Deployment Tool for inputting from a manager the Meta Data creation library creation function establishment and Rule of meta data etc. about the clients Requests of CP management function subscriber registering function and value added service management function. Said meta data is a part of the Deployment Tool of said workflow engine . Said Meta Data consists of each parameter for processing service request inputted from clients to API. Said library has the function of processing the workflow engine about service request provided from clients. In addition said Deployment Tool contains a Return Code. Said return code is in association the messages received in working of the workflow engine .

In the present invention there is the service provision function that on the request transmitted through WEB and WAP from the external system the corresponding service is provided. The said external system includes all system in association with NATE system including PS and CP.

In addition with respect to the information requested from the clients such as mobile communication business man said Rule processes inquiry and validation of input and output data on the basis of global standards that is Global Rule. In working of the workflow engine said workflow engine fetches the Rule from the subscriber data base and entrain it on predetermined memory. On the basis of said rule the workflow engine performs the services of registering acceptance modification creation inquiry changes subscription release deletion or billing etc. of information about the subscriber and value added service of subscriber. The workflow engine on the basis of said Deployment Tool creates Meta Data and library about input and output data requested from clients. Said workflow engine performs inquiry validation and billing about the meta data and library on the basis of the corresponding Rule.

In addition said SNMP interface supports said workflow engine . Said SNMP interface performs a point system management between servers and confirmation and management of urgent error messages through email or SMS.

As depicted in drawings the workflow engine consists of a Server Startup Module for fetching the data and Rule information necessary for initial starting of a workflow engine from said subscriber data base and for transmitting them to internal memory a Business Module for performing process of Request about registered data on the basis of said rule information as applying to workflow engine a Communication Handler for performing the communication interfacing by allocating communication channel with PV WEB CP and WAP accessing to said interface group a validation LDAP module for validating and inquiring of the subscriber information on the basis of LDAP data base in inputting and modifying subscriber information received from said communication handler a workflow management module for performing registering validation and inquiry of the subscriber information subscriber request information contents provider and value added service received from said communication handler on the basis of said rule information and for creating the results therefrom and a Notify CP module for transmitting result information provided from said workflow management module to contents provider or value added service provider.

Meanwhile said billing unit as depicted in consists of first and second data creation server for creating a using data format containing predetermined using information by using user log provided from said CP interface and said WAP interface by contents provider a total using data server for creating a total using data format which is made up of price information incurred from WAP using and predetermined information added to said using data and for transferring it into billing data register format. Said billing server calculates the billing using the billing data register format inputted from said total using data creation server .

In addition said prepaid billing unit consists of a prepaid billing client for performing a billing after receiving information of the deposit of user and for outputting the billing data therefrom and a prepaid billing gateway for receiving the billing data and outputting it after confirming client information. Said billing server receives said data performs billing calculation or deducts the deposit from client according to billing calculation.

Said prepaid billing gate way consists of a client handler for receiving billing data in accordance to the predetermined standard promised with clients and for outputting it after comparing with client information and prepaid billing service plug in PPS Plug In for receiving the billing data from said clients handler and for outputting said billing data to prepaid billing server which works in accordance to the standards of billing server to provide prepaid billing services regardless of kinds of billing server .

The operation of the present invention will be described in detail in accordance to drawing attached hereto as bellows.

It will be apparent to those skilled in the art that various modifications and variations can be made in the present invention. Thus it is intended that the present invention covers the modifications and variations of this invention provided they come within the scope of the appended claims and their equivalents.

