---

title: User interfaces for collaborative multi-locale context-aware systems management problem analysis
abstract: A method to provide user interfaces for multi-locale context-aware systems management problem analysis comprises receiving a request for information associated with a systems management event, dynamically identifying a first locale designation associated with a first user of a systems management tool and a second locale designation associated with a second user of the systems management tool, and the systems management tool concurrently displaying the information according to the first and second locale designations.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07941484&OS=07941484&RS=07941484
owner: Symantec Operating Corporation
number: 07941484
owner_city: Mountain View
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050620
---
This invention relates to computer systems and more particularly to computer systems management tools.

The complexity of managing computer systems has been increasing rapidly. Mission critical enterprise applications may be distributed over a large number e.g. hundreds or thousands of computer hosts and storage devices and may in some cases comprise multiple independent layers or tiers provided by different vendors. Even applications intended for single users e.g. intended for execution on a single desktop or laptop computer may incorporate components from multiple vendors and may rely on numerous hardware and software devices. Typically different hardware and or software vendors have developed their own custom approaches to the detection diagnosis debugging and resolution of problems and errors and also to other systems management tasks such as logging audit trails monitoring application behavior etc. In the event of unexpected operating conditions or failures hardware devices or software modules may be configured to generate messages such as error messages or warnings using terminology and formatting that may often be hard to decipher for non experts. For example the error or warning message may include a hexadecimal version of an address or identifier instead of a descriptive name for an object. As a result the user or administrator whose work is interrupted or made less productive by the unexpected operating condition may spend a substantial amount of time attempting to understand the message or messages often without success. Ultimately and especially for problems that may affect mission critical applications the appropriate expert may have to be found and consulted sometimes at considerable expense to the end user and or the vendor providing support even in cases where the best response to the problem may require a relatively simple set of actions that the user could have performed if the generated messages had been more intelligible. Similar issues related to possible confusion caused by unclear system generated messages may also arise in other systems management arenas not directly related to error diagnosis such as event auditing application monitoring etc.

The problem of diagnosing computer systems has become even more complicated as the set of skills needed to understand and respond to systems management events have become more geographically dispersed and as the user base for applications has expanded internationally. It may be a common occurrence for example for a particular user in a first country e.g. Brazil to buy a software application originally developed in a second country e.g. the United States and run the application on a computer system produced in a third country e.g. Malaysia . In some cases various levels of the support organizations for the computer hardware vendor and the application vendor may be physically located in a fourth and fifth country respectively e.g. Ghana and India . The computer system may be configured to gather error warning and or status messages from various hardware and software components in a central message repository e.g. in a system provided Event Log on computer systems employing versions of Windows operating systems from Microsoft Corporation or in syslog files or their equivalents on systems employing UNIX based operating systems. Over time a large number of entries may be accumulated in such repositories and each individual entry itself may include a large number of fields which may be hard to assimilate using the interfaces traditionally provided to view such repositories.

If the user encounters a problem such as for example a hanging i.e. unresponsive application or an unexpected reduction in performance the user may be advised to consult the message repository in an attempt to troubleshoot the problem. A typical user or even an expert user may encounter several types of difficulties at this point such as identifying which specific messages are relevant understanding what the message contents or fields may mean and or identifying and performing corrective actions if any are needed. If the user cannot resolve the problem without external help he or she may initiate a support call or open a bug report on the software or hardware component that is suspected to be at fault. Depending on the specific nature of the problem the support call or bug report may have to be channeled through several levels of support organizations e.g. among support personnel that may not all be fluent in the same set of languages until the right expert is found. Each party involved in the problem resolution e.g. the end user and one or more support staff members may have to spend considerable time and effort trying to assemble and correlate the information provided by other parties e.g. a description of the problem the contents of one or more systems management messages details of the environment in which the problem occurred etc. Language difficulties i.e. a lack of an adequate level of fluency in a common language may increase the chances of miscommunication and or incomplete communication between the parties involved in the problem diagnosis and resolution and may further increase the already high costs of support organizations.

Various embodiments of methods and systems to provide user interfaces for multi locale context aware systems management problem analysis are disclosed. According to one embodiment a method comprises receiving a request for information associated with a systems management event dynamically identifying a first locale designation associated with a first user of a systems management tool and a second locale designation associated with a second user of the systems management tool and the systems management tool concurrently displaying the information according to the first and second locale designations. For example in a collaborative session of analysis of a system management problem where a first participant in the session is a resident or native of the United States and a second participant is a resident or native of France both participants may be shown information on the problem in their respective preferred languages. In addition when the first participant performs an action on a first region of the display e.g. selecting a particular element or entry of the information in a region corresponding to a United States English locale the systems management tool may be configured to automatically perform a corresponding action e.g. highlighting the corresponding information in the French version of the information in another region of a display where a different locale designation is being used. By automatically propagating such actions across different display regions the probability of miscommunication or incomplete communication between participants collaborating in systems management problem analysis may be reduced.

At least a portion of the information being displayed according to the second locale designation may be transmitted over a wide area network in one embodiment e.g. the participants in the systems management problem analysis may be geographically dispersed. A number of different techniques may be used to identify the locale designations to be used in the concurrent displays in different embodiments for example in one embodiment one or more users may explicitly select the locale designations while in other embodiments the systems management tool may identify the locale designations automatically e.g. based on a network address or an organizational database. The specific information to be displayed may be obtained from a variety of sources including message catalogs systems management message repositories and other databases. In some embodiments part or all of the specific information displayed to a particular user may be filtered e.g. based on authorization privileges of the user or on environment variables associated with the user.

In one embodiment the systems management tool may be configured to provide additional context sensitive information and or interfaces to perform corrective actions in response to the systems management event. In one implementation in response to a request to provide additional information on a particular systems management event the systems management tool may be configured to identify a category of events to which the particular systems management event belongs and to generate and display context specific information based on the category e.g. in a more user friendly or natural format for that category. For example if the event is related to file system operations the systems management tool may allow the user to invoke one or more file system tools e.g. executable programs or services or to fill out a special problem report form for file system related problems. The interfaces for the additional information the invocation of additional programs and or forms may each be formatted in accordance with a desired locale designation of the requesting user.

While the invention is susceptible to various modifications and alternative forms specific embodiments are shown by way of example in the drawings and are herein described in detail. It should be understood however that drawings and detailed description thereto are not intended to limit the invention to the particular form disclosed but on the contrary the invention is to cover all modifications equivalents and alternatives falling within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

The managed entities may be configured to support any desired set of computer applications such as enterprise level applications e.g. a tiered online banking application including a front end web server tier a mid level application server tier and a back end database tier workgroup applications or single user applications such as word processors spreadsheet programs computer or video games etc. Managed entities may thus include a variety of entities of different levels of complexity and aggregation in different embodiments such as entire computer hosts clusters of hosts individual or aggregated storage devices e.g. individual disks disk arrays or optical storage devices such as individual CDs or DVDs or jukeboxes of CDs or DVDs components and peripheral devices included within or attached to computer hosts such as keyboards mice display devices network cards CD DVD readers writers USB Universal Serial Bus attached devices joysticks digital cameras etc. network links the software applications themselves modules of the applications and so on.

In one embodiment at least some of the managed entities may be configured to generate event records intended to help in diagnosing and or resolving errors in responding appropriately to unexpected operational behavior and in tracking or logging events or operations deemed to be of interest by the providers of the managed entities. Such event records which may be exposed to users as error messages warning messages and or status messages in some embodiments may be termed systems management event records herein and the corresponding events may be termed systems management events herein. It is noted that while some types of systems management events may be associated with faults errors or malfunctions other systems management events may not. For example a planned reboot of a personal computer or an intentional reset of a network interface may not represent an error condition but may nevertheless count as a systems management event of interest and may result in the generation of systems management event records in some embodiments.

An event record aggregator may be configured to collect at least a subset of the generated systems management event records in one embodiment and to produce an aggregated event record from the collected records. The aggregated event record may for example be implemented as a collection of timestamped event encodings which may not be stored in human readable formats but may be converted to human readable format when needed. In some embodiments the event record aggregator may be a component of systems management tool while in other embodiments the event record aggregator may be external to the systems management tool such as a service provided by an operating system . The event record aggregator may be configured to provide a public application programming interface API in one embodiment so that a variety of hardware or software vendors of different managed entities may provide systems management event records in a consistent manner using the API.

Systems management tool may be configured to format information about systems management events such as error messages possible corrective actions etc. according to one or more locale designations for display to human users A D collectively users . The term locale or locale designation as used herein generally refers to a component of a user s computing environment that defines conventions for a specified language country culture and or region such as the choice of human readable language script and spelling time formatting numeric formatting monetary formatting character classification conversion sorting and collation. Some applications that are aware of and responsive to locale designations which may be referred to as localized applications may be configured to adapt the representation of their output to the locale of the particular user to whom the output is being provided. For example if an output display includes a calendar date the manner in which the data is displayed may differ depending on whether the output is being displayed to a user in the United States where calendar dates are typically displayed in Month Day Year format or to a user in India where calendar dates may be typically displayed in Day Month Year format . In this example confusion may result from the different interpretations in the United States and India of a date displayed as 01 02 2003 which may be interpreted as Jan. 2 2003 in the United States and Feb. 1 2003 in India.

The internal and external representation of locale designations may vary from one implementation to another and or from one application to another and may be based on standards recommended by organizations such as ISO the International Organization for Standardization in some embodiments. In one implementation for example locale designations may be represented by one or more ASCII American Standard Code for Information Interchange text encodings include encodings for languages such as en for English and optional encodings for geographical regions or countries such as US for the United States or GB for Great Britain . The optional region country encodings may be concatenated with the language encodings. For example the environment settings for a computer user in the United States of America may associate the default locale designation en US with the user indicating that the user s preferred language is English and the user s country is the United States. A localized application that detects the en US locale designation associated with the user may be configured to display text dates numbers etc. to the user according to the cultural and linguistic conventions used in the United States. The default locale designation for a user of the same application in England may be en GB indicating the Great Britain version of English and the same underlying information may be displayed in a slightly different format to the user in the United Kingdom. In the following description the term locale may be used synonymously with the term locale designation .

In some implementations a particular human readable representation of aggregated event record typically formatted according to a single locale designation specified at operating system installation time may be created by default. Such representations may for example include a syslog file or equivalent files in UNIX based systems and the Event Log in systems employing a version of Microsoft s Windows operating systems.

In response to a request for information associated with a systems management event systems management tool may be configured to dynamically identify locale designations associated with two or more users of the tool in one embodiment and concurrently display the requested information according to the identified locale designations. The request may be triggered in a variety of ways in different embodiments for example a particular user may notice a specific entry in a syslog file or event log and request a concurrent multi locale display of information related to that entry or a user may notice a message in an application console or in an application specific log and may wish to view information related to that message. In response to the request systems management tool may be configured to retrieve and or correlate the information from a variety of sources such as the aggregated event record and present the information according to the two or more locale designations. In a collaborative troubleshooting environment for example where user A and user B may be residents of different countries and may have different native languages systems management tool may be configured to display messages related to the systems management event concurrently in more than one language or format so that the information may be received by each user in the particular language or format in which he or she may be most fluent. In the example shown in the native or preferred locale designation for each of users A B C and D is abbreviated as L L L and L respectively. Systems management tool instance A provides a display of systems management information on a display device A including three regions A B and C to users A and D. Instance B provide a concurrent display of the same underlying systems management information on device B including regions D and E to user B while instance C provides a concurrent display on device C including regions F and G to user C. The information may be displayed within each region according to a particular locale designation L in regions A D and F L in regions B and E and L in regions C and G. In some embodiments at least a portion of the information being displayed on devices may be transmitted over network which may include for example one or more LAN Local Area Network or WAN Wide Area Network links. The information may be transmitted synchronously over network in some embodiments so that for example the view seen by each set of users at a particular point in time is consistent with the view seen by other users on other displays at that point in time. Network may be a private network e.g. a network used exclusively by a single enterprise or company in some embodiments and may include shared links such as Internet links in other embodiments. While multiple instances of systems management tool are shown in in other embodiments a single instance of the tool may be configured to provide multiple displays on a plurality of display devices .

As described below in further detail in one embodiment when a first user selects a particular message or other information element displayed in a view containing a list or table of elements in accordance with the first user s locale preferences systems management tool may be configured to track the selection in the views seen by other users . For example systems management tool may be configured to automatically highlight the corresponding message or element in each of the other users views allowing each of the other users to read the message or information in his or her own preferred language or format. By supporting such automated tracking highlighting of related information across locales systems management tool may help reduce the potential for miscommunication between users attempting to collaborate in resolving systems management problems. In addition as also described below in further detail in some embodiments systems management tool may also be configured to provide context sensitive detailed information such as information on suggested corrective actions related to the systems management event formatted according to users locale preferences which may make it easier for users to respond appropriately to the event while minimizing the time and effort required from technical support staff.

Systems management tool may be configured to select the elements of systems management information to be displayed such as the specific text of warning or error messages from a variety of sources in different embodiments. In one embodiment for example the request may be initiated by double clicking on an existing entry in a visual display of an application log or a system log. In such an embodiment the existing entry may represent a message generated by an application or system component according to a particular locale designation and systems management tool may be configured to obtain additional versions of the application generated message formatted according to other desired locale designations from one or more message catalogs that may have been installed along with the application. In some embodiments part of the information displayed to a particular user may be obtained from one or more message catalogs and part of the information may be based on one or more environment variables i.e. other than a locale designation associated with the user. Further details on how the specific other locale designations may be identified in different embodiments and how environment variables may be used to determine displayed information are provided below.

In some embodiments the request for the information by a particular user may serve as a starting point for a search of one or more databases of systems management information. In one such embodiment in response to the request systems management tool may be configured to parse the contents of the request such as a selected log entry or text entered in a text area and attempt to find related entries in the databases as well as in one or more application logs or system logs. In embodiments where the request is initiated by selecting a particular entry in a system log for example the system log itself as well as other logs and databases may be searched. The related entries may be selected based on content e.g. by matching terms and or based on time proximity e.g. in implementations where log entries in various logs may include timestamps . Systems management tool may also be configured to look up additional information e.g. from system registries or installation records that may be useful in troubleshooting problems related to the systems management event such as an identification of the vendor or vendors that provided the managed entities involved in the event warranty and support details etc. The search may result in a reduction in the total amount of data that may otherwise have to be viewed when troubleshooting a problem e.g. by eliminating unrelated messages from one or more logs and combining relevant log messages with useful information obtained from other databases.

In addition the specific information that is eventually displayed to each user may also be dependent on the authorization roles or privileges of the user in some embodiments. For example in one implementation having determined a set of information related to the systems management event that could potentially be displayed systems management tool may be configured to provide an identification of each participating user to authorization engine and select the specific subset of information that is actually displayed to each user based on information provided by the authorization engine. Such authorization based restrictions may be particularly important in embodiments where a subset of users may not be authorized to view some of the information where the information provided to the user may include suggestions on corrective actions or where systems management tool may actually provide an interface to initiate a corrective action as described below in further detail.

The selection of the specific locale designations in which the information is displayed on a particular display device may be implemented using a variety of manual and or automated techniques in different embodiments. For example in one embodiment systems management tool may provide an interface allowing an explicit selection of the locale designations from among a plurality of locale designations. In one such embodiment for example a particular user in a collaborative troubleshooting session may be designated as a session coordinator and the session coordinator may be allowed to select the locale designations in which the information is displayed to various other collaborating users . For example in the example of user A may decide that the information should be displayed according to locales L L and L on display device A but only according to locales L and L on display device B etc. In one specific embodiment a single display comprising a plurality of regions each formatted according to a different selected locale designation may simply be replicated for viewing by the various users e.g. using a video conferencing application. In other embodiments each user or group of users may be allowed to independently specify the locale designations in which the systems management information is to be displayed.

Systems management tool may be configured to automatically identify the appropriate set of locale designations to be used in some embodiments. For example in one embodiment each participating user may log in using an interface provided by the systems management tool and the user identifier provided as input during the login may be used by the systems management tool to identify an appropriate locale designation for each user e.g. by looking up the default locale designation associated with the user identifier in an organizational database such as an LDAP Lightweight Directory Access Protocol database . In another embodiment systems management tool may be configured to use a mapping of a network address to a geographical location to identify the locales for example if a user establishes a network connection using IP the Internet Protocol to interact with systems management tool the IP address used for the connection may be mapped to a geographical location and hence to a likely appropriate locale designation. Such mappings of network addresses to physical locations may be performed either statically using an existing database identifying locations of hosts or devices by IP address or dynamically by tracing packets sent to the user s host or device . Once the appropriate locale designation for each of the participating users has been identified the combination of locales in which the systems management information is displayed to each user may be selected either automatically e.g. by displaying the information according to all of the identified locales to each user or based on manual input. In some embodiments where systems management tool may select preferred locale designations using such automated techniques users may also be provided with an interface allowing them to override the selections made by the systems management tool.

In the example depicted in systems management information is displayed as a set of entries such as entries K L selected entry A and corresponding entry B etc. where each entry within a given region corresponds to a particular systems management event and includes a number of different fields or elements. For example region A is formatted in according to a United States English locale designation and each entry therein may include a Time field representing a timestamp a Type field identifying the entry as belonging to a particular category of entries a Source field identifying the managed entity or component of managed entity where the event occurred an ID field providing a unique identification for the entry and a Message field including a text message associated with the event. Other fields may also be provided within each region such as the name of an executable program that generated the entry a process identifier and or thread identifier associated with the entry etc. Scrollbars may allow up down and left right scrolling within each region . In various embodiments vertical scrollbars may be located at the right edge of a region or at the left edge as shown in . . In region B includes a plurality of entries formatted according to a French locale designation. Each entry in region B includes a French version of the information included in the corresponding entry in region A for example entry B corresponds to entry A. The names of the columns or fields in region may also be presented according to the French locale in some embodiments for example a column entitled L Heure in region B may correspond to the column entitled Time in region A. In one implementation a separate set of command icons may be provided for each region and the symbols and or text titles associated with each set of command icons may also be selected in accordance with the respective locale designations associated with the region.

In one embodiment a mechanism or interface to select or highlight a particular entry or a set of entries may be provided as part of the graphical user interface. For example in one implementation a user may click on any part of an entry may using a pointing device such as a mouse and such a click may indicate a selection of the entry by the user. The selected entry may be displayed in a special manner to distinguish it from other entries e.g. it may be displayed in a different color or in bold fonts etc. In some embodiments a selection of a particular entry e.g. entry A within a given region e.g. A may automatically trigger a selection of the corresponding entry in other regions e.g. entry B in region B by systems management tool . That is in such embodiments when a first user selects a particular entry systems management tool may automatically track or propagate the selection and highlight the corresponding entries in other regions allowing other collaborating users to quickly identify the information corresponding to the selected entry in their own preferred language and or format. The automatic propagation may extend to regions being displayed at multiple display devices in some embodiments for example in a selection of an entry in region A by user A may result in corresponding entries being synchronously highlighted in all the concurrently displayed regions such as B C D E F and G. Such automated propagation of selected entries may help to ensure that all collaborating users are focused on the same set of underlying systems management information and may help for example to reduce the likelihood of ambiguity confusion or human error in identifying the system management events that are to be examined or investigated. Similar automated highlighting may also be supported for columns and or individual fields in some embodiments for example when a first user selects the ID column e.g. by clicking on the ID column title the corresponding columns may be highlighted in other regions as well.

A variety of additional controls or interfaces may also be supported in the graphical user interface in some embodiments such as the ability to hide one or more columns or entries. One or more actions that result from the use of such controls or interfaces in a particular region may also be propagated to the other regions . For example if a first user hides the Source column in region A using a particular interface in one embodiment the corresponding column may also be automatically and synchronously hidden in one or more of the other regions . In some embodiments the graphical user interface may also include one or more controls to control the extent of propagation of actions such as selection hiding sorting etc. across the various regions. For example it may be possible in one embodiment for a user to decide whether a specific action is to be propagated to other regions or all actions of a particular type where different action types may include for example selection hiding scrolling etc. are to be propagated to other regions and if so to which specific regions the action or actions are to be propagated. In embodiments where such selective propagation may result in the regions becoming unsynchronized e.g. where the different regions may happen to be displaying different sets of information at a given point in time as a result of selective propagation an interface may also be provided to synchronize the different regions e.g. user A may be allowed to issue a command that results in all the regions showing columns and entries that correspond to those being currently shown in region A. It is noted that while shows an example where only two regions are displayed within a view the same graphical user interface that is used to generate the view shown in may also allow multiple regions to be displayed together on a single display device . In addition the specific input interfaces e.g. buttons scrollbars etc. and or output formats may differ from those shown in in some embodiments.

In some embodiments based on the specific type of systems management events being examined or analyzed systems management tool may be configured to provide additional detailed information and or to display the information that may be contained in an entry in a more useful or more user friendly format to users . is a block diagram illustrating further aspects of the functionality of an exemplary graphical user interface provided by system management tool that may be used to display the additional details and or reformatted information according to one embodiment. In the illustrated example a user may use a particular input interface such as a right button click of a two button mouse to request additional detailed information on or context aware reformatting of a particular entry e.g. selected entry A that is currently being displayed within a view . In response systems management tool may be configured to generate a context sensitive details window which may comprise a plurality of tabs such as tab A and B . Each tab may display information related to the particular entry according to a respective locale designation for example tab may include information conforming to a locale designation L e.g. United States English associated with region A and tab may display the equivalent information conforming to a locale designation L e.g. French . In some embodiments the different sets of localized information may all be in view at the same time e.g. the information contained in both tabs A and B may be displayed in two visible regions of the window or in separate windows.

The information that is displayed in tabs may be context sensitive in that the number and content of detail elements A F and detailed text regions and the manner in which the elements and regions are layed out on the tab may depend on the nature of the systems management event represented by the corresponding entry . In one embodiment for example systems management tool may be configured to categorize different systems management events based on a taxonomy of event types. An indication of the category to which a systems management event belongs may be provided using the values displayed in the Type column of regions shown in for example. In such embodiments each category of systems management event may have a corresponding format or layout for a context sensitive details window associated with the category. Systems management tool may be configured to identify the particular category to which the systems management event corresponding to the selected entry belongs select the context specific format for displaying information on that category of events and display the information in that format.

The layout of context sensitive details window may be organized in a way that may be more useful in summarizing the available information on the systems management event than entry especially for entries that may contain numerous fields which may be hard to view together in the regions . For certain types of managed entities an operating system or a third party application may provide a tool to help interact with or manage the entities. For systems management events related to such entities systems management tool may be configured to imitate the look and feel of the interfaces typically provided by those tools when generating context sensitive details window . For example if a disk monitoring tool DMT is typically used to analyze input output performance context sensitive details window may be designed to resemble the interface provided by DMT when displaying information about disks. In this way users may be provided with systems management information using interfaces with which they are already familiar thereby potentially reducing the time taken to analyze systems management problems and the chances of human error.

In addition to reformatting systems management information in more useful ways context sensitive details windows may also be used to display information aggregated from additional sources e.g. sources other than entry in some embodiments. For example additional systems management databases may be accessed for information relevant to the event category or to the specific event for which details are being displayed. Any of a variety of specific input interfaces such as double clicking right clicking or menu driven input interfaces may be used to trigger the display of context sensitive details window in various embodiments. The specific tab whose contents are to be displayed in the foreground may be selected by clicking on the tab header e.g. the region where the text English U.S or French France is displayed in some embodiments and or using other input interfaces such as Tab keys or Function keys on a keyboard in other embodiments.

In one embodiment systems management tool may allow users to invoke one or more actions such as corrective actions or reporting actions in response to a systems management event. is a block diagram illustrating further aspects of the functionality of an exemplary graphical user interface provided by system management tool that may be used to automatically fill out a form or to invoke an executable program or service according to one embodiment. In the depicted example a right click on an entry results in a display of a context sensitive details window that includes buttons and . As indicated in the detailed text region the particular systems management event being analyzed in this example is a file system event. Button may be used to invoke an executable program or service Check FS to check one or more file systems and button may be used to fill out a locale specific problem report form .

The executable program or programs that may be invoked may be specific to the category of systems management event being analyzed e.g. for a file system event an interface to invoke a file system management tool may be provided while for a network related event an interface to a network management tool may be provided. In addition the executable program or programs that a particular user may be allowed to invoke may be restricted in some embodiments e.g. based on authorization privileges or roles of the user . Systems management tool may be configured to communicate with authorization engine to determine whether a particular user has the appropriate privileges to execute a program and may only display an interface allowing the invocation of the program e.g. button to authorized users. Thus the contents of the context sensitive details window seen by a user may be determined at least partly by the authorization level of the user in some embodiments. For example programs that may potentially result in destructive actions e.g. programs to reformat storage reset a device or restart a failed service may only be invoked by administrative users in some implementations. Environment variables associated with the user may also be used by systems management tool in some embodiments to determine at least part of the context sensitive details window e.g. a path variable may indicate the directories or locations of the set of executable programs to which the user has access or an application specific environment variable such as an ORACLE HOME variable identifying a database management system installation directory may affect what is displayed. In one embodiment part of the contents of context sensitive details window may be obtained from one or more message catalogs or from databases while remaining contents may be determined based on authorization levels or environment variables.

If a user clicks on the Fill Out Problem Report Form button in the example shown in a localized and context sensitive form window may be displayed. For example in the form includes text indicating that the problem report will be mailed to an address including the term FS support which may represent a file system support organization. If the event represented by entry were a network related event a different form with different fields and directed at a different support address e.g. Network support may have been generated. Some fields of the form e.g. A and B may be automatically filled by systems management tool for example using part of the contents of entry or using one or more environment variables associated with a user that initiated the generation of the form while other fields e.g. fields A B and may be filled out by the user. The text and instructions in the form may be displayed in accordance with the locale designation of the tab from which the form was generated i.e. in accordance with the preferred locale of a user who initiated the generation of the form.

In one specific embodiment at least a portion of the display provided by systems management tool may be user customizable. For example if an administrator of a particular data center becomes aware of a date center specific solution to a systems management problem where the solution may not be applicable at other data centers the administrator may customize the graphical user interface of systems management tool to display information on the local solution. The custom information may in some embodiments only be displayed according to a particular locale designation and may be obtained from a local support database maintained at the data center. This technique may be especially useful in quickly diagnosing and resolving problems that may be caused by a local condition such as a known problem of network packets occasionally being dropped within a LAN at the data center. The application level systems management messages generated as a result of the dropped packets may be at too high a level or may be too generic to identify the real source of the problem and may result in unnecessary support calls or bug reports directed outside the data center. Customization of the systems management tool e.g. by displaying a message such as This problem is known to be caused due to an intermittent loss of packets in the LAN at data center XYZ and is already being investigated to local users in accordance with a preferred locale designation may prevent such unnecessary support calls or bug reports.

In various embodiments additional features may be implemented in the graphical user interface provided by systems management tool . For example in some embodiments hypertext links may be provided via the interface allowing a user to navigate to web pages containing information related to a systems management event of interest. In other embodiments links to a localized on line glossary of terms may be provided allowing the user to learn the meanings of various terms expressed in the language preferred by the user used in the systems management information. The look and feel of the graphical interface may differ from that shown in . in some embodiments. In one embodiment systems management tool may also provide one or more non graphical interfaces e.g. command line interfaces to provide some of the functionality described above.

Although the embodiments above have been described in considerable detail numerous variations and modifications will become apparent to those skilled in the art once the above disclosure is fully appreciated. It is intended that the following claims be interpreted to embrace all such variations and modifications.

