---

title: Launch tube system having inflatable bladder shock isolation
abstract: A launch tube system has two concentric sleeves. An inner sleeve having holes formed therethrough defines a launch tube, and an outer sleeve surrounds the inner sleeve and is spaced apart therefrom. One or more flexible bladders are disposed between the inner outer sleeves. When filled with fluid, the flexible bladder(s) expands and extends into and through the holes and into confines of the inner sleeve to thereby form shock isolation for a projectile housed in the inner sleeve.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07128013&OS=07128013&RS=07128013
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07128013
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050926
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates generally to shock isolation in launch tubes and more particularly to a launch tube system that uses an inflatable bladder to provide shock isolation.

Underwater shock is a major consideration when designing underwater launch tubes. In the past elastomeric or polymeric materials have been permanently bonded to the inside surfaces of launch tubes to provide shock isolation around the circumference of a projectile e.g. weapon sensor system etc. loaded in the launch tube. The bonded material remains permanently in the launch tube and often interferes with or restricts the amount of exhaust that can be vented from the launch tube during a launch event. Also when launch tube designs require the tandem vertical stacking of projectiles projectiles further down in the stack may have trouble clearing all the bonded shock isolation materials in the launch tube without experiencing velocity reduction.

Accordingly it is an object of the present invention to provide a launch tube system utilizing shock isolation of a non permanent nature.

Other objects and advantages of the present invention will become more obvious hereinafter in the specification and drawings.

In accordance with the present invention a launch tube system has shock isolation for a projectile housed therein. Two concentric sleeves are utilized with an inner sleeve defining a launch tube and an outer sleeve surrounding the inner sleeve and spaced apart therefrom. The inner sleeve has a plurality of holes formed therethrough. One or more flexible bladders are disposed between the inner outer sleeves. A fluid under pressure is introduced into the flexible bladder s . When filled with the fluid the flexible bladder s expands and extends into and through the holes and into confines of the inner sleeve to thereby form shock isolation for a projectile housed in the inner sleeve.

Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to a cross sectional view of a launch tube system in accordance with the present invention is shown and is referenced generally by numeral . Launch tube system houses a projectile prior to and during the launch thereof. The type of projectile is not a limitation of the present invention. Accordingly projectile can be any size configuration and could be weapon or non weapon based without departing from the scope of the present invention. Further the type of launch system used to expel projectile from launch tube system is not a limitation of the present invention.

Launch tube system generally includes an inner tube or sleeve an outer tube or sleeve a sealed bladder and a bladder inflator . More specifically inner sleeve and outer sleeve are concentric sleeves with inner sleeve serving as a launch tube for projectile . Typically sleeves and are made of a rigid material the choice of which is not a limitation of the present invention.

Inner sleeve has a plurality of holes A formed or cut therethrough with edges B defining holes A so formed or cut typically being rounded as illustrated. In the illustrated example holes A are elongated slots that extend axially along inner sleeve . However the present invention is not so limited as the slots could also extend diagonally or transversely with respect to the axial dimension of sleeve . Still further the number and or size of holes A can be different than that shown. That is the holes in sleeve could have other geometries without departing from the scope of the present invention. The holes in sleeve can be evenly distributed about inner sleeve as shown or could be placed in strategic locations around sleeve for a particular application without regard to an even distribution thereof.

Outer sleeve is spaced apart from inner sleeve such that a gap is formed therebetween. Fitted in this gap is bladder made from a flexible material such as an elastomeric material or a composite fabric material. In bladder is in its deflated state. Bladder inflator is coupled to the interior volume of bladder through for example a valve A. Bladder inflator can any number of gas or liquid sources such as a pump compressor bladder generator or storage tank or the like.

In operation projectile is loaded into inner sleeve with bladder in its deflated state shown in . Once loaded bladder inflator is activated and valve A is opened to inflate fill bladder with a fluid. As bladder fills and eventually becomes filled with the fluid bladder expands and extends through holes A as shown in . does not illustrate projectile for clarity of illustration. The size and flexibility of bladder is such that portions of inflated filled bladder expand into inner sleeve through holes A to engage the exterior surface of projectile . Thus filled bladder serves as shock isolation for the engaged projectile . When projectile is to be launched bladder inflator is reversed and fluid in bladder is expelled therefrom until bladder deflates sufficiently so that projectile can be launched without being restricted by bladder .

Bladder can be realized by a single annular bladder that encircles inner sleeve as illustrated. However the present invention could also be realized using several bladders with each one thereof being aligned with a single one or several of holes A. Such individual bladders could be linked for filling with a single bladder inflator or could be coupled to a corresponding number of independent bladder inflators.

In terms of using the present invention for underwater launch scenarios schematically illustrates a simple bladder inflation embodiment of the present invention. When the launch tube system of the present invention utilizes a single annular bladder e.g. bladder and will operate underwater with the surrounding seawater environment having a pressure that is greater than that inside a deflated bladder the filling of bladder can be accomplished using a single valve . More specifically valve is positioned such that when opened seawater passes through valve and into bladder due to the pressure differential thereby inflating filling bladder as described above. Once the filled bladder engages projectile through holes A valve is closed. The build up of strain energy in filled bladder can be used to at least partially deflate bladder when valve is again opened. Alternatively a vacuum pump not shown can be coupled to valve to increase the speed of bladder deflation.

The advantages of the present invention are numerous. The launch tube system is easy to fabricate simple to operate and can be adapted to a variety of launch tube sizes and configurations. The shock isolation provided by the present invention is not permanent and can easily be removed from the confines of the launch tube to accommodate loading and launches.

It will be understood that many additional changes in the details materials steps and arrangement of parts which have been herein described and illustrated in order to explain the nature of the invention may be made by those skilled in the art within the principle and scope of the invention as expressed in the appended claims.

