---

title: Container for grenades
abstract: A grenade container includes a box having a bottom and four sides; a first foam layer disposed on the bottom of the box; a second foam layer disposed on the first foam layer and having a plurality of openings formed therein for receiving grenades; a plurality of grenades placed in the openings in the second foam layer; a first partition disposed on the grenades placed in the openings in the second foam layer; a third foam layer disposed above the first partition and having a plurality of openings formed therein for receiving grenades; a plurality of grenades placed in the openings in the third foam layer; a second partition disposed on the grenades placed in the openings in the third foam layer; a fourth foam layer disposed above the second partition; and a lid and a latch for closing the box.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07395922&OS=07395922&RS=07395922
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07395922
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050830
---
This application claims the benefit under 35 USC 119 e of U.S. provisional patent application 60 552 301 filed on Sep. 14 2004 which application is hereby incorporated by reference.

The inventions described herein may be manufactured used and licensed by or for the U.S. Government for U.S. Government purposes.

The known packaging system for grenades in particular smoke grenades comprises 16 spiral bound fiber containers packed into a wire bound wood ammunition crate. Each of the 16 spiral bound fiber containers contains a single grenade. Several of the wood ammunition crates are stacked on a pallet and secured thereto. To access a grenade a soldier has to unpalletize the wood crate open the wood crate remove the spiral bound fiber containers remove the grenades from the spiral bound containers and then load the grenades into individual metal cans or cargo pockets. The total weight of the packaging materials spiral bound fiber containers and wood ammunition crate is about 35 pounds. The known packaging system is heavy and does not meet all performance requirements.

The wood crate does not have any carrying handles or a lid that can be easily opened and shut. The crate is opened by removing some of the wood slats that form the crate. Removing the wood slats often damages them. To close the crate the wood slats if still intact must be fastened to the rest of the crate with nails or similar fasteners. After removal from the pallet the crate is not easily transportable because it has no carrying handles. Often the crate is opened and some but not all the grenades are removed and then the crate is left open. Even if stored in a building the open crates may allow undesired substances to contact the spiral bound containers.

In particular the current spiral bound containers absorb water vapor and cause rust at the metal sealing at the top of the grenade. This rusting can cause the grenades to become duds. The known packaging is very heavy bulky and has two layers i.e. the wood ammunition crate and the spiral bound fiber containers. The two layer packaging system is prohibitive in terms of weight and ease of handling.

One embodiment of the invention is a grenade container comprising a box having a bottom and four sides a first foam layer disposed on the bottom of the box a second foam layer disposed on the first foam layer and having a plurality of openings formed therein for receiving grenades a plurality of grenades placed in the openings in the second foam layer a first partition disposed on the grenades placed in the openings in the second foam layer a third foam layer disposed above the first partition and having a plurality of openings formed therein for receiving grenades a plurality of grenades placed in the openings in the third foam layer a second partition disposed on the grenades placed in the openings in the third foam layer a fourth foam layer disposed above the second partition and a lid and a latch for closing the box.

The present invention provides all the benefits of protection as the known packaging and exceeds the environmental protection required for shipping from depots to the field. The present invention reduces the two layer system to one layer. The new one layer system allows soldiers to carry grenades in the shipping box wherever they want to go and still have the flexibility to carry one or two grenades in each soldier s personal space. Because of its size weight carrying handles and reclosable lid with latch the new shipping box may be loaded directly into a soldier s vehicle which is much faster than removing grenades out of the old wire bound wood crate and loading them individually in a vehicle.

The reclosable lid with latch makes the new package better for long term storage of grenades and reduces the rust corrosion of the grenades during storage. The new packaging is cheaper and lighter. The new packaging eases logistics burdens and increases the number of rounds per pallet. In addition the new packaging affords a stable side by side container set up in a palletized configuration. The new packaging is easier to transport. When a mission requires several grenades or more the soldiers do not have to open a wooden ammunition crate and carry the single spiral bound containers. Rather because of the light weight of the new packaging the soldiers can simply transport the grenades in the new packaging.

The invention will be better understood and further objects features and advantages thereof will become more apparent from the following description of the preferred embodiments taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

The grenade container includes a box having four sides a bottom and a lid . The lid is preferably attached to the box using for example a hinge . A latch attached to an opposite end of the box from the hinge secures the lid to the box . A gasket may be used to further seal the box . One or more handles are attached to the box for example a handle on the lid and handles disposed on opposite ends of the box .

Box may be made of for example metal or a composite material. An exemplary metal is one half inch cold rolled steel per ASTM A109 or ASTM A568. The metal should be painted with corrosion resistant fire retardant paint. An example of a composite material is a carbon fiber composite with 40 percent resin and 60 percent carbon fiber. Gasket is preferably neoprene.

The first second third and fourth foam layers comprise for example polyethylene foam having a four pound density. Preferably the polyethylene foam has a compression strength of 315 psi 2.17 Mpa and a tensile strength of 180 psi 1.24 Mpa . The four foam layers are generally rectangular in shape with a length and a width sized to fit snugly in box . The first and fourth layers may have the same thickness in the X direction shown in for example about one inch. The second and third foam layers may also have the same thickness which is preferably at least about twice the thickness of the first and fourth foam layers . In one embodiment the thickness of the second and third foam layers is about three inches.

Second and third foam layers include openings formed therein. The openings are preferably octagonal in shape and extend for example about two thirds through the thickness of the second and third layers . The spacings a and b between adjacent openings in layers is preferably at least about 0.3 inches. The first and fourth foam layers do not have openings.

First and second partitions have openings formed therein for receiving grenades . The openings extend completely through partitions and are preferably octagonal in shape. The partitions are made of for example thick corrugate cardboard with a thickness from about one eighth of an inch to about one half an inch. The spacings between adjacent openings in first and second partitions is the same as the spacings a and b between adjacent openings in the second and third foam layers. The openings in the first and second partitions contact grenades at a top portion of the grenade approximately where the fuze is attached to the cylindrical body.

In one embodiment the box is about 14.5 inches long by about 9 inches wide and about 14.5 inches high. First and fourth foam layers are about one inch thick. Second and third foam layers are about three inches thick and first and second partitions are about one half inch thick. The second and third foam layers and the first and second partitions each have fifteen openings formed therein 5 rows and 3 columns each opening having a diameter of about 2.5 inches. Fifteen grenades are placed in the openings in second foam layer and fifteen grenades are placed in the openings in third foam layer .

While the invention has been described with reference to certain preferred embodiments numerous changes alterations and modifications to the described embodiments are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

