---

title: Terrestrial repeater system for use with craft-mounted base stations
abstract: A craft-mounted repeater system processes signal properties (e.g., signal strength) between terrestrial (ground-based) wireless networks and mobile users that are aboard crafts (e.g., airplanes and/or ships) equipped to allow the user's mobile communications device to communicate at departure and at arrival of the craft. An onboard craft-mounted non-translating in-band only repeater system is a provided that increases the terrestrial mobile network signal levels inside the aircraft or ship to allow passengers to communicate with a terrestrial cellular communications system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07715853&OS=07715853&RS=07715853
owner: AT&T Mobility II LLC
number: 07715853
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050815
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent application Ser. No. 60 667 807 entitled TERRESTRIAL REPEATER SYSTEM FOR USE WITH CRAFT MOUNTED BASE STATIONS and filed Apr. 1 2005 the entirety of which is incorporated by reference herein.

This invention is related to communications repeater systems and more specifically to repeaters used in human cargo transportation systems.

There are tremendous advances being made to equip transportation systems e.g. airplanes and ships with base stations such that mobile cellular users can continue to communicate using wireless communications devices. Typically these craft mounted base stations form picocells that utilize satellite or other wireless backhaul networks as communication links with terrestrial networks to complete the voice and or data call. In the case of aircraft these picocells can be switched on once the aircraft has reached a safe cruising altitude and turned off when the aircraft is on final landing approach or at other designated times.

A main concern with these craft mounted base stations is the potential for interference with terrestrial mobile networks and other licensed spectrum bands while in flight. Although the use of cell phones while airborne is currently prohibited that may be changing. Government oversight agencies such as the FCC Federal Communications Commission and FAA Federal Aviation Administration are currently considering allowing the capability of operating cell phones while the aircraft is airborne. Additionally airlines and the aircraft manufactures are considering increasing the capability of aircraft to be electromagnetically shielded to from other terrestrial wireless networks. Shielding of the aircraft would in principle reduce or attenuate signal levels originating from inside the aircraft such as from mobile cellular telephones and thus potentially reduce the level of interference to the terrestrial wireless networks.

Herein is a problem with such craft mounted systems for the terrestrial wireless operator. It is fairly common today for many wireless customers to desire to use cell phones onboard aircraft for example to make last minute calls prior to being told to discontinue the use of all electronic devices. These calls can be extremely important to the terrestrial wireless operators. As the aircraft or ship for example is parked at the terminal or dock and prior to commencing travel mobile users should not be prohibited from utilizing the terrestrial mobile networks.

If the aircraft or ship is equipped with the additional shielding the mobile device of the user can have difficulty establishing and maintaining a call with the terrestrial base station that serves the airport or shipping dock due to the additional signal attenuation presented by the aircraft ship shielding mechanism. Compounding the problem is the difficulty if not outright prohibition in zoning additional towers around airports and docks to address the needs of such implementations. Thus there is a substantial unmet need in the art for an improved craft mounted system for mobile communications.

The following presents a simplified summary of the invention in order to provide a basic understanding of some aspects of the invention. This summary is not an extensive overview of the invention. It is not intended to identify key critical elements of the invention or to delineate the scope of the invention. Its sole purpose is to present some concepts of the invention in a simplified form as a prelude to the more detailed description that is presented later.

The subject invention is a communications system that processes signal properties e.g. signal strength between terrestrial ground based wireless networks and mobile users that are aboard crafts e.g. airplanes and or ships equipped to allow the user s mobile communications device to communicate at departure and at arrival of the craft. An onboard craft mounted repeater system is a provided that increases the terrestrial mobile network signal levels inside the aircraft or ship to allow passengers to use a terrestrial mobile network prior to or at the end of the craft s travels. Such equipment can include a general base station Node B base stations and or wireless access points such as is associated with the operation of picocells or microcells.

To the accomplishment of the foregoing and related ends certain illustrative aspects of the invention are described herein in connection with the following description and the annexed drawings. These aspects are indicative however of but a few of the various ways in which the principles of the invention can be employed and the subject invention is intended to include all such aspects and their equivalents. Other advantages and novel features of the invention will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the drawings.

The invention is now described with reference to the drawings wherein like reference numerals are used to refer to like elements throughout. In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the subject invention. It may be evident however that the invention can be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to facilitate describing the invention.

As used in this application the terms component and system are intended to refer to a computer related entity either hardware a combination of hardware and software software or software in execution. For example a component can be but is not limited to being a process running on a processor a processor a hard disk drive multiple storage drives of optical and or magnetic storage medium an object an executable a thread of execution a program and or a computer. By way of illustration both an application running on a server and the server can be a component. One or more components can reside within a process and or thread of execution and a component can be localized on one computer and or distributed between two or more computers.

Referring initially to the drawings illustrates a craft mounted system in accordance with the subject invention. The system can include a communications component that facilitates communications between the craft mounted communications system of a craft not shown and a terrestrial communications system . The communications between the communications component and the terrestrial system can include non translated signals processed from signals received from a mobile terminal of the craft. Such non translated signals can be communicated at least while the craft is in arrival mode and departure mode.

A control component is provided that can include a craft control system such that craft control signals can be processed by the control component to further control the communications component. For example in one implementation the control component facilitates automatic and or manual shutdown of portions or all of the communications component that provides communications between the craft mounted system and the terrestrial system based on data and or signals received by the control component from other craft systems. In another example the control component facilitates automatic and or manual enablement of portions or all of the communications component that provides communications between the craft mounted system and the terrestrial system based on data and or signals received by the control component from other craft systems.

It is within contemplation of the disclosed innovation that the control component can also monitor data and or signals of the communications component and react accordingly based on the data and or signals received therefrom. For example certain channels can be managed such that one channel is enabled for communications while another channel is disabled. These are only but a few examples of the aspects that can be monitored and controlled.

The system includes a repeater subsystem that facilitates the wireless interface via a first antenna an internal antenna located inside the craft between one or more of the mobile terminals and the terrestrial communications system . The repeater subsystem can also include a second antenna that provides external wireless access to the terrestrial communications system . In a wireless communications system a repeater generally consists of a radio receiver an amplifier a transmitter an isolator and two antennas. In a translating repeater system the transmitter produces a signal on a frequency that differs from the received signal. This can be necessary to prevent the strong transmitted signal from disabling the receiver. The isolator provides additional protection in this respect.

The repeater subsystem of the subject invention is a non translating in band only repeater that retransmits signals without changing their frequencies. The repeater subsystem supports wireless networks such as cellular PCS Personal Communications Service Wi Fi WiMax AWS Advance Wireless Services 700 MHz and WCS Wireless Communications Service for example. Moreover devices operating according to communications technologies such as CDMA Code Division Multiple Access e.g. 800 1900 bands TDMA Time Division Multiple Access GSM Global System for Mobile Communications e.g. 850 1900 bands and UMTS Universal Mobile Telecommunications System can operate in accordance with the subject invention.

The onboard system can also include a control system also referred to as the repeater control system that monitors and controls aspects of thereof. For example the control system can enable disable the repeater subsystem in accordance with predetermined instructions and or external signals that are received. For example the control system can be configured to interface to a craft control system not shown such that signals and data that are communicated thereby can be utilized as triggers that are further used to control the onboard system . This is described in greater detail infra. Additionally the control system can be used to record data signals and other information related to the onboard system .

At the craft initiates departure mode. If an aircraft this mode can include parked at the gate such that travelers on the plane can communicate using their cell phones and other similarly capable devices to communicate over the terrestrial communications system. Departure mode can also include the time up to and including liftoff at which time cellular communications and other personal communications devices are required to be turned off. It is to be appreciated that in another implementation departure mode can include a short period of time e.g. in the regime of seconds or minutes after the aircraft has lifted off the runway.

However FAA FCC regulations require that such devices no longer be operated during certain times or blackout periods . Thus the onboard system of the subject invention can be disabled at or about these times to prevent communications between onboard travelers and terrestrial callers. To this end data and signals associated with events such as movement e.g. taxing speed altitude and liftoff e.g. landing gear up control can be utilized to trigger the repeater control system to enable or disable the repeater system. Accordingly at the repeater control system interfaces to the aircraft control system to monitor and receive one or more signals and or data that will then be processed to function as a trigger for enabling disabling the repeater subsystem during required blackout periods. At if a trigger is not detected flow is back to to continue monitoring the aircraft control system s for data and or signals that can be used as trigger signals.

At if a trigger is detected flow is to where in one implementation an optional notification message is sent indicating that the repeater subsystem is shutting down. At the repeater subsystem is then shutdown or is disabled in some form to prevent mobile communications between the onboard mobile terminals and the terrestrial communications system.

In any case whenever allowed the onboard repeater subsystem can then be enabled such that passengers can use mobile phones for example to communicate over terrestrial communications system. In that data and signals can exist that are related to landing events such as speed altitude and landing e.g. landing gear down control such information can be utilized as trigger signals to the repeater control system of the invention to enable the repeater subsystem. Accordingly at the repeater control system interfaces to the aircraft control system to monitor and receive one or more signals and or data that will then be processed to function as triggers for enabling the repeater subsystem after the required blackout period. At if a trigger is not detected flow is back to to continue monitoring the aircraft control system s for data and or signals that can be used as trigger signals.

At if a trigger is detected flow is to where in one implementation an optional notification message is sent indicating that the repeater subsystem is about to be enabled. At the repeater subsystem is then enabled for operation to provide mobile communications between the onboard mobile terminals and the terrestrial communications system.

A repeater control system of the system can provide monitor and control capabilities in conjunction with the repeater subsystem and can further interface to an aircraft control system or a plurality of the aircraft control systems to communicate signals and or data that can be processed as one or more trigger signals for managing e.g. enable disable the repeater subsystem .

In one implementation the repeater control system communicates with a picocell subsystem or base station that is internal to the repeater system and provides onboard communications for the mobile users. In an alternative implementation a picocell subsystem or base station provides the same or similar function as the internal picocell subsystem but is external to the onboard repeater system . In yet another implementation both the internal and external picocell subsystems and are provided in support of mobile communications of the aircraft .

In another implementation the engine processes the rules or policies based on passenger usage of the repeater subsystem similar to subsystem . For example IF the number of channels is exceeded THEN insert passenger registration in queue for next available channel . In support of the engine operations the repeater control system can also include a processor denoted CPU that monitors and controls all operations of the system as well as all or certain functions of the repeater subsystem . A memory facilitates the storage and or caching of data and applications that support operation of the repeater control system .

It is to be appreciated that the control system can be fabricated as an ASIC Application Specific Integrated Circuit or FPGA Field Programmable Gate Array system such that all programs and algorithms are programmed thereinto for more rugged and reduced form factor applications. Additionally communications between the repeater control system and the craft control system can be via any conventional wired and optical wireless communications architectures.

The onboard system can also include the repeater subsystem similar to subsystem for non translation in band only signal repeating. In this implementation the onboard system can also include a GPS receiver such that the geographic location information of the system can be ascertained. The GPS receiver includes an antenna not shown that also has external access to the craft such that GPS signals can be received. This information can be useful at least for the rules engine described supra. A repeater control system provides monitor and control of the repeater system components and and can also interface to the craft control system not shown to receive data and or signals therefrom for at least trigger processing for managing the repeater subsystem .

The craft mounted repeater system can include additional functionality to ensure that it does not facilitate potential interference. If the craft mounted repeater subsystem is turned off terrestrial signals could propagate through an external antenna into the system as conducted or radiated emissions. For radiated emissions the system can include dummy RF Radio Frequency load s in the RF chain inside the craft e.g. aircraft cabin that switches the desired RF signals from the antenna distributed antennas leaky cable to the dummy RF load s . When the system is on it switches to the internal antenna distributed antennas leaky cable . For conducted emissions standard EMC Electromagnetic Compatibility preventive measures such as coupling capacitors and or ferrites can be employed on the cable paths from the outside antenna as it progresses through the shielding.

In summary the craft mounted terrestrial repeater system is a non translating in band only repeater system for wireless networks such as cellular PCS Wi Fi WiMax AWS 700 MHz and WCS. The craft repeater includes antennas to distribute signals from within and outside the craft. A duplex antenna system can be part of the craft repeater system. One antenna is mounted beyond the craft shielding preferably on the outside of the craft. Signals are received by the external antenna and or amplified and brought through the craft shielding or hull by means of a cable and reradiated inside the cabin of the aircraft by means of another antenna mounted inside the aircraft or by a distributed antenna systems such as a leaky cable.

Additionally the craft mounted repeater system includes associated electronics with a controller and interface to operate in conjunction with a craft mounted base station. The controller serves to manage functionality e.g. turn on off of the craft mounted repeater system and turn off on the craft mounted base station at defined intervals such as leaving or arriving at the terminal and in flight or in travel away from the terrestrial networks. Additionally other electronics onboard the aircraft such as GPS air speed indicators altitude signals and cabin signaling can be used and interfaced with the craft repeater system and base station to ideally configure the defined operations period of the craft repeater and base station.

The following frequencies 1885 2025 MHz and 2110 2200 MHz can be allocated for UMTS use. However the innovative aspects described herein can also be applied to other frequency bands. Bearer services can have different QoS quality of service parameters for maximum transfer delay delay variation and bit error rate. Offered data rate targets are 144 kbps satellite and rural outdoor 384 kbps urban outdoor and 2048 kbps indoor and low range outdoor.

UMTS network services can have different QoS classes for four types of traffic conversational class e.g. voice video telephony video gaming streaming class e.g. multimedia video on demand webcast interactive class e.g. web browsing network gaming database access and background class e.g. email SMS downloading .

UMTS can also support have a virtual home environment which is a concept for portability across network boundaries and between terminals in a personal service environment. Personal service environment means that users are consistently presented with the same personalized features user interface customization and services in whatever network or terminal wherever the user may be located. UMTS also includes network security and location based services.

The UMTS network can consist of three interacting domains a user equipment UE domain a UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network UTRAN domain and a core network CN domain . The UTRAN domain is also referred to as the access network domain and the CN is referred to as the core network domain the both of which comprise an infrastructure domain.

The UE domain includes a USIM user services identity module domain and an ME mobile equipment domain. User equipment is the equipment used by the user to access UMTS services. In the UE domain the UMTS IC card is the USIM which has the same physical characteristics as GSM SIM subscriber identity module card. The USIM interfaces to ME via a Cu reference point. Functions of the USIM include support of one USIM application and optionally more than one support of one or more user profiles on the USIM update of USIM specific information over the air security functions user authentication optional inclusion of payment methods and optional secure downloading of new applications.

UE terminals work as an air interface counter part for Node B devices of the access network and have many different types of identities. Following are some of the UMTS identity types which are taken directly from GSM specifications international mobile subscriber identity IMSI temporary mobile subscriber identity TMSI packet temporary mobile subscriber identity P TMSI temporary logical link identity TLLI mobile station ISDN MSISDN international mobile station equipment identity IMEI and international mobile station equipment identity and software version number IMEISV .

A UMTS mobile station MS can operate in one of three modes of operation. A PS CS mode of operation is where the MS is attached to both the PS packet switched domain and CS circuit switched domain and the MS is capable of simultaneously operating PS services and CS services. A PS mode of operation is where the MS is attached to the PS domain only and can only operate services of the PS domain. However this does not prevent CS like services from being offered over the PS domain e.g. VoIP . In a third CS mode of operation the MS is attached to the CS domain only and can only operate services of the CS domain.

The UTRAN provides the air interface access method for the UE domain . The reference point between the UE domain and the infrastructure domain is the Uu UMTS radio interface. The access network domain provides the physical entities that manage resources of the access network and facilitates access to the core network domain. In UMTS terminology a base station of the access network domain is referred as a Node B device and control equipment for Node B devices is called a radio network controller RNC . The interface between the Node B device and the RNC is the Iub interface. The interface between two RNCs is called the Iur interface.

The functions of Node B devices include air interface transmission reception modulation and demodulation CDMA Code Division Multiple Access physical channel coding micro diversity error handing and closed loop power control. The functions of the RNC include radio resource control admission control channel allocation power control settings handover control macro diversity ciphering segmentation and reassembly broadcast signaling and open loop power control.

Wideband CDMA WCDMA technology was selected for UTRAN air interface. UMTS WCDMA is a direct sequence CDMA system where user data is multiplied with quasi random bits derived from WCDMA spreading codes. In UMTS in addition to channelization codes are used for synchronization and scrambling. WCDMA has two basic modes of operation frequency division duplex FDD and time division duplex TDD .

The Core Network is divided in circuit switched and packet switched domains. Some of the circuit switched elements are a mobile services switching center MSC and visitor location register VLR and gateway MSC GMSC . Packet switched elements include a serving GPRS support node SGSN and gateway GPRS support node GGSN . Some network elements such as an EIR equipment identity register not shown HLR home location register VLR and AuC authentication center not shown can be shared by both domains.

A function of the CN is to provide switching routing and transit for user traffic. The CN also contains the databases and network management functions. The basic CN architecture for UMTS is based on the GSM network with GPRS general packet radio service capability. All equipment is modified for UMTS operation and services. The radio access network has several interfaces which can be configured and dimensioned. The CN interfaces to the radio access domain via an Iu interface. An Iu CS circuit switched reference point interfaces an RNC of the access network to the MSC VLR entity of the CN for voice from to the MSC VLR . An Iu PS packet switched reference point interfaces an RNC of the access network to the SGSN entity of the CN for data from to the SGSN .

In the CN a Gs interface is provided between the MSC VLR and the SGSN. A Gn interface is provided between the SGSN and the GGSN . A D interface is provided between the MSC VLR and the HLR and the HLR and the GMSC . A Gr interface is provided between the SGSN and the HLR . A Gc interface is provided between the GGSN and the HLR .

The CN provides the interface from the UE domain to external networks such as the Internet via a Gi interface from the GGSN and other networks via the GMSC which can include a PLMN public land mobile network PSTN public switched telephone network and ISDN integrated service digital network networks.

Asynchronous Transfer Mode ATM is defined for UMTS core transmission. ATM Adaptation Layer type 2 AAL2 handles circuit switched connection and packet connection protocol AAL5 is designed for data delivery.

The architecture of the CN can change when new services and features are introduced. Number Portability Database NPDB for example can be used to enable a user to change the network while keeping their old phone number. A gateway location register GLR can be employed to optimize the subscriber handling between network boundaries. Additionally the MSC VLR and SGSN can merge to become a UMTS MSC.

Summarizing the UMTS frequencies 1920 1980 MHz and 2110 2170 MHz can be employed for FDD and WCDMA. Paired uplink and downlink channel spacing can be 5 MHz and raster is 200 kHz. An operator can use 3 4 channels 2 15 MHz or 2 20 MHz to build a high speed high capacity network. Frequencies 1900 1920 MHz and 2010 2025 MHz can be employed for TDD and TD CDMA. Unpaired channel spacing can be 5 MHz and raster is 200 kHz. Transmit and receive are not separated in frequency. Frequencies 1980 2010 MHz and 2170 2200 MHz can be employed for satellite uplink and downlink.

What has been described above includes examples of the invention. It is of course not possible to describe every conceivable combination of components or methodologies for purposes of describing the subject invention but one of ordinary skill in the art may recognize that many further combinations and permutations of the invention are possible. Accordingly the invention is intended to embrace all such alterations modifications and variations that fall within the spirit and scope of the appended claims. Furthermore to the extent that the term includes is used in either the detailed description or the claims such term is intended to be inclusive in a manner similar to the term comprising as comprising is interpreted when employed as a transitional word in a claim.

