---

title: Techniques for recovering optical spectral features using a chirped optical field
abstract: Techniques for recovering optical spectral features include receiving a detected time series that represents a temporally varying intensity of an optical signal. The optical signal is formed in response to an interaction between a target optical spectrum and a chirped optical field. The chirped optical field is an optical field that has a monochromatic frequency that varies in time. The target optical spectrum is an optical frequency dependent optical property of a material or device. A phase correction factor is determined based only on one or more properties of the chirped optical field. The detected time series is corrected based on the phase correction factor to produce an output time series that reproduces in time a shape of the target spectrum in frequency. These techniques allow for fast measurement of spectral features and eliminate the need for prior knowledge of the target optical spectrum to adjust the chirp rate.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07145713&OS=07145713&RS=07145713
owner: Montana State University
number: 07145713
owner_city: Bozeman
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050712
---
This application claims benefit of Provisional Appln. 60 587 331 filed Jul. 13 2004 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein under 35 U.S.C. 119 e .

This invention was made with Government support under Contract No. MDA 972 03 1 0002 awarded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and Montana Board of Research and Commercialization Technology Grant 03 08 . The Government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to optical signal processing to determine features of a target optical spectrum and in particular to the use of a chirped optical field to recover the target optical spectrum. Here a target optical spectrum is a spectrum at optical frequencies that is output by a device included inherently in a material or device or recorded by artificial action in a material or device or formed in some combination.

Information processing based on optical analog signal processing promises to provide advantages in speed size and power over current information processing systems. Many versatile optical coherent transient OCT processing devices have been proposed. An OCT device relies on broadband complex spatial spectral grating formed in the optical properties of a material such as an inhomogeneously broadened transition IBT material also called a spatial spectral S2 material. A spatial spectral grating has the ability to generate a broadband optical output signal that depends on an optical probe waveform impinging on that grating and the one or more interacting optical signals that formed the grating.

In some OCT devices the approach to accessing the information in the spatial spectral grating is to probe that grating with a high bandwidth Fourier transform limited optical signal such as a coherent brief optical pulse or a series of such coherent brief optical pulses. Under certain conditions the probing of the grating can produce optical output signals that are generally referred to as stimulated photon echoes or optical coherent transients. A single brief coherent light pulse with a bandwidth equal to that of the spectral grating stimulates a time delayed output signal whose temporal profile represents the Fourier transform of the spectrum recorded in the grating structure.

While useful in many applications the approach of readout with a high bandwidth Fourier transform limited coherent brief optical pulse or series of optical pulses at the full bandwidth of processing can suffer at present from the limited performance in dynamic range of photo detectors and analog to digital converters ADCs also called digitizers that are needed to make a measurement of any instantaneous high bandwidth optical signal. Existing high bandwidth detectors and ADCs have limited performance and higher cost as compared to lower bandwidth detectors and digitizers.

Swept frequency modulated optical signals are called chirped optical fields and chirped laser fields herein. The frequency sweep can be linear in time with a constant chirp rate called linear chirp or linear frequency modulation LFM or non linear with a time varying chirp rate. Optical LFM signals have been used as probe waveforms in pulse sequences to write spatial spectral gratings for applications of storage signal processing true time delay generation and arbitrary waveform generation and also for readout of spectral gratings. LFM probe waveforms generate a temporal output signal that represents a collective readout of all the absorbers as with the brief pulse excitation but under the condition of swept excitation. By properly choosing the rate of frequency change with time called herein the chirp rate a temporal readout is produced that is slow enough to be digitized by low cost high performance digitizers in the frequency bands of interest. See for example published International Patent application WO 2003 098384 entitled Techniques for processing high time bandwidth signals using a material with inhomogeneously broadened absorption spectrum Inventors K. D. Merkel Z. Cole K. M. Rupavatharam W. R. Babbitt T. Chang and K. H. Wagner 27 Nov. 2003 hereinafter Merkel the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.

The concept of using a chirped laser field as a probe signal has been called spectral to temporal mapping. Coherent interaction of resonances of the physical system with the chirped laser field is called a stimulated photon echo or optical coherent transient effect. Commonly this interaction results in a response signal that is a time varying change to the amplitude and or phase of the probe field. The frequency sweep rate or chirp rate is defined as the frequency scan range or bandwidth B divided by the duration of the sweep time c as given by Expression 1a 1a 

In some cases the response field phase and amplitude can be directly observed. For some other cases e.g. at optical frequencies in order to obtain the full information about both the phase and the amplitude a heterodyne detection scheme is used where a reference field interferes with the response signal. Typically the reference field is close in frequency with the response signal so that a lower frequency beat output is produced that is readily observable with photo detectors and high performance digitizers. Under some conditions heterodyne detection is automatic such as when the probe field spatially overlaps the response signal and acts as a reference as in the case of absorption or dispersion. In other cases the output signal is distinct from the probe field and a reference field is made to interfere with the response signal before being received by a measurement apparatus such as a digitizing detector.

It has been observed that the detected signal received by the detectors is not a simple mapping in time of a target optical spectrum with which the probe signal interacts but often includes spurious features. For example an attenuated ringing of a single peak spectral feature in a target optical spectrum is observed in the detected signal. The composite ringing of multiple spectral features leads to a complex distortion of the target optical spectrum when mapped into a temporal readout signal.

A commonly used method to reduce the distortion to a negligible level is to limit the chirp rate to a slow sweep rate usually set by an inequality such as in Expression 1b 

For example in optical absorption spectroscopy the frequency swept excitation is widely used to directly map the absorption spectrum to the time domain and the frequency chirped field is applied at a slow chirp rate to reduce the distortions S. P. Anokhow V. I. Kravchenko and M. S. Soskin Rapid spectroscopy using lasers with swept lasing frequency Opt. Spectrosc. 36 1 10 1972 . Anokhow et. al. pointed out that From the point of view of laser spectroscopy the most interesting mode of operation is adiabatically slow sweeping and also that Under adiabatically slow frequency sweeping the shape of the luminescence line does not have any appreciable effect on the kinetics and the amplitude of the peaks results from the pumping intensity . Duppen et. al. also observed the problem that using a fast chirp rate results in distortions or asymmetrical ringing on the response in frequency chirped four wave mixing experiments K. Duppen F. de Haan E. T. J. Nibbering and D. A. Wiersma Chirped four wave mixing Phys. Rev. A. 47 5120 1993 . The sweep rate limit was also pointed out in the response of the frequency chirped excitation of a Fabry Perot interferometer M. J. Lawrence B. Willke M. E. Husman E. K. Gusman E. K. Gustafson and R. L. Byer J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 16 4 523 1999 . Optical frequency chirped fields have been used for readout of the spectral features in inhomogeneously broadened spectral materials. In the majority of such measurements to map the spectral features to the temporal domain the chirp rates were set to be slow with respect to the width of the finest spectral feature C. M. Jefferson and A. J. Meixner Chem. Phys. Lett. 189 60 1992 A. J. Meixner C. M. Jefferson and R. M. Macfarlane Phys. Rev. B 46 5912 1992 Z. Cole T. Bottger R. K. Mohan R. Reibel W. R. Babbitt R. L. Cone and K. D. Merkel Appl. Phys. Lett. 81 3525 2002 . The entire contents of each of these references are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.

While a slow chirp rate can reduce such distortions the use of a slow chirp rate is not always desirable or applicable. For example a disadvantage of the slow chirp rate requirement is the need to know or accurately estimate the spectral resolution of the finest significant features in the spectrum of interest. Often the finest spectral resolution is not known. In some applications the readout time is limited and a fast chirp rate e.g. is required to cover a sufficient bandwidth of interest.

For another example in some applications of optical spectroscopy techniques such as cavity ringdown absorption spectroscopy which is a highly sensitive and accurate way to measure weak gas phase molecular spectra a fast chirp is required to enhance the performance. A swept carrier frequency of the laser is used to observe the detected signal as the heterodyne beating between the transmitted field and the impulse response and the distortions due to a fast frequency sweep are clearly observed.

In one approach Y. He B. J. Orr J. Chinese Chem. Soc 48 591 2001 Y. He B. J. Orr Appl. Phys. B75 267 2002 Y. He B. J. Orr Appl. Phys. B79 941 2004 subsequent steps were then taken to convert the temporal distortions into an envelope only function using a demodulating logarithmic amplifier to observe the cavity ringdown time but not to compensate for the distortions.

Based on the foregoing there is a clear need for techniques to use a chirped optical field to probe a target optical spectrum which does not suffer the deficiencies of prior art approaches to optical readout. In particular there is a need for techniques to read out a target optical spectrum using chirp rates that are not limited by the finest spectral resolution of the target optical spectrum which is not known in some applications.

Techniques are provided for recovering optical spectral features in a target optical spectrum using a chirped laser field by determining and applying a frequency dependent correction factor to a detected signal. These techniques allow the determination of the spectral content of a target optical spectrum during one or more optical interactions including for example optical absorption transmission reflection diffraction dispersion and scattering of the target optical spectrum with the chirped laser field without limitations imposed by the spectral or spatial resolution of the target optical spectrum. Here a target optical spectrum is a spectrum at optical frequencies that is output by a device included inherently in a material or device or recorded by artificial action in a material or device or formed in some combination. As used herein optical fields are understood to include all types of high frequency propagating electro magnetic waves including but not limited to visible light infrared radiation ultraviolet light microwaves millimeter waves and terahertz waves. Optical spectra can be any spectra that have frequency dependence that modifies propagating electro magnetic waves including but not limited to visible light infrared radiation ultraviolet light microwaves millimeter waves and terahertz waves.

In a first set of embodiments a method includes determining a phase correction factor based only on one or more properties of a chirped optical field used to interact with a target optical spectrum. In these embodiments the target optical spectrum is an optical frequency dependent optical property of a material or device. The chirped optical field is an optical field that has a monochromatic frequency that varies in time. A detected time series is received which represents a temporally varying intensity of an optical signal. The optical signal is formed in response to an interaction between at least the target optical spectrum and the chirped optical field. The detected time series is corrected based on the phase correction factor to produce an output time series that reproduces in time a shape of the target spectrum in frequency.

In some embodiments of the first set determining the phase correction factor includes determining a Fourier transform of the chirped optical field.

In some embodiments of the first set the chirped optical field has well known values for well known properties and the phase correction factor is determined based on the well known values.

In some of these embodiments the well known properties include a constant chirp rate that indicates a change in frequency of the chirped optical field with time and a start frequency s that indicates an initial frequency at a start of the chirped optical field.

In some such embodiments determining the phase correction further includes determining a frequency dependent correction factor on a phase term c given by the equation c exp i 2 s that includes an effect of a quadratic phase where i is the square root of 1 and is the well known ratio of a circumference to a diameter of a circle.

In some of these embodiments correcting the detected time series includes determining a Fourier transform of the detected time series. The Fourier transform of the detected time series is multiplied by the correction factor equal to the reciprocal of the quadratic phase form c to produce a corrected transform. An inverse Fourier transform of the corrected transform is determined to produce the output time series.

In some alternative embodiments of this set correcting the detected time series includes determining an inverse Fourier transform of the correction factor equal to the reciprocal of the quadratic phase term c to produce a transformed correction. The transformed correction is then convolved with the detected time series to produce the output time series.

In a second set of embodiments a method includes receiving a detected time series that represents a temporally varying intensity of an optical signal. The optical signal is formed in response to an interaction between an incident optical field having a target optical spectrum and a material with a chirped spectral grating. The chirped spectral grating is a spectral grating of grating period that varies with optical frequency. A phase correction factor is determined based only on one or more properties of the chirped spectral grating such as the chirp rate of a chirped optical field that formed the grating. The detected time series is corrected based on the phase correction factor to produce an output time series that reproduces in time a shape of the target spectrum in frequency.

In other sets of embodiments a computer readable medium stores instructions used to perform one or more steps of the methods described above.

In various embodiments these spectrum recovery techniques enable the recovery of arbitrary spectral features with arbitrarily fast readout chirp rates provided the chirp bandwidth covers the full spectrum of interest plus an additional bandwidth where is the finest feature width and is the chirp rate. The spectral resolution provided by the spectrum recovery technique is 1 c and is determined by the chirp duration c instead of the chirp rate . Thus is the finest feature in the target optical spectrum and is the resolution of the recovery technique related to the chirp duration.

Furthermore in various embodiments these spectrum recovery techniques enable a fast measurement of spectral features over a broad spectral range with high resolution and eliminate the need for prior knowledge of the spectral feature to adjust the chirp rate as required by conventional absorption spectroscopy. In various embodiments spectral features over a bandwidth B are measured with chirp rates up to B which are fast compared to the limit of conventional absorption spectroscopy 

Since the chirp readout in many embodiments uses heterodyne detection where the detected signal is the beat of the response field and a reference field such as the transmitted field the output signal is stronger than the direct detection of the power of the response signal. Since the recovery algorithm treats conventional absorption spectroscopy and coherent transient spectroscopy under the same physical framework embodiments are applicable for a vast range of chirp rates and provide flexibility in a variety of applications including RF signal processing and RF spectral analysis.

Techniques are described for recovering optical spectral features using a chirped laser field. In the following description for the purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. It will be apparent however to one skilled in the art that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to avoid unnecessarily obscuring the present invention.

Several embodiments of the invention are descried below in the context of spectral spatial gratings formed by optical absorption variations in an IBT material using heterodyne detection. However the invention is not limited to this context. In other embodiments of the invention the techniques are applied to impulse responses that modify the amplitude or the phase or both of the electric field of the optical probe through various physical processes including but not limited to absorption transmission diffraction reflection scattering and dispersion. Thus in various embodiments the technique is applied to among other phenomena measurement of the spectral features of an absorption or gain spectrum naturally occurring or induced by one or more optical interactions optical cavity reflection and transmission Bragg grating reflections and transmission spectrally dependent diffraction dispersion and diffraction from complex spatial surface gratings and volume gratings. In some embodiments the techniques are applied to recover target optical spectra without using heterodyne detection but instead using advanced optical detectors and digitizers yet to be produced.

Optical recording and readout system includes one or more laser sources laser modulators optical materials optical detectors and post detection electronics separated by zero or more optical components not shown for directing optical beams such as mirrors phase plates optical fibers among others well known in the art of optics.

In the illustrated embodiment laser sources include an input laser and a readout laser . These laser sources provided stabilized optical carrier frequency beams used to carry the target optical spectrum and the chirped laser field used as a probing waveform. In some embodiments a single laser provides the carrier frequency beam for both the target optical spectrum and probe signals. In some embodiments additional laser sources are included in laser sources .

The laser modulators modulate the carrier frequency beams to produce signal beams with rich frequency content. In the illustrated embodiment laser modulators include input signal source electro optic phase modulators EOPMs and arbitrary waveform generator AWG . In some embodiments one or more EOPMs are replaced with or added to other optical modulators such as one or more acousto optic modulators AOMs electro optic amplitude modulators and electro absorption modulators. In some embodiments AWG is replaced by other wave generators such as one or more pulse pattern generators PPGs .

The input signal source is any combination of components that generate a target optical spectrum to be placed on an optical carrier for use in system . For example input signal source is a radio frequency signal to be analyzed such as a radar pulse or its reflected return or both as described in Merkel. The input signal source is an electronic signal such as a voltage. EOPMs are used to modulate the optical carrier from input laser in phase in proportion to the sign and magnitude of the applied RF voltage. This produces a phase encoded optical field with a target optical spectrum. In other embodiments other modulators are used in place of or in addition to EOPMs to produce an optical field encoded in frequency or amplitude or both with the target optical spectrum. In other embodiments multiple modulated laser beams in one or more directions interact to form the optical target optical spectrum. The single direction of the depicted optical field is called a collinear geometry which records only the spectral content of the signal. In some embodiments various angled beam geometries are used in which the signal consists of multiple beams impinging on the optical material in different directions.

The AWG generates a chirped radio frequency waveform such as a linear radio frequency chirp of bandwidth B around a carrier radio frequency. The EOPM imposes this same chirp bandwidth B on the laser carrier beam from readout laser to produce one or more chirped laser fields starting at an optical frequency s . In some embodiment AWG is replaced by other frequency chirped RF sources such as pulse PPGs. In some embodiments EOPM and EOPM are replaced by one or more AOMs. In other embodiments the readout laser can create an optical chirp and no external modulator scheme such as the combination of components and is needed or used.

The optical material records one or more optical field that impinge on the material with sufficient intensity and duration. When multiple beams interact in the optical material at different angles spatial spectral structures are formed in the material. When all beams impinge in the same direction only spectral content is recorded. For example in some embodiments the optical material is an IBT material that stores a complex spatial spectral grating as absorption variations within a doped low temperature crystal. In some embodiments the one or more optical fields produce target optical spectra as spectra or spatial spectral gratings. In some embodiments one or more chirped laser fields are recorded as spectra or spatial spectral gratings in optical material . At a later time another optical beam is directed with relatively lower intensity to the optical material to produce a response signal . The chirped laser field and the optical field may impinge on the optical material at the same location and angle or at different locations and angles.

For heterodyne readout processes a reference optical field is also produced. Any method of generating a reference field may be used. In the illustrated embodiment the reference optical field emerges from the optical material usually in a spatial mode that has not recorded the target optical spectrum from optical field such as experienced by chirped laser field In some embodiments the reference signal is a chirped laser field not shown that has not passed through the optical material . In some embodiments the reference signal is the transmitted probe signal that is naturally in the same direction as the response signal that itself is often delayed. Thus in such embodiments the signal detected at the optical detectors is naturally heterodyne. In some embodiments the reference signal is a response signal from the chirped optical field interacting with one or more spatial spectral gratings recorded in the optical material for the purpose of generating a reference field.

In some embodiments the optical material is a material or device such as an etalon with an inherent target optical spectrum that is not the result of artificial recording. In such embodiments components and resulting optical fields are omitted.

The optical detectors include one or more detectors such as optical detector that detect the time varying optical intensity in a certain optical bandwidth. In some embodiments a one or two dimensional array of optical detectors like detector are used to simultaneously detect a response signal on multiple spatial modes. Scanned or instant images can be generated by the array of detectors. In some embodiments the optical detector detects only the response signal. In some embodiments the optical detector detects the heterodyne combination of the response signal and reference signal . For example the heterodyne combination generates beat frequency variations that are much lower in frequency and larger in amplitude than response signal intensity variations therefore the beat frequency variations are more accurately measured with current detectors. In some embodiments using chirped laser fields with a chirp rate that exceeds the inequality given by Expression 2 above the signal detected by detector is distorted.

The post detection electronics use electrical signals output by detectors such as optical detector . In the illustrated embodiment post detection electronics include scope digitizer and recovery processor . The scope displays the output from one or more optical detectors . For example in some embodiments the scope is an oscilloscope that displays analog or digital data. In some embodiments the scope is omitted. The digitizer converts analog output from optical detector to a discrete time series of digital values. In some embodiments optical detectors produce digital output and digitizer is omitted. The recovery processor determines and applies a correction factor for correcting the distorted signal detected by detector as described in more detail below. In various embodiments recovery processor includes different hardware and software components that perform the methods described in the next section.

It has been observed that the distortion in the detected signal is similar to the response of a linear resonant system to frequency swept excitation in an electrical circuit as analyzed by Gunnar Hok Response of Linear Resonant System to Excitation of a Frequency Varying Linearly with Time Journal of Applied Physics 19 pp 242 250 1947 hereinafter Hok the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. In Hok a temporally extended ringing originated from a quadratic phase of the frequency sweep. The ringing increased with the frequency sweep rate of the probe field. This ringing is deterministic and can be predicted by theory based on properties of the frequency swept excitation field.

Solutions for removing the distortion have been proposed for two different types of physical systems that do not use heterodyne or optical detection 1 Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectroscopy and 2 time delay spectrometry. In these non heterodyne cases the impulse response amplitude and phase of the fields were measured directly because the frequencies were in operationally advantageous ranges for detectors and digitizers in use. The detected fields were electrical fields in Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectroscopy and were acoustic and electrical waves for time delay spectrometry. For the Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectroscopy a frequency swept electric field oscillating at radio frequency is used to detect the ion cyclotron resonance so that the ion mass to charge ratio can be extracted from the resonance frequency. The distortions due to the frequency sweep are corrected by deconvolving the response with the frequency swept excitation as described in Alan G. Marshall and D. Christopher Roe Theory of Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectroscopy Response to frequency sweep excitation J. Chem. Phys. 73 4 1581 1980 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. Time delay spectrometry is used to measure the frequency response functions of acoustic system and electric circuits where the distortion on the impulse response due to the fast frequency sweep is observed. The linear swept measurement is the time delay spectrometry was analyzed using Wigner Distribution and a solution was developed to remove the distortion as described in Mark A. Poletti Linearly swept Frequency measurements Time Delay Spectrometry and Wigner Distribution J. Audio Eng. Soc. 36 6 457 1988 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. A slightly different algorithm was proposed to solve the same kind of problem in Richard Greiner Jamsheed Wania and Gerardo Noejovich A Digital Approach to Time Delay Spectrometry J. Audio Eng. Soc. 37 7 8 593 1989 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. These solutions have not included the case of optical frequency chirped fields or a case where the distorted fields could not be measured directly nor has the application of the solution been discussed in reference to optical resonances such as those in spatial spectral holographic materials with inhomogeneously broadened transitions.

In the illustrated embodiment the theoretically predicted quadratic phase of a linear chirped laser field is used to determine the ringing response in heterodyne detections and to remove that ringing response from the detected signals. In other embodiments the predicted correction factors of a more general chirped optical field are determined and used to remove distortion from the detected signals whether heterodyne detection is used or not. For purposes of illustration the theory for a linear chirped laser field is described here to show how a frequency dependent correction factor is determined and applied to a detected signal. However the invention is not limited by this theory or discussion.

For readout of the spectral features in IBT materials the readout field is actually generated by diffraction of the probe field by spectral features as analyzed by T. Chang R. K. Mohan M. Tian T. Harris W. R. Babbitt and K. D. Merkel Frequency chirped readout of spatial spectral absorption features Phys. Rev. A 70 063803 2004 hereinafter Chang I the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. Chang I observed that in a collinear geometry the heterodyne detection comes from the beating of the impulse response field with the transmitted field and distortions are seen in the case of fast chirp rate not 

In general optical devices that produce an impulse response have spectral features that modify the amplitude and phase of spectral components of a probing optical field. The following discussion concentrates on absorption target spectra and their recovery but the recovery algorithm is applicable to all materials and devices with spectral features. An electric field can be represented as 2a where E t is a complex envelope. When this electric field is incident onto a medium with arbitrary absorption spectral features there results in the non saturated regime an output field that has spectral components described as 2b where E is the Fourier transform of E t 1 square root over 2c is the speed of light and are the electric permittivity and magnetic permeability of free space respectively is the optical carrier frequency and L is the length of the optically thin medium.

The spectral features in the medium interacting with the probe optical field results in feedback through a polarization given by Expression 3a 3a where 3b is the complex susceptibility of the material.

Often the target spectral features to be measured are represented by the amplitude modifying absorption coefficient rather than the complex susceptibility since is the directly observed physical quantity in most of the measurements. The imaginary part of the complex susceptibility is related to the absorption coefficient through 3c where 2 3d is the wave number 2 wavelength at the optical carrier frequency and nis the refraction index of the material at that frequency. The real part of the complex susceptibility which is responsible for the dispersion that modifies the phase of the probe field is related to the imaginary part through Kramer Kronig s relation 2 3e 

The absorption coefficient of any arbitrary spectral feature can be decomposed as cos 2 4 In the context of a spectral holographic absorption medium is viewed as the sum of a series of sinusoidal spectral gratings where is the amplitude and is the phase of the spectral grating of period 1 .

The complex susceptibility is thus decomposed as exp 2 5 So that the temporal function of the output electric field is obtained as 

In the case of chirped readout the input probe field is expressed as 7a where Eis the amplitude of the field is the start frequency of the chirp in Hz at t 0 and is the chirp rate in Hz sec. The output is the sum of the delayed weighted replicas of the chirped pulses and the transmitted chirped pulse. The intensity of the outbound field detected as the detected signal is cos 2 7b where A is a constant depending on the intensity of the chirped optical field used as a probing optical field and the material. The term 2 7c is the start frequency dependent phase which is independent of the optical carrier frequency and 7d is the quadratic phase. Under the condition 

Step 1 Fourier transform the detected signal intensity E t . The positive frequency components of the resulting transform are used for the following processing.

Step 2 Compensate the linear and quadratic phase for positive frequencies S 0 using multiplier function correction factor C given by 2 9a yielding the corrected transform S given by 0 2 9b The phase and the grating amplitude are functions of the delay and carry the complete information of the original spectral features. The second term Cin C is given by 9c and is used to compensate the quadratic phase. The first term C1 in C is given by 2 9d and is for shifting the frequency scale to find the absolute frequency of the spectral features. It is noted that the frequency dependent correction factors Cand C and hence C depend only on the constant chirp rate and the start frequency s. For more complex chirps the correction factors are expected to depend on other characteristics of the chirped laser field.

Step 3 Inverse Fourier transform the corrected transform that results from step 2. The restored spectrum is obtained as 

In some embodiments the negative frequency components of the Fourier transform of the detected signal in step 1 can also be used for the spectral feature recovery processing. In these embodiments the compensation multiplier is determined during step 2 as given by Expression 11. 2 11a This is equivalent to using the positive frequency components where both absorption and dispersion can be obtained. In some embodiments both positive and negative frequency components are used for the recovery processing. In such embodiments the compensation multiplier is 2 11b It is again noted that the frequency dependent correction factors C and C depend only on the constant chirp rate and the start frequency s. See T. Chang M. Tian R. K. Mohan C. Renner K. D. Merkel W. R. Babbitt Recovery of spectral features readout with frequency chirped laser fields Optics Letters 30 10 1129 2005 hereinafter Chang II the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 2.2 Method for Recovering Optical Spectral Content

In step chirp data is obtained that indicates properties of a chirped laser field used to probe the target optical spectrum. Any method may be used to receive the chirp data. In some embodiments values for one or more parameters that fully describe the chirped laser field are obtained from storage in a file on a computer readable medium or retrieved from a database or received as manual input from a user or received in a message from another process such as a laser modulator control process either unsolicited or in response to a request or prompt. In some embodiments the chirped laser field itself is directly measured during step at detector . In some embodiments a transform of the chirped laser field is received e.g. the Fourier transform of the chirped laser field is received during step . For a linear chirped laser field the values of the constant chirp rate and the start frequency s are sufficient chirp data to describe the chirp properties. For non linear chirped laser fields other properties are included to fully characterize the chirp for determining phase correction factors. In some embodiments the chirped laser field is received and recorded during step . The chirped field can be a digitized analog signal from the chirp generation or the chirp detection or a digital signal regenerated from the chirp generation process or characterization process.

In step a phase correction factor is determined based on the chirp data received during step . The distortion compensation multiplier is generated in one or more ways. For example in various embodiments using a linear chirped laser field at least one of correction factors C C and C are determined based on constant chirp rate and the start frequency s as given by Expressions 9a 11a 11b respectively. In some embodiments in which the correction factor is applied in the time domain as described in more detail below step includes taking the inverse Fourier transform of the correction factor. In some embodiments the chirped laser field received and recorded during step is subjected to a Fourier transform to produce the correction factor C.

In some embodiments the correction factor is generated by taking the Fourier transform of the frequency chirped probe field designated E . The correction factor is proportional to

In step a detected time series is received that is based on an interaction between the chirped laser field described in step and a target optical spectrum. For example a response signal based on the interaction of a chirped laser field and a target optical spectrum recorded in material by previous interaction with the optical data signal is detected at optical detector and communicated to recovery processor . In some embodiments the response signal is received at detector in heterodyne combination with a reference field to produce an enhanced time series more suitable for detection and digitization by currently available high performance devices and that signal is communicated to recovery processor .

In step the detected time series received in step is corrected based on the correction factor determined in step to produce an output time series that maps in time the spectral content e.g. amplitude and or phase as a function of frequency of the target optical spectrum. The chirp rate is used to translate the temporal changes in the output time series to frequency changes. The start frequency is used to determine the absolute frequency scale associated with the start of the output time series and can be assumed zero to simplify the data process if absolute frequency scale is not desired.

In some embodiments control passes back to step to receive more detected signals. As long as the same chirped optical field or grating is used to probe the target optical spectrum neither the correction factor nor its Fourier transform need be recalculated.

In step the Fourier transform is determined for the detected time series. Any method may be used. There are efficient fast Fourier transform FFT software programs and microprocessor chips which may be used in any combination to perform step .

In step at each frequency the spectral component in the Fourier transform is multiplied by the correction factor for the corresponding frequency as determined in step to produce a corrected transform. For example the amplitude of the Fourier transform of the detected series for frequency is multiplied by the value of C at frequency as given by Expression 9a above to produce the amplitude and phase of the corrected transform at that frequency.

In step the inverse Fourier transform is performed to produce the output time series that maps the spectral content of the target optical spectrum. Any method may be used as described above for step . There are efficient fast Fourier transform FFT software programs and microprocessor chips which may be used in any combination to perform step .

Step is a particular embodiment of step described above. Step includes step . In step the inverse Fourier transform of the correction factor is determined. Any method may be used to take the inverse Fourier transform of the correction factor as described above for steps and . There are efficient fast Fourier transform FFT software programs and microprocessor chips which may be used in any combination to perform step . In some embodiments the inverse Fourier transform of the correction factor is determined analytically. For the case of a LFM probe the analytical inverse Fourier transform of the correction factor results in a time series that describes the LFM with an chirp rate opposite to that of the probe.

Step is a particular embodiment of step described above. Step includes step . In step the corrected output time series that maps the spectral content is determined by convolving the transformed correction factor with the detected time series.

The invention is further described in the following simulated and experimental embodiments. These embodiments show example distorted detected time series detected at detector and corrected output time series produced by recovery processor that maps the spectral content of a known target optical spectrum. In practice the target optical spectrum is not known a priori. These examples instill confidence that the recovery process generates output time series that very accurately map and therefore recover the spectral content of the target optical spectrum.

The computer based simulations of the spectrum recovery in this section were performed under the assumption of ideal probe field and detector unless otherwise indicated.

Computer based simulations of signal spectrum recovery presented in this section were performed under the assumption of ideal probe field and detector. is a graph that shows spectral peaks in four simulated target optical spectra vertically offset. The horizontal axis represents frequency in MegaHertz MHz 1 MHz 10Hz 1 Hz 1 cycle per second relative to an optical carrier frequency increasing to the right. The vertical axis represents absorption coefficient in arbitrary units. Plotted on graph are traces collectively referenced hereinafter as traces representing target optical spectra stored as optical absorption variations in an optical material e.g. each with a single absorption spike at the carrier frequency but with increasing spectral width . Each trace is offset vertically from the other traces to avoid obscuring details. The spectral widths are 0.1 MHz 0.3 MHz 1.0 MHz and 3.0 MHz for traces respectively.

When the chirp rate is fast the detected signals traces are severely distorted. The recovered spectra traces show the restoration of the original spectral shape in the target optical spectra traces . When the chirp rate is at the slow chirp limit trace the distortions of the detected signal are still significant. Even when the chirp rate is much slower than the slow chirp limit 

The recovery procedure even works when distortions overlap in time and do not appear as the distinctive ringing of isolated peaks. This effect is described with reference to through . are graphs that show spectral peaks in three simulated target optical spectra. The horizontal axes represent frequency in MHz relative to an optical carrier frequency increasing to the right. The vertical axes represent the spectral feature depth in arbitrary units increasing upward. Plotted on graphs are traces collectively referenced hereinafter as traces respectively representing target optical spectra stored as optical absorption variations in an optical material e.g. . Each trace has one or more absorption peaks with a width 0.1 MHz like the peak in trace that produced substantial distortion thus 0.01 MHz. Trace includes three such peaks spaced 3 MHz apart and trace includes three such peaks spaced 0.5 MHz apart.

The recovered spectra in traces faithfully reproduce the shape of the target optical spectra in traces and thus demonstrate the effectiveness of the recovery technique even with overlapping distortions from different spectral features.

Trace represents a complex target optical spectrum stored as optical absorption variations in an optical material e.g. . The spectral features are stored into material which corresponds to the power spectral of a pseudo random bi phase pattern at 10 megabits per second and pattern duration 10 s. Therefore the finest feature 0.1 MHz in trace is determined by the pattern duration.

Trace represents the detected signal when probed with a chirped laser field. The probing chirped laser has a bandwidth B 10.4 MHz and chirp duration c 104 s. The chirp duration c includes rising and falling edges of 2 s each and corresponding frequency scanning of 0.2 MHz each. The chirp rate 0.1 MHz s is ten times faster than the slow chirp limit 0.01 MHz. This causes significant deviation of the detected signal in trace from the target optical spectrum in trace The bandwidth B does not encompass the entire spectrum of the target optical spectrum represented by trace so the detected signal is correspondingly limited in bandwidth.

It is here noted that in realistic detected signals as shown in trace the resonant ringing associated with quadratic phase is not evident. Therefore it is not evident that correction factors based on the quadratic phase of the chirped laser field is effective in recovering the target optical spectrum.

Trace represents the recovered spectrum obtained by applying method with step . The recovered spectrum trace shows an accurate match of the spectral features in the target optical spectrum trace over the probed bandwidth. Only at the ends of the spectrum are there remaining distortions. To avoid such edge effects it is recommended that extra bandwidth of about be added to the chirped laser field around the bandwidth of interest.

An embodiment of the spectral recovery technique has been experimentally demonstrated using a spectral hole burning crystal Tm YAG at 4.2K as the optical material . The optical length is around L 1. A frequency stabilized diode laser line width less than 100 kHz tuned to the absorption resonance of Tm at 793.380 nanometers nm 1 nm 10meters is used as laser source . A radio frequency RF signal from an arbitrary waveform generator AWG was used as input signal source and was modulated onto the optical carrier by an AOM in place of EOPMs . The crystal optical material was illuminated with the modulated light for 100 s. Spectral holes due to driving the AOM with RF frequencies of 262 263 264 and 270 MHz were engraved in the crystal. The hole widths estimated at 0.2 MHz result from the recording time laser line width and the coherence decay time about 20 s . Two digital chirps of bandwidth B 20 MHz were generated with an AOM substituted for EOPM and driven by the AWG . The chirp durations c were 100 s 0.2 MHz s and 20 s 1.0 MHz s . These chirp rates are 5 times and 25 times respectively faster than the conventional chirp rate limit given by 0.04 MHz. The chirped laser fields are directed onto crystal on the same spatial mode for automatic heterodyne detection.

In the detected signal trace with 0.2 MHz s the frequencies of primary spectral features can be resolved but the shapes are distorted. The detected signal trace with 1.0 MHz s has significant distortions due to the interference between the temporally overlapping coherent responses. The frequencies of the spectral features in the target optical spectrum can not be resolved. The lower traces show the recovered spectra that are almost identical for these two chirp rates and clearly show the four distinct peaks in the target optical spectrum at 262 263 264 and 270 MHz. The small difference is due to laser phase and amplitude fluctuations in the burning and readout processes. It is noted that the recovered spectrum for the higher chirp rate trace has less noise. This observation in discussed in more detail in the next section. The experiment indicates that this embodiment of the technique works well to correct actual distortions observed in optical analog processing.

The spectrum recovery technique is tested through simulation in the presence of laser source noise. The linear frequency chirped laser in all these embodiments had limited coherence time 50 s in the simulation.

The corresponding recovered spectra demonstrate the effectiveness of the spectrum recovery technique in the presence of phase noise on the optical probe field. In each case the target optical spectrum is recovered but the corrected signal shows decreasing noise with increasing chirp rate. For example trace shows less noise than trace which shows less noise than trace The fastest chirp producing detected signal trace and corrected trace requires a shorter time a few s to obtain the most significant information regarding the target optical spectrum and thus benefits most from the laser coherence time 50 s. Therefore the spectrum recovery may reduce the requirements on the frequency stability for the frequency chirped laser source e.g. laser .

When mapping an unknown spectrum with a chirped optical field of chirp rate the impulse response of the features within certain frequency ranges interfere with each other. The spectrum recovery technique is able to correct the crosstalk between the neighboring spectral features as demonstrated above with reference to . In this section it is shown that the spectrum recovery technique is able to correct the crosstalk between a narrow feature near a relatively broad feature with reference to and .

The traces closely resemble the shape of the target optical spectrum depicted by traces respectively. Thus the recovered spectra demonstrate that the recovery technique enables accurate mapping of arbitrary spectral features of arbitrary resolution. Prior knowledge about the width of the features even the width of the smallest features is not needed to set the chirp rate .

The recovery technique removes the distortions but the spectral resolution is still limited by the bandwidth of the detector . is a graph that shows spectral peaks of various width in three simulated target optical spectra vertically offset. These simulated target optical spectra are the same as in graph described above. The horizontal axis represents frequency in MHz relative to an optical carrier frequency increasing to the right. The vertical axis represents absorption coefficient in arbitrary units. Plotted on graph are traces collectively referenced hereinafter as traces that are identical to trace respectively described above.

The distortions are reduced in traces but the narrow peak is not resolved. Therefore the recovery technique can be applied and will reduce but not eliminate distortions even for features that are not fully resolved by a detector. However the technique does not recover features that are not resolved by the detector.

The experimental and simulated detections described above were in collinear embodiments. In some other embodiments the method is applied to other heterodyne geometries.

In the chirped readout of spectral absorptive or dispersive features without spatial structures the transmitted field and impulse response photon echoes are inherently aligned which is called collinear geometry. Heterodyne detection is automatically achieved because for example a non delayed transmitted version of the probe field serves as the reference field. When the interaction of the chirped field is with a spatial spectral grating the optical response field propagates in general in a different direction from the optical transmitted field. In this case the optical response field is preferably mixed with either the optical transmitted field or with the input chirp optical field to achieve heterodyne detection. This separation of the response field from the reference field can happen when measuring spectral features in diffraction scattering and reflection. In such cases the reference field beats with the response field to achieve heterodyne detection. In various embodiments the reference field is an exact or attenuated or delayed replica of the chirped optical field or is a separately generated chirped optical field. The phase correction is determined once for each probe field and applied to each heterodyne detection that uses the same probing chirped optical field.

Arrays of detectors can simultaneously measure responses on multiple spatial modes. In various embodiments the correction step is applied separately on each spatial mode.

Spatial imaging of an object is usually performed in two ways. One is to use an optical system to image the object onto a 2D detector array. Examples of such systems include microscopes cameras and telescopes where the spatial information is processed in parallel. Another way is to spatially scan the illuminating light source on the object with a single detector or linear array of detectors as done in scanners. The detected signals are collected in series then the spatial image of the object is reconstructed with the recorded information.

The spectrum of a spatial object is of great interest in many systems ranging from remote stars to soft tissues in animal organs. One intensively used technique is absorption imaging spectroscopy where a tunable laser is used as the illuminating source and the absorption of the object is monitored to construe the image. The absorption image of the object is obtained as the function of the laser frequency that is swept in time. The spectrum recovery technique of the current invention applies to these types of applications. The frequency sweep rate is often fast compared to the spectral features. Without the spectral recovery techniques of the current invention the slow limit set by the finest spectral feature applies. At least some embodiments of the present invention allows fast and accurate mapping of the spectral features during image construction which is useful in spectral imaging of systems with ultra fast dynamics such as combustion flames and cold plasma in ion traps.

A Spatial Spectral Coherent Holographic Integrating Processor S2CHIP provides a technique for signal processing in optical domain Merkel . In most applications a chirped laser field is used for readout processing or both. The low latency and material memory time benefit from a fast chirp rate . Embodiments of the present invention can be used to remove the distortions due to the fast chirp rate. The applications of S2CHIP include but are not limited to radar delay and Doppler signal processing radio frequency RF signal processing and spectral analysis Lidar signal processing optical correlator and true time delay processing.

Chang I pointed out that the fast chirp can be used for probing a single spatial spectral grating. However during probing of multiple spatial spectral gratings or any other spectral features the embodiments of the present invention are useful to remove distortions.

One application of the inhomogeneously broadened absorptive material is spectral analysis. A chirped laser field is used with heterodyne detection to alleviate the requirement for a large detector bandwidth with large signal to noise ratio.

Materials containing inhomogeneously broadened absorbing centers with narrow homogeneous line width are used to implement broadband RF spectrum analyzer of high resolution low latency and high dynamic range. Two recording and readout schemes involve linear frequency chirped optical fields. The spectrum recovery technique of the invention applies to both schemes to ensure accurate mapping of the RF spectrum.

Scheme 1 As shown in an RF signal with the spectrum to be measured is the input signal source and modulated on an optical carrier from input laser using EOPM to produce the optical field which has the target optical spectrum. The target optical spectrum is recorded as the absorption spectrum of the optical material . The absorption of the material is modified according the power spectrum of the target optical spectrum. The absorption spectrum is read out by a linear chirped laser field produced by modulating an optical carrier from readout laser in EOPM driven by AWG . This arrangement is described in more detail in R. K. Mohan Z. Cole R. Reibel T. Chang K. D. Merkel W. M. Babbitt M. Colic F. Schlottau and K. H. Wagner Microwave Spectral Analysis Using Optical Spectral Holeburning Technical Digest 2004 IEEE Topical Meeting on Microwave Photonics MWP 04 24 27 2004 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. The response signal is the convolution of the chirped laser field and the target optical spectrum in material as given by Expression 7b. Applying the spectrum recovery procedure described in ensures the accurate measurement of the spectral features on the absorption profile and hence the RF spectrum of the data.

Scheme 2 Some embodiments of this invention also make possible another spectral analysis scheme using spectral hole burning in a novel manner. In this new technique chirped gratings are prepared in the material and an optical field with the target optical spectrum is diffracted by the grating. Thus one or more chirped laser fields are first burned in optical material to form chirp gratings and an optical field with the target optical spectrum is later directed onto the chirped gratings to produce response signal .

Scheme 2 involves preparing a chirped spectral grating or chirped spatial grating. The preparation can be achieved by using two chirped fields with different chirp rates or one chirp and one broadband brief pulse. For the various embodiments using two chirps the two chirps are temporally overlapped or separated the chirp rates are different and are opposite e.g. one is an upward chirp and the other is a downward chirp . For wideband processing the fast chirp rate is used since the material has limited coherence memory time. The created chirped spectral grating has a spacing varying linearly with the frequency. The chirp rate of the chirped spectral grating g is defined such that the diffraction of a brief pulse by this grating is an optical chirp with that chirp rate g. With this definition the chirp rate of a chirped grating is given by Expression 12a

Impinging on the optical material an optical field with a target optical spectrum E t is diffracted by the chirped spectral grating. A frequency chirped pulse or a reference chirp with proper chirp rate is use to heterodyne with the diffracted field. It is convenient to use a reference field with the same chirp rate as the chirped grating. In this case the direct output signal measured by the detector is similar to Expression 7b cos 2 12b where A is a constant related to the reference and impulse response amplitude and is a constant phase due to the chirped grating and the reference. In this processing the direct readout experiences the same distortion represented by as in scheme 1. The same recovery procedure described in is used to remove the extra phase terms and . From the processed result the target optical spectrum of the incident field E t can be obtained.

The chirped heterodyne reference field can be a delayed portion of the programming chirp field by passing a beam through the material or through the spatial region in the material that is not affected by the programming pulses. Another way to generate the heterodyne chirped reference in some embodiments is to add a broadband brief pulse to the optical field so that the brief pulse is diffracted by the chirped grating into a linear frequency chirp of the same characteristic equivalent to a delayed programming chirp.

An angled beam geometry is also used in some embodiments to improve the performance where the input optical field with the target optical spectrum and the output signal are spatially separated.

A frequency chirped field in optical coherent transient and spectral hole burning processes causes a quadratic phase and distorts the output. In some applications one or more chirped optical fields are employed in the processing. The quadratic phase may not be completely removed due to a chirp rate mismatch or other processing requirements. In some embodiments of the present invention one or more steps of method are used to remove the residual quadratic phase and the resulting distortion.

In some embodiments two or more chirped optical fields are used for readout over multiple frequency bandwidths. If the chirps are in different directions the resulting detected signals are detected on one or more detectors. For chirps that are overlapped in space the resulting detected signals are received using the same detector. In various embodiments the probing chirps are overlapped or separated in either frequency or time or both. In various embodiments the chirped optical fields are set to have the same or different durations. In various embodiments the chirp rates are set to the same absolute value with the same or opposite sign. A common correction factor for removing the distortion due to the quadratic phase is determined by the absolute value of the chirp rate. The corrected signal is the sum of the individual corrected signals over the corresponding frequency range and in the corresponding chirp time.

The data processing can be implemented in one or more computers micro processors or similar devices that can implement Fourier transform or convolution such as a field programmable gate array FPGA . The data processing can be performed with a program in any computer language or micro processor language or with any combination of hardware and software.

Computer system also includes a memory coupled to bus . The memory such as a random access memory RAM or other dynamic storage device stores information including computer instructions. Dynamic memory allows information stored therein to be changed by the computer system . RAM allows a unit of information stored at a location called a memory address to be stored and retrieved independently of information at neighboring addresses. The memory is also used by the processor to store temporary values during execution of computer instructions. The computer system also includes a read only memory ROM or other static storage device coupled to the bus for storing static information including instructions that is not changed by the computer system . Also coupled to bus is a non volatile persistent storage device such as a magnetic disk or optical disk for storing information including instructions that persists even when the computer system is turned off or otherwise loses power.

Information including instructions is provided to the bus for use by the processor from an external input device such as a keyboard containing alphanumeric keys operated by a human user or a sensor. A sensor detects conditions in its vicinity and transforms those detections into signals compatible with the signals used to represent information in computer system . Other external devices coupled to bus used primarily for interacting with humans include a display device such as a cathode ray tube CRT or a liquid crystal display LCD for presenting images and a pointing device such as a mouse or a trackball or cursor direction keys for controlling a position of a small cursor image presented on the display and issuing commands associated with graphical elements presented on the display .

In the illustrated embodiment special purpose hardware such as an application specific integrated circuit IC is coupled to bus . The special purpose hardware is configured to perform operations not performed by processor quickly enough for special purposes. Examples of application specific ICs include graphics accelerator cards for generating images for display cryptographic boards for encrypting and decrypting messages sent over a network speech recognition and interfaces to special external devices such as laser modulation control devices signal triggering devices robotic arms and medical scanning equipment that repeatedly perform some complex sequence of operations that are more efficiently implemented in hardware field programmable gate array FPGA for performing application specific tasks and analog to digital conversion for signal input.

Computer system also includes one or more instances of a communications interface coupled to bus . Communication interface provides a two way communication coupling to a variety of external devices that operate with their own processors such as printers scanners and external disks. In general the coupling is with a network link that is connected to a local network to which a variety of external devices with their own processors are connected. For example communication interface may be a parallel port or a serial port or a universal serial bus USB port on a personal computer. In some embodiments communications interface is an integrated services digital network ISDN card or a digital subscriber line DSL card or a telephone modem that provides an information communication connection to a corresponding type of telephone line. In some embodiments a communication interface is a cable modem that converts signals on bus into signals for a communication connection over a coaxial cable or into optical signals for a communication connection over a fiber optic cable. As another example communications interface may be a local area network LAN card to provide a data communication connection to a compatible LAN such as Ethernet. Wireless links may also be implemented. For wireless links the communications interface sends and receives electrical acoustic or electromagnetic signals including infrared and optical signals that carry information streams such as digital data. Such signals are examples of carrier waves.

The term computer readable medium is used herein to refer to any medium that participates in providing information to processor including instructions for execution. Such a medium may take many forms including but not limited to non volatile media volatile media and transmission media. Non volatile media include for example optical or magnetic disks such as storage device . Volatile media include for example dynamic memory . Transmission media include for example coaxial cables copper wire fiber optic cables and waves that travel through space without wires or cables such as acoustic waves and electromagnetic waves including radio optical and infrared waves. Signals that are transmitted over transmission media are herein called carrier waves.

Common forms of computer readable media include for example a floppy disk a flexible disk a hard disk a magnetic tape or any other magnetic medium a compact disk ROM CD ROM a digital video disk DVD or any other optical medium punch cards paper tape or any other physical medium with patterns of holes a RAM a programmable ROM PROM an erasable PROM EPROM a FLASH EPROM or any other memory chip or cartridge a carrier wave or any other medium from which a computer can read.

Network link typically provides information communication through one or more networks to other devices that use or process the information. For example network link may provide a connection through local network to a host computer or to equipment operated by an Internet Service Provider ISP . ISP equipment in turn provides data communication services through the public world wide packet switching communication network of networks now commonly referred to as the Internet . A computer called a server connected to the Internet provides a service in response to information received over the Internet. For example server provides information representing video data for presentation at display .

The invention is related to the use of computer system for implementing the techniques described herein. According to one embodiment of the invention those techniques are performed by computer system in response to processor executing one or more sequences of one or more instructions contained in memory . Such instructions also called software and program code may be read into memory from another computer readable medium such as storage device . Execution of the sequences of instructions contained in memory causes processor to perform the method steps described herein. In alternative embodiments hardware such as application specific integrated circuit may be used in place of or in combination with software to implement the invention. Thus embodiments of the invention are not limited to any specific combination of hardware and software.

The signals transmitted over network link and other networks through communications interface which carry information to and from computer system are exemplary forms of carrier waves. Computer system can send and receive information including program code through the networks among others through network link and communications interface . In an example using the Internet a server transmits program code for a particular application requested by a message sent from computer through Internet ISP equipment local network and communications interface . The received code may be executed by processor as it is received or may be stored in storage device or other non volatile storage for later execution or both. In this manner computer system may obtain application program code in the form of a carrier wave.

Various forms of computer readable media may be involved in carrying one or more sequence of instructions or data or both to processor for execution. For example instructions and data may initially be carried on a magnetic disk of a remote computer such as host . The remote computer loads the instructions and data into its dynamic memory and sends the instructions and data over a telephone line using a modem. A modem local to the computer system receives the instructions and data on a telephone line and uses an infra red transmitter to convert the instructions and data to an infra red signal a carrier wave serving as the network link . An infrared detector serving as communications interface receives the instructions and data carried in the infrared signal and places information representing the instructions and data onto bus . Bus carries the information to memory from which processor retrieves and executes the instructions using some of the data sent with the instructions. The instructions and data received in memory may optionally be stored on storage device either before or after execution by the processor .

In the foregoing specification the invention has been described with reference to specific embodiments thereof. It will however be evident that various modifications and changes may be made thereto without departing from the broader spirit and scope of the invention. The specification and drawings are accordingly to be regarded in an illustrative rather than a restrictive sense.

