---

title: Multi-sensory speech enhancement using a speech-state model
abstract: A method and apparatus determine a likelihood of a speech state based on an alternative sensor signal and an air conduction microphone signal. The likelihood of the speech state is used, together with the alternative sensor signal and the air conduction microphone signal, to estimate a clean speech value for a clean speech signal.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07680656&OS=07680656&RS=07680656
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07680656
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050628
---
A common problem in speech recognition and speech transmission is the corruption of the speech signal by additive noise. In particular corruption due to the speech of another speaker has proven to be difficult to detect and or correct.

Recently systems have been developed that attempt to remove noise by using a combination of an alternative sensor such as a bone conduction microphone and an air conduction microphone. Various techniques have been developed that use the alternative sensor signal and the air conduction microphone signal to form an enhanced speech signal that has less noise than the air conduction microphone signal. However perfectly enhanced speech has not been achieved and further advances in the formation of enhanced speech signals are needed.

A method and apparatus determine a likelihood of a speech state based on an alternative sensor signal and an air conduction microphone signal. The likelihood of the speech state is used to estimate a clean speech value for a clean speech signal.

Embodiments of the invention are operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with embodiments of the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers telephony systems distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

Embodiments of the invention may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The invention is designed to be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules are located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard a microphone and a pointing device such as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer is operated in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a hand held device a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on remote computer . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Memory is implemented as non volatile electronic memory such as random access memory RAM with a battery back up module not shown such that information stored in memory is not lost when the general power to mobile device is shut down. A portion of memory is preferably allocated as addressable memory for program execution while another portion of memory is preferably used for storage such as to simulate storage on a disk drive.

Memory includes an operating system application programs as well as an object store . During operation operating system is preferably executed by processor from memory . Operating system in one preferred embodiment is a WINDOWS CE brand operating system commercially available from Microsoft Corporation. Operating system is preferably designed for mobile devices and implements database features that can be utilized by applications through a set of exposed application programming interfaces and methods. The objects in object store are maintained by applications and operating system at least partially in response to calls to the exposed application programming interfaces and methods.

Communication interface represents numerous devices and technologies that allow mobile device to send and receive information. The devices include wired and wireless modems satellite receivers and broadcast tuners to name a few. Mobile device can also be directly connected to a computer to exchange data therewith. In such cases communication interface can be an infrared transceiver or a serial or parallel communication connection all of which are capable of transmitting streaming information.

Input output components include a variety of input devices such as a touch sensitive screen buttons rollers and a microphone as well as a variety of output devices including an audio generator a vibrating device and a display. The devices listed above are by way of example and need not all be present on mobile device . In addition other input output devices may be attached to or found with mobile device within the scope of the present invention.

Air conduction microphone receives ambient noise V generated by one or more noise sources and generates its own sensor noise U . Depending on the type of ambient noise and the level of the ambient noise ambient noise may also be detected by alternative sensor . However under embodiments of the present invention alternative sensor is typically less sensitive to ambient noise than air conduction microphone . Thus the alternative sensor signal B generated by alternative sensor generally includes less noise than air conduction microphone signal Y generated by air conduction microphone . Although alternative sensor is less sensitive to ambient noise it does generate some sensor noise W .

The path from speaker to alternative sensor signal can be modeled as a channel having a channel response H. The path from ambient noise to alternative sensor signal can be modeled as a channel having a channel response G.

Alternative sensor signal B and air conduction microphone signal Y are provided to a clean signal estimator which estimates a clean signal . Clean signal estimate is provided to a speech process . Clean signal estimate may either be a time domain signal or a Fourier Transform vector. If clean signal estimate is a time domain signal speech process may take the form of a listener a speech coding system or a speech recognition system. If clean signal estimate is a Fourier Transform vector speech process will typically be a speech recognition system or contain an Inverse Fourier Transform to convert the Fourier Transform vector into waveforms.

Within clean signal estimator alternative sensor signal and microphone signal are converted into the frequency domain being used to estimate the clean speech. As shown in alternative sensor signal and air conduction microphone signal are provided to analog to digital converters and respectively to generate a sequence of digital values which are grouped into frames of values by frame constructors and respectively. In one embodiment A to D converters and sample the analog signals at 16 kHz and 16 bits per sample thereby creating 32 kilobytes of speech data per second and frame constructors and create a new respective frame every 10 milliseconds that includes 20 milliseconds worth of data.

Each respective frame of data provided by frame constructors and is converted into the frequency domain using Fast Fourier Transforms FFT and respectively.

The frequency domain values for the alternative sensor signal and the air conduction microphone signal are provided to clean signal estimator which uses the frequency domain values to estimate clean speech signal .

Under some embodiments clean speech signal is converted back to the time domain using Inverse Fast Fourier Transforms . This creates a time domain version of clean speech signal .

The present invention utilizes a model of the system of that includes speech states for the clean speech in order to produce an enhanced speech signal. provides a graphical representation of the model.

In the model of clean speech is dependent upon a speech state . Air conduction microphone signal is dependent on sensor noise ambient noise and clean speech signal . Alternative sensor signal is dependent on sensor noise clean speech signal as it passes through a channel response and ambient noise as it passes through a channel response .

The model of is used under the present invention to estimate a clean speech signal Xfrom noisy observations Yand Band identifies the likelihood of a plurality of speech states S.

Under one embodiment of the present invention the clean speech signal estimate and the likelihoods of the states for the clean speech signal estimate are formed by first assuming Gaussian distributions for the noise components in the system model. Thus V N 0 g EQ. 1 U N 0 EQ. 2 W N 0 EQ. 3 where each noise component is modeled as a zero mean Gaussian having respective variances g and V is the ambient noise U is the sensor noise in the air conduction microphone and W is the sensor noise in the alternative sensor. In EQ. 1 g is a tuning parameter that allows the variance of the ambient noise to be tuned.

In addition this embodiment of the present invention models the probability of the clean speech signal given a state as a zero mean Gaussian with a variance such that 0 EQ. 4

Under one embodiment of the present invention the prior probability of a given state is assumed to be a uniform probability such that all states are equally likely. Specifically the prior probability is defined as 

In the description of the equations below for determining the estimate of the clean speech signal and the likelihood of the speech states all of the variables are modeled in the complex spectral domain. Each frequency component Bin is treated independently of the other frequency components. For ease of notation the method is described below for a single frequency component. Those skilled in the art will recognize that the computations are performed for each frequency component in the spectral version of the input signals. For variables that vary with time a subscript t is added to the variable.

To estimate the clean speech signal Xfrom the noisy observations Yand B the present invention maximizes the conditional probability p X Y B which is the probability of the clean speech signal given the noisy air conduction microphone signal and the noisy alternative sensor signal. Since the estimate of the clean speech signal depends on the speech state Sunder the model this conditional probability is determined as 

Under some embodiments a single state is used for all of the frequency components. Therefore each frame has a single speech state variable.

Using the Gaussian assumptions for the distributions of the noise discussed above in equations 1 3 the joint probability of the clean speech signal the observations and the state can be computed as 

The alternative sensor s channel response G for background speech is estimated from the signals of the air microphone Y and of the alternative sensor B across the last D frames in which the user is not speaking. Specifically G is determined as 

The alternative sensor s channel response H for the clean speech signal is estimated from the signals of the air microphone Y and of the alternative sensor B across the last T frames in which the user is speaking. Specifically H is determined as 

The conditional likelihood of the state p S s Y B is computed using the approximation of EQ. 8 and the joint probability calculation of EQ. 9 as 

A close look at EQ. 13 reveals that the first term is in some sense modeling the correlation between the alternative sensor channel and the air conduction microphone channel whereas the second term makes use of the state model and the noise model to explain the observation in the air microphone channel. The third term is simply the prior on the state which under one embodiment is a uniform distribution.

The likelihood of the state given the observation as computed in EQ. 13 has two possible applications. First it can be used to build a speech state classifier which can be used to classify the observations as including speech or not including speech so that the variances of the noise sources can be determined from frames that do not include speech. It can also be used to provide a soft weight when estimating the clean speech signal as shown further below.

As noted above each of the variables in the above equations is defined for a particular frequency component in the complex spectral domain. Thus the likelihood of EQ. 13 is for a state associated with a particular frequency component. However since there is only a single state variable for each frame the likelihood of a state for a frame is formed by aggregating the likelihood across the frequency components as follows 

The above likelihood can be used to build a speech non speech classifier based on a likelihood ratio test such that 

Using the likelihood of the speech states an estimate of the clean speech signal can be formed. Under one embodiment this estimate is formed using a minimum mean square estimate MMSE based on EQ. 6 above such that 

Using equations 7 and 9 the conditional probability p X Y B S s from which the expectation E X Y B S s can be calculated is determined as 

In the calculations above H was assumed to be known with strong precision. However in practice H is only known with limited precision. Under an additional embodiment of the present invention H is modeled as a Guassian random variable N H H . Under such an embodiment all of the calculations above are marginalized over all possible values of H. However this makes the mathematics intractable. Under one embodiment an iterative process is used to overcome this intractability. During each iteration H is replaced in equations 13 and 20 with Hand is replaced with circumflex over X where circumflex over X is an estimate of the clean speech signal determined from a previous iteration. The clean speech signal is then estimated using EQ. 21. This new estimate of the clean speech signal is then set as the new value of circumflex over X and the next iteration is performed. The iterations end when the estimate of the clean speech signal becomes stable.

To identify frames where the user is not speaking the alternative sensor signal can be examined. Since the alternative sensor signal will produce much smaller signal values for background speech than for noise when the energy of the alternative sensor signal is low it can initially be assumed that the speaker is not speaking. The values of the air conduction microphone signal and the alternative sensor signal for frames that do not contain speech are stored in a buffer and are used to compute variances of the noise as 

Under some embodiments the technique of identifying non speech frames based on low energy levels in the alternative sensor signal is only performed during the initial frames of training. After initial values have been formed for the noise variances they may be used to determine which frames contain speech and which frames do not contain speech using the likelihood ratio of EQ. 15.

The value of g which is a tuning parameter that can be used to either increase or decrease the estimated variance is set to 1 under one particular embodiment. This suggests complete confidence in the noise estimation procedure. Different values of g may be used under different embodiments of the present invention.

The variance of the noise for the air conduction microphone is estimated based on the observation that the air conduction microphone is less prone to sensor noise than the alternative sensor. As such the variance of the air conduction microphone can be calculated as 1e EQ. 27

At step the speech variance is estimated using a noise suppression filter with temporal smoothing. The suppression filter is a generalization of spectral subtraction. Specifically the speech variance is calculated as 

Thus in EQ. 28 the variance is determined as a weighted sum of the estimated clean speech signal of the preceding frame and the energy of the air conduction microphone signal filtered by the noise suppression filter K.

Under some embodiments is chosen according to a signal to noise ratio and a masking principle which has shown that the same amount of noise in a high speech energy band has a smaller impact in perception than in a low speech energy band and the presence of high speech energy at one frequency will reduce the perception of noise in an adjacent frequency band. Under this embodiment is chosen as 

This noise suppression filter provides weak noise suppression for positive signal to noise ratios and stronger noise suppression for negative signal to noise ratios. In fact for sufficiently negative signal to noise ratios all of the observed signal and noise are removed and the only signal present is a noise floor that is added back by the otherwise branch of the noise suppression filter of Eq. 33.

Under some embodiments is made frequency dependent such that different amounts of noise are removed for different frequencies. Under one embodiment this frequency dependency is formed using a linear interpolation between at 30 Hz and at 8 KHz such that 225 EQ. 34 where k is the count of the frequency component is the value of desired at 30 Hz is the desired at 8 KHz and it is assumed that there are 256 frequency components.

After the speech variance has been determined at step the variances are used to determine the likelihood of each speech state at step using equations 13 and 14 above. The likelihood of the speech states is then used in step to determine a clean speech estimate for the current frame. As noted above in embodiments in which a Gaussian distribution is used to represent H steps and are iterated using the latest estimate of the clean speech signal in each iteration and using the changes to the equations discussed above to accommodate the Gaussian model for H.

Although the present invention has been described with reference to particular embodiments workers skilled in the art will recognize that changes may be made in form and detail without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

