---

title: Controlled energy release projectile
abstract: A projectile is provided, in accordance with the present invention that includes a gas seal, an absorption zone, a core material containment area, a mass of material within the containment area and an actuator member. The containment area is characterized by the ability to peel back upon itself on impact, thereby releasing the mass of core particles after impact. The actuator, is releasably fixed to the hull open end, and has a stem member that projecting into the mass of material. Prior to initial impact the actuator maintains the core material within the containment area hull and, up initial impact, the actuator is continues to be propelled forward, along with the core material.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07640860&OS=07640860&RS=07640860
owner: 
number: 07640860
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050531
---
This application makes reference to the following U.S. patent applications. The first application is U.S. application Ser. No. 09 107 892 entitled Polymer Jacketed Fragmentation Type Projectile for Smooth Bore Guns filed Jun. 30 1998 now abandoned. The second application is U.S. application Ser. No. 09 721 062 entitled CONTROLLED ENERGY RELEASE PROJECTILE filed Nov. 22 2000 and issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 899 034 issued May 31 2005. The entire disclosure and contents of the above applications are hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention relates to a fragmentation type projectile for antipersonnel use and more particularly to a fragmentation type projectile having increased stopping power and after initially hitting a target having a decreased lethal range.

The problems associated with ammunition missing or going through the target and hitting an innocent bystander has long been acknowledged. Various methods of resolving the problem have been approached however none have eliminated the inadvertent injuries and deaths.

Various forms of smooth bore shotgun projectiles specifically buckshot and slugs originally designed for use in hunting big and or dangerous game animals are well known in the art. Although these designs are the most common types of shotgun ammunition used by the law enforcement community their excessive destructive capabilities have always presented liability problems in law enforcement situations.

These projectiles are designed for deep penetration in game animals weighing up to one thousand pounds. With only a fractional loss of energy they will completely penetrate a human sized target. The small percentage of energy transference to the target makes these hunting projectiles very inefficient and dangerous for use in crowded urban environments. Both slugs and larger sizes of buckshot are capable of passing through multiple residential type interior walls and or non masonry exterior walls while retaining lethal energy.

Shotgun projectiles have been designed typically to have either a single projectile or core element slug or multiple projectiles or core elements shot or pellets . In the multiple projectile or core element design a shot cup or core material containment area protects the projectiles from deformation inside the shotgun barrel and upon exit from the barrel separates from the core elements prior to impact.

Typically this shot cup or core material containment area is slit and peels back during flight due to wind resistance. The pellets then travel in a progressively spreading pattern and impact a target as a collection of individual particles whose impact area is dependent upon the distance the pellets have traveled.

A target struck by small less dangerous multiple individual pellets receives very little post impact trauma or blunt trauma injury as the individual pellets displace minimal kinetic energy which is lost rapidly during flight or upon the first impact. By way of contrast a slug and to a lesser extend large buck shot generally hits with enough kinetic energy and penetration to produce blunt trauma injury over penetration of an initial target and lethality for an extended period of travel beyond. The difficult problem of achieving a balance between the safer small and inefficient individual pellet impact and the dangerous but effective slug impact is not only achieved by the process and projectile of the present invention but is achieved in a controlled manner.

The disclosed unique type of projectile will penetrate an initial barrier create a secondary incapacitation zone of several feet or greater if so desired and then become non lethal down range. It is through a controlled expansion process that the present ammunition achieves a result that is different from any ammunition ever designed.

It is advantageous to define several terms before describing the invention. It should be appreciated that the following definitions are used throughout this application.

Where the definition of terms departs from the commonly used meaning of the term applicants intend to utilize the definitions provided below unless specifically indicated.

For the purposes of the present invention the term actuator refers to any device that will initiate a real timed expansion of core material upon initial impact.

For the purposes of the present invention the term contact time expansion refers to the expansion time of prior projectiles wherein expansion only takes place while the projectile is experiencing a high level of resistance while traveling through a dense or viscous medium.

For the purpose of the present invention the term controlled expansion refers to predetermining the expansion time of the core material by actuator design.

For the purpose of the present invention the term controlled peel back rate refers to a rate of peel back that is substantially equal to the velocity of the projectile.

For the purposes of the present invention the term core material refers to a mass of material including but not limited to lead tungsten steel carbide and or plastic compounds in small rigid or semi rigid particles or plates 

For the purposes of the present invention the term core material containment area or core material containment member refers to the cylindrical body of the projectile that encapsulates the core material. The terms are used interchangeable within the application and have equal meaning unless otherwise noted.

For the purposes of the present invention the term first lethal distance refers the distance from the firing of the projectile to initial impact

For the purposes of the present invention the term initial impact refers to the first obstacle encountered by a projectile.

For the purposes of the present invention the term lethal refers to impact force that is sufficient to cause death of a person or destruction of an inanimate object.

For the purposes of the present invention the term lethal mass refers to a body of core material that has sufficient energy to cause death of a person or destruction of an inanimate object.

For the purposes of the present invention the term obstacle refers to any object that will cause the core material containment area to peel back.

For the purposes of the present invention the term particles refers to small pellets manufactured from any dense rigid or semi rigid material including but not limited to lead silicon carbide or plastics.

For the purposes of the present invention the term peel back refers to the leading end of the projectile core material containment area opening and peeling back so that the exterior surface of the leading end lies adjacent to at least part of the exterior surface of the trailing end.

For the purposes of the present invention the term peel back rate refers to the time it takes for the projectile core material containment area to peel back and expose the core material.

For the purposes of the present invention the term pressure or shock wave refers to the series of air waves that form in front of a supersonic or subsonic projectile and can produce sudden large changes in pressure.

For the purposes of the present invention the term projectile body refers to the exterior covering that covers the entire projectile.

For the purposes of the present invention the term real time expansion is refers to the time sequence of events unique to this projectile design that take place upon impact wherein once the expansion process is initiated it continues through to completion at a controlled rate regardless of the circumstances or resistance.

For the purposes of the present invention the term second lethal distance refers to the distance from the initial impact to the point where the lethal mass becomes non lethal.

For the purposes of the present invention the term third non lethal distance refers to the region where the distance traveled is such that the core material has become non lethal.

The law enforcement requirements for tactical ammunition are extremely specific and appear to be mutually exclusive. First the ammunition must be capable of incapacitating an individual upon initial impact as quickly as possible. Second it needs to do so with either a direct impact or after passing through a barrier such as a car windshield a residential partition wall or a residential door used by the criminal as a shield. However as a third requirement it needs to pose as little threat as possible to innocent bystanders or people down range from the shooting position. For example if a round is fired in an apartment building the round must not endanger residents in neighboring apartments.

Conventional ammunition with a solid lead design or with a solid lead core and a copper jacketing material meets the first requirement reasonably well. This type of ammunition can be configured in an expanding design that will impart a fair amount of energy through the expansion process. This energy generally incapacitates the target upon impact. It meets the second requirement extremely well in that it only loses energy through contact resistance and can travel with lethal energy for hundreds of yards after an impact with something as non resistant as a residential partition wall. The third requirement is where the conventional ammunition design fails since it is designed to penetrate an initial barrier and retain lethal force beyond there is a sacrifice of down range safety.

In an effort to create safer designs ammunition designers have for many years experimented with pre fragmented rounds that contained a plurality of sub munitions inside a hull typically a copper jacket similar to that on a conventional bullet . In the prior art the design and operation of these rounds fall into one of two groups. The first is designed with loose particles inside the hull or jacket and bursts into an uncontrolled spray of particles upon initial impact. The second type is comprised of loose particles that have been swaged into a solid mass or bound together into a solid mass by some type of compound such as epoxy. This second type of projectile is designed to penetrate solid obstacles such as partition walls and only break apart upon contact with a viscous media.

The first type of pre fragmented round is much safer when deployed close to bystanders than conventional ammunition due to the fact that the round bursts into non lethal particles upon the first impact. This type of round has never met with favor in police work because of its lack of effectiveness when the need arises to shoot through an initial barrier and disable someone on the other side.

The second type of pre fragmented round is more effective in law enforcement scenarios but can be just as dangerous and prone to over penetration as conventional ammunition if it takes flight through a house apartment or business complex.

The present invention provides for the unique combination of the full impact of a unitary structure while providing for radial dispersion of the impact energy. This is accomplished in three stages. The first stage is a forceful initial impact similar to that of a solid slug. The second stage is a short secondary zone downstream of the point of initial impact in which the projectile particles are lethal but have slightly reduced penetration and a broader blunt trauma zone than that of standard tactical shot gun ammunition. In the third stage the particles have succumbed to air resistance and have become non lethal or harmless.

The projectile converts upon an initial impact from 1 a unitary structure to 2 an expanding body of individual particles that continue to act as a unitary structure and 3 within a controlled distance becomes a mass of discrete particles that rapidly lose their lethality. Stated another way the projectile 1 initially acts like a slug then 2 acts like a slug of substantially increased diameter and then 3 becomes a non lethal object.

The increased diameter of the projectile after initial impact and during the lethal formation of the core particles produces an impact comparable to that of a very high caliber projectile. The disclosed projectile when the initial impact and expansion is within a body produces a wide pressure or shock wave that can produce a lethal and immediately incapacitating impact upon organs. Incapacitation is critical in many tactical situations as for example in interaction with armed aggressors where the need is to disable them immediately before they can react with deadly consequences.

In order to instantaneously incapacitate a terrorist it is essential that the projectile expand rapidly enough to completely decelerate within the internal organs imparting all its energy without over penetration. The forward shock or pressure wave that is generated will impact the internal organs in advance of the projectile particles and a rebounding shock wave will impact the organs a second time. The rebounding pressure wave is the original wave reflected off of and amplified by the interior surface opposite the point of entry. The core particles will embed into the first surface such as an organ or tissue which has a density sufficient to stop their forward movement. This has been demonstrated by firing the projectile into a large plastic container of ballistic gelatin. The projectile blew apart the container without penetrating the rear of the container. The front of the container is considered to be the first side impacted by the projectile and the rear is the opposite side of the container. The zone of expansion from first impact to very low potential for lethality that is seven 7 to ten 10 feet in free flight is compressed to seven 7 to ten 10 inches in various viscous materials. In water full projectile expansion and deceleration occurs within approximately four 4 inches of penetration in ballistic gelatin approximately seven 7 inches and in animal tissue and organs seven 7 to ten 10 inches.

A typical round of conventional ammunition can penetrate the body and produce little immediate incapacitation. By way of analogy immediate incapacitation is more likely to be achieved by hitting the terrorist with a high velocity bowling ball rather than a high velocity spear. The spear can eventually produce death due to bleeding but would not prevent the terrorist from continuing to function for some limited period of time perhaps as long as several hours. Conversely the wide spread blunt trauma of the bowling ball impact would immediately stop the terrorist from continuing to function. If the terrorist is wearing a bulletproof vest immobilization can only be achieved by impacting the terrorist with a huge amount of energy over a confined area.

As stated heretofore the disclosed projectile can penetrate a first barrier and retain its lethal efficacy for a limited distance. The lethality after initial penetration must be such that the terrorist is immediately incapacitated by the blunt trauma impact of the expanding mass of core particles even though the projectile had penetrated a protective barrier such as a wall or car windshield. However in the event that the terrorist provides the first impact object the projectile must become non lethal upon penetration. The limitation of the distance should be such that the projectile will be incapacitating to an armed aggressor positioned directly behind a residential type partition wall or door but innocent parties who are at a significant distance from the wall or behind a second wall would not be exposed to danger.

Law enforcement officers are sometimes killed by friendly fire when a fellow officer s projectile travels through an auto or partition wall striking them on the other side with enough force to defeat their body armor. With the disclosed projectile design after an initial impact the expanding projectile has increased blunt trauma potential but greatly reduced potential for penetration. In its expanding form it may still incapacitate but is much less likely to kill a person wearing body armor standing adjacent to the auto or partition wall. And since the distance over which the projectile changes from lethal to non lethal particles is pre designed into the projectile unprotected people beyond the lethal range of the core particles would only receive slight abrasions if any injury at all.

Since there is the potential of a point of third impact within the lethal zone the energy must dissipate rapidly subsequent to the second impact such that the particles become non lethal and that there can be no third lethal impact point at a point distant from the last impact zone.

The operation of the projectile of the present invention is unlike prior technology. As for example in the case of the original Glasser bullet design that has a plurality of round particles in a metal jacket when the bullet hits it bursts immediately into non lethal particles and there is no secondary lethal zone. The looser the core of particles the greater the dispersion. In the latest Glasser design the core particles are typically swaged to form somewhat solidified slug that can penetrate multiple layers of glass or partition walls and will only break apart into non lethal particles after impact with viscous material.

Due to the size of the disclosed projectile a heavy recoil would be produced using a low burn rate powder to produce a high velocity projectile. Since tests have provided no advantages to using a supersonic velocity disclosed projectile preferably uses a high burn rate powder that produces subsonic velocity. This lower speed dramatically reduces the recoil while increasing the stability of the projectile in flight.

Although all of the embodiments herein are illustrated with an absorption zone the inclusion of this feature is not critical to the invention. The absorption zone reduces the amount of recoil however it does not affect the functioning of the disclosed projectile.

The core material containment area or containment member contains the mass of core particles which are contained within the core material containment area by folding over the upper end of the core material containment area to lock the actuator in place. The size of the particles contributes to the effectiveness of the disclosed projectile. The use of fine particles is essential to change a secondary impact from lethal to non lethal in a short distance.

The core material containment area of the disclosed projectile must be of such material as to have some expansion capabilities however to great an expansion and the release is uncontrolled. Material too elastic or soft adheres to the gun barrel during the heat and pressure of firing too rigid or hard a material will tend to burst on tear upon impact. The preferred material is a low density polyethylene low blow mold grade or a material having equal performance.

In the embodiment of the base provides the gas seal and is exposed to about 8000 psi gas pressure upon firing. The absorption zone must be able to withstand the compression of firing and return to its expanded position. The core material containment area must be of a material and design to affect a controlled peel back. It is therefore critical that the material used must meet the foregoing three very different responses in order for the disclosed projectile to perform as described.

The individual fine particles do not have penetration power as individual particles and are rapidly slowed down by air resistance. To prevent the core particles from possibly compressing into a unified mass that would resist separation upon impact an absorption zone is used to absorb the initial force of the gun power.

Maintaining the projectile as an integrated or lethal projectile of expanded diameter is achieved through the use of an actuator. The actuator also serves to dam up the particles and keep them confined within the core material containment area. The actuator is preferable a thumb tack like structure that keeps the individual particles from immediately spreading directly after an initial impact and becoming ineffective with respect to being able to render a terrorist incapacitated. The actuator works in conjunction with the core material containment area to produce the three stage transition from a slug to a wide diameter blunt trauma producing object and then to non lethal individual particles.

In the embodiment of the actuator does not contain a stem which in some uses where controlling the lethal range is not critical is advantageous. In most applications however the stem provides necessary stability to the actuator. This is illustrated in the core particles follow behind the actuator when the stem is present to provide a stable flight. When an actuator without a stem is used the core particles expand outwardly as the actuator tips.

After an initial impact the actuator maintains the particles as a lethal body of increased diameter but still traveling as an integrated body over the predetermined distance of the secondary zone. If the particles spread randomly or too quickly impact can be that of hundreds or thousands of minute non lethal particles thereby negating the desired trauma effect of the secondary impact zone. Through the use of controlled expansion the particles impact over a confined area comparable to that of a very large caliber projectile. The term very large caliber projectile is intended to indicate that the effective diameter of the projectile is increased by a factor of at least two and preferably at least four. Since surface area of a circle increases with the square of the radius the doubling of the diameter or caliber increases the impact area four fold.

When the pressure wave dissipates at approximately four to five feet from core particle release the motion of the actuator is slowed by air resistance and the particles start to disperse around the actuator. Radial dissipation of energy is the net result. The lethal zone is thus reduced from up to 300 feet for conventional ammunition to about three 3 feet in the disclosed design. It is possible to shoot through a wall door metal sheet etc with the lethal force carrying over to immediately downstream of the initial penetration for roughly three feet.

In embodiments that use particles they must be discrete particles such that the mass fragments into individual minute particles. Because of the versatility of the disclosed projectile the size of the core particles is dependent upon the end use. In several of the embodiments disclosed herein the core particles have a lethal range of less than about ten 10 feet. Because of this short range the particle size is preferably in the range from about 0.01 inch to about 0.13 inch and most preferably in the range of from about 0.02 inch to about 0.05 inch. The small size and mass of the individual particles causes them to have a short flight path when exposed to air resistance.

To provide the controlled lethal range described herein the core particles must be spheres remaining separate from one another. The use of flake power rather than spherical core particles causes the interior particles to swage together under the pressure of the impact creating a solid mass that penetrates and proceeds down range from an initial impact similar to a slug.

To control the lethal range the particle size along with actuator angle adjustments can be manipulated to satisfy mission specific needs. By increasing or decreasing the angle or radius by 5 to 10 degrees or increasing the decreasing the overall width or thickness of the angle or radius will slow or accelerate the expansion process in increments of one millisecond or less. For example to increase the lethal range to about thirty 30 feet the size of the particles would be increased to about 0.13 along with a reduction or elimination of the angle of the actuator cone.

It is preferable in all embodiments that the end of the actuator be pointed. Although this is not a necessity for performance it makes the insertion of the actuator into the core material containment area filled with core particles easier. The length of the actuator stem must be about of the length of the core material containment area. Since the core material helps maintain the stability of the actuator during post impact flight at about the depth of the containment area there is too little contact with the core particles and the actuator becomes unstable. At a length substantially greater than the depth of the containment area the stem will contact the core material containment area base during the compression upon impact. Even if the stem does not punch a hole in the base of the core material containment area the impact will throw the actuator out of alignment during flight.

An alternate embodiment of an actuator is shown in the enlarged view of . The actuator has a circular flange that locks into the circular channel in the upper end of the projectile core material containment area as illustrated in . The tapered side of the actuator forms a frusta conical shape that is based on the circular flange . The open end of the core material containment area has a tapered top wall that is configured to match the tapered side of the actuator . It can be seen in this Figure how the tapered side of the frustro conical section mated against the tapered wall of the core material containment area . Similarly the circular flange of the actuator is shown locked into the circular channel . The projectile is illustrated fully assembled in wherein the core particles have been sealed within the core material containment area by the actuator . The actuator has an integral cap or flange that has a diameter equal to that of the core material containment area thereby causing the cap or flange to rest on the rim of the cylindrical portion of the open end of the core material containment area . This overlap serves to prevent the actuator from angling or shifting during insertion. The cap further prevents the actuator from sinking into the core material containment area and bringing the stem beyond the functional depth.

In the actuator is illustrated placed within the core material containment area of the projectile . The actuator is as the actuator illustrated in is designed to mate the tapered top wall and has the circular flange that interlocks with the circular channel . The actuator however does not have the cap of the prior embodiment.

The projectile must produce essentially the same results when passing through steel plate a car door a car windshield or a residential interior wall or exterior wall. It has been found that when the actuator impacts a very rigid surface such as a substantial gage metal plate the actuator head will as illustrated in enter into a controlled failure curving back or cupping upon penetration of the metal. In this manner the core particles are maintained in a dense cluster and provide greater penetration power than if permitted to disperse laterally. At the moment of penetration between the forward momentum of the core particles pushing forward against the underside of the actuator and the resistance of the material being penetrated the actuator curves. As the core particles continue to apply pressure to the inside curvature of the actuator and the material being penetrated applies a counter force against the outside curvature of the actuator a shearing effect occurs. This affect shears off a ring of plastic from the outside edge of the actuator as the rest of the actuator and core particles punch through the material. This is known as a controlled failure because the reduction in the diameter of the face of the actuator makes penetration easier. Enough of the actuator head must remains intact so that aided by the cupping action of the interior angle the proper spread of core particles into the second and third phase of their flight is facilitated. To achieve this the actuators are preferably manufactured from a high density polyethylene or its equivalent. The material must have a combination of rigidity and toughness to punch through residential type partitions walls doors car windshields and bone without breaking or tearing yet be flexible enough to enter into controlled failure upon impact with a dense obstacle. The use of an extremely hard material such as polycarbonate prevents the actuator from entering into the controlled failure illustrated. As illustrated in using material that is too soft for the actuator face or a stem that is too narrow enables the stem and particle to punch through the actuator face leaving a large free floating ring .

The penetration power required to pass through sheet rock that is a residential interior wall for example is less than that required to penetrate the metal plate and the actuator would not deform as in the case of penetration through the metal plate.

The initial transformation of a unitary slug to a lethal projectile of increasing diameter is achieved by rapidly separating the plurality of lethal particles from the core material containment area within which they are contained. If the separation step from the core material containment area is too slow the particles will spread too slowly and will continue to function as small diameter penetrating projectile continuing to be lethal over an extended distance. If the expansion is too rapid the particles lose their incapacitating force too rapidly eliminating the capability to incapacitate a terrorist standing behind a wall or protected by a car windshield.

To control the transformation the core material containment area peels back and drops away from the particles at a predetermined controlled rate thus producing a predetermined controlled rate of expansion of the path that the particles follow subsequent to the initial impact of the projectile with an object. The controlled separation of the particles from the core material containment area can be achieved by peeling the core material containment area back upon itself as a result of the contact of the core material containment area with an object having a predetermined density. To achieve this the controlled peel back rate of the core material containment area must be controlled to release the particles within preferably about from 0.0005 to 0.001 seconds as determined by velocity. This would occur upon penetration of a typical residential partition wall wooden wall or car windshield.

By way of further contrast with the prior art projectiles in the present invention the core material containment area travels with the contained core materials until initial impact peeling back upon initial impact to free the core particles. The amount of resistance necessary for the core material containment area to peel back is very low. Although automobile safety glass or gypsum board will produce peel back single pane window glass will not produce peel back. A of heavy corrugated cardboard a sheet metal panel a plastic container filled with water flesh and body organs are all within the category of materials that will produce the peel back effect. A sheet of paper is typically insufficient to produce the peel back of the core material containment area.

Upon peel back all core particles leave as a single mass and continue their momentum for some distance. For the first predetermined distance for example two to three feet the core particles have a lethal single body effect. The core is continually expanding and after the first predetermined distance about 3 to 6 feet using the above example the lethal effect of the core decreases substantially. Up to about a four inch diameter the core particles produce an impact comparable to that of a single slug. A ten inch diameter for the zone of the core particles produces thousands of individual particle impacts and consequently is far less lethal.

When passing through a solid or viscous object the core material containment area peels away and actuator and core particles continue on a forward trajectory along a radial dispersion path. The orientation of the actuator is maintained consistent due to the interaction between the core particles and the stem . The stem cannot deviate substantially from the initial path since the core particles surround the stem and restrict the movement of the stem other than along a path along the stem s axis. As the core particles disperse radially and start losing their lethal force the interaction between the particles and the stem continues to lessen and the actuator will eventually tilt and or tumble with the particles dispersing. Thus the core particles initially impact as a cohesive unitary body and rapidly disperse radially to the point where they are non lethal individual particles.

It is the pressure wave created by the projectile s momentum that maintains the core particles within the precise formation behind the actuator . As expansion occurs the pressure wave dissipates and becomes insufficient to make a path for the actuator . That is when the air resistance dampens the forward movement of the actuator as illustrated in the particles begin to radially disperse. When the projectile does not contact a secondary target the particles will disperse due to the air resistance preventing the particles from traveling a substantial distance. Once the particles have been slowed due to air resistance as illustrated in the particles act as non lethal individual particles. This dispersal must occur within a zone that is from about seven feet to within about ten feet from the point of initial impact.

As the core material containment area folds back the actuator followed by the core particles is released and continues the forward momentum. The mass of the core particles begins to elongate and spread but remains behind the actuator .

For the first three to four feet of travel after core particle release a pressure wave precedes the actuator and mass of core particles and produces a low pressure area around the actuator and mass of core particles. Thus the actuator encounters little wind resistance even though it presents a broad flat surface.

In the first few feet of flight the blunt design of the actuator results in its being dragged along behind the pressure wave . Since the individual particles have a low resistance to air on their own they would neither produce this pressure wave effect nor be pulled by the vacuum zone produced by the pressure wave. Thus the blunt design of the actuator creates the pressure wave producing a vacuum zone which in turn further lessens the air resistance for the particles. Additionally the cone affect of the pressure wave helps to maintain the particles in the lethal mass behind the actuator . Usually within seven to ten feet from release from the core material containment area the pressure wave dissipates and the actuator s blunt shape causes it to offer high resistance and slow down and or deviate from its straight line trajectory. The particles at that point disperse radially to the point where they do not impact as a unitary mass but rather impact as non lethal individual particles.

The expansion of the core particles starts immediately upon peeling away of the core material containment area however to only a limited extent. The pressure wave leads followed by the actuator and core particles. The core particles tend to stay in a cohesive group initially preferably for about three to six feet. The projectile design is such that the pressure wave dissipates rapidly and after travel through the initial zone in which the cohesive mass of particles form a unitary lethal mass the particles are not tightly packed around the centering stem of the actuator and the actuator no longer travels along a straight trajectory.

This pressure wave effect is dramatically amplified within highly viscous material such as the internal organs of the human body and becomes a highly destructive force in and of itself. illustrates the effect of the disclosed projectile when the initial and secondary impact area is a body. As seen herein the pellets are preceded by a broad essentially flat pressure wave represented by lines and thus impact the secondary target of an organ over a wide area. The pressure wave impacts the surface of the secondary target driving the surface away from the advancing actuator and mass of core particles .

The force of the pressure wave can cause a severe trauma over a very large area and can virtually liquefy a body organ. Thus the effective impact area is substantially larger than the area of the actuator or the mass of core particles .

The point of initial impact determines the damage done to a body upon impact by the actuator and core particles. If the initial impact is through a car window or partition wall and the body is hit within about three 3 feet from the initial impact the actuator and particles will penetrate the skin and organs nearer the surface and deliver a heavy blunt trauma impact. If however the initial impact is through a wall and the body is ten 10 feet beyond the point of exit the damage will be minimal if any.

When the initial impact is a body the peeling back of the core material containment area and release of the core particles takes place within the flesh and the actuator and core particles go on to penetrate the internal organs. Because of the density of the body the core particles are slowed much faster therefore remaining within the body. This prevents any accidental injuries due to a bullet passing through the body of initial impact and hitting a second person. Additionally because of the viscosity of the internal organs the pressure wave will do extensive damage to organs as it moves through the body to be stopped at surface of the impacted cavity opposite the point of entry by the surrounding skin and flesh. The elasticity and strength of surface muscle bone and skin structure combined with the slowing of the pressure wave causes the pressure wave to recoil back toward the point of entry.

As stated heretofore the speed of the peel back is critical. show what happens to the core particles when the peel back of the core material containment area is partial or too slow thereby preventing simultaneous release of the core particles . When the core material containment area passes through the initial impact area and remains in the configuration illustrated in a portion of the core particles will remain within the core material containment area . If the core material containment area continues to slowly peel back moving into the configuration of the particles start to exit between the actuator and the core material containment area since the actuator is being slowed by the stem still retained within the particles remaining within the core material containment area . This causes the particles to immediately start dispersing spreading laterally while degrading from a unitary mass to independently acting particles. The partial or slow peeling of the core material containment area results in a lengthening of the secondary zone and increased instability of the actuator .

The core particles within inches of leaving the core material containment area reach the final broad radial dispersion illustrated in . In a slow or uncontrolled peel back the distance between initial impact and the final broad radial dispersion is undeterminable due to the unpredictability of the separation. This can also occur if the core material containment area tears or splits due to structural irregularities or poor material selection as the particles will disperse through the tears in the core material containment area in an uncontrolled manner and will no longer act as a unitary mass.

It should be noted however that planned splitting of the core material containment area due to predetermined scoring of the core material containment area materials will enable controlled dispersal of the inter particles. In this embodiment however the scoring is done at a depth that will enable the split to occur in a timed manner to release the core particles in a controlled manner when a faster release is required such as in door breeching scenarios. This includes but is not limited to shooting the locks or hinges off doors or bomb disposal as a disruptor round.

When the peel back is too slow the particles reach the dispersal stage illustrated in far more rapidly than when the peel back is at the speeds taught herein. In the event of a tearing of the core material containment area the dispersal would be similar but would be in an inefficient and irregularly shaped star burst form when viewed three dimensionally.

Although the broad radial dispersal of is the desired end point when properly constructed the projectile as disclosed herein does not reach that point until seven 7 to ten 10 feet after leaving the core material containment area. The slow core material containment area peeling illustrated in would make the projectile ineffective for a secondary impact if it had to pass through an initial shield such an auto windshield or residential partition wall.

The target was a residential type interior partition wall with a single layer of one half inch thick gypsum board on each side of a standard stud wall. The projectile was a shell having a mass of 7000 small pellets as core particles confined within a core material containment area. The leading open end of the core material containment area was closed by a thumbtack like actuator. During the penetration of the wall the core material containment area peeled back releasing the actuator and the mass of particles. For a distance of about three feet the mass of particles traveled in a confined zone as an expanding but lethal mass of particles. The mass of core particles had a center core of dense packed particles with a spreading fringe of individual particles. At the end of three 3 feet the particles had a radial dispersion diameter of about two inches. The pressure wave then dissipated to the point where drag set in and at a distance of about seven 7 to about ten 10 feet the intermediate zone of the pellets expanded to form a large diameter zone of less lethal individual acting particles. Impact with the particles against a target just beyond ten 10 feet from the point of initial impact could cause abrasion but would not be lethal.

The targets were seventeen 17 to eighteen 18 pound whole pork shoulders. A one inch thick plywood sheet barrier was placed 36 inches behind the shoulder directly within the line of fire. The aim point was the heavy muscled area just over the shoulder joint itself which would create a projectile path from the outside of the shoulder toward where the shoulder would attach to the animal.

Using several different types of conventional ammunition the projectiles passed through each pork shoulder and on through the plywood barrier.

In the test firing using the disclosed projectile the one inch plywood sheet barrier was replaced with a inch thick piece of sheetrock. It was determined that if the projectile or any part of the pork shoulder penetrated the sheetrock that configuration of the projectile would be considered a failure.

Using the projectile as disclosed herein the shoulder joint was cleanly separated and blew through a large hole in the back of the shoulder. The paper on the surface of the sheetrock was slightly cut from either the projectile casing or a bone fragment but was otherwise undamaged. Neither the joint bone nor cartilage material was marred by the projectile or core particles. Forensic dissection of the shoulder later reveled that the vast majority of core particles had expended their energy inside the shoulder and stopped before reaching the joint itself. The indication was that the shoulder joint had been cleaved from the rest of the bone structure by a pressure wave that had been built up inside the pork shoulder and preceded the expanding projectile through the impact area.

Under normal circumstances neither the casing nor the bone would have passed through the body due to the viscosity of a living body. Since the pork shoulder consists of dry tissue and the viscosity is reduced the dry tissue and bone bunched behind the actuator barely exiting at the back of the shoulder

Surprisingly the actuator is almost perfect after impacting the eight inch thick pork shoulder. The pressure wave blows out an area about four times that of the original projectile diameter.

For example in the case of a steel drum filled with water and having a 10 inch diameter and 18 inch high of a fairly high gauge steel the impact of the projectile of the present invention rips out the front but does not effect the back wall. There is a rebound of the pressure wave that is a water hammer effect.

The rebound hydraulic shock can be four times the impact of the initial pressure wave. The present invention projectile unlike prior art projectiles produced large bulges at the side and top of the steel drum but no exit hole. The shock wave does massive damage and the blunter the nose and the faster the expansion the greater the shock wave.

A penetrating bullet takes the shock wave with it through the exit opening. A full metal jacket projectile has a very high penetration force and will pass cleanly the same type of container creating minimal bulging and only a small entrance and exit hole. Thus the diameter of the trauma zone is very small. In the case of the penetration of a heart it may take an extended period of time for the target to succumb to the wound due to bleeding. The projectile of the present invention however can produce an actual projectile expansion of four 4 to five 5 inches in diameter and a highly destructive ten inch or larger diameter shock wave. Since the projectile does not exit the body there is a shock wave rebound and a huge trauma zone.

In order to determine the lethal range of the core particles after encountering an initial impact area two layers of denim were placed three 3 inches in front a sheet of plywood. The disclosed projectile was shot through an impact media ten 10 feet in front of the denim and plywood backstop. If the core particles caused any substantial damage to the plywood or deeply embedded into the plywood the test was considered unsuccessful. When the core particles were slightly embedded into the plywood and could be easily brushed off the test was considered successful.

The above tests would also be applicable to different distances and the distance adjustments would be obvious to those skilled in the art when read in conjunction with this disclosure.

As stated heretofore another method of controlling the controlled peel back rate is to score the core material containment area as illustrated in . In this embodiment the core material containment area is scored as peel lines . The number and depth of the score lines directly affects the rate of peel back however scoring the core material containment area deeper than 50 of the core material containment area thickness over compromises the core material containment area. Although this is not as reliable as tapering the core material containment area as too many scores or too deep a scoring will cause the projectile to explode upon first impact there are specific situations is would be of value in door breeching bomb disruption and other such known to those skilled in the art.

The actuator design can be altered to facilitate the desired controlled expansion of the core material or pellets. In applications where it is undesirable for the actuator to shear as described heretofore an actuator of can be used. The actuator has a conical region that merges at its apex end with a longitudinal stem has been found to prevent the actuator lead surface from shearing away on impact. If the lead surface shears upon impact the core particles continue to travel as a unitary mass for an extended period of time thus extending the secondary lethal zone well beyond the preferred maximum distance of ten feet required in this embodiment. This configuration would be used in embodiments where the secondary lethal zone is extended in a controlled manner to meet specific law enforcement needs.

The optimum cone angle to achieve the three 3 to seven 7 foot lethal zone is about 40 to 60 from the centerline and preferably in the range of 55 to 58 from the centerline. The lethal zone can be adjusted by changing the cone angle controlled peel back rate and core particle size. For example a 40 angle almost eliminates the lethal secondary zone as the energy of the core particles dissipates immediately. Having an angle of less than 10 doubles the lethal zone if all other factors are the same. The actuator of would be an example of an extended lethal zone.

The actuator illustrated in has a conical region of less than maximum diameter and a narrower stem . Although the narrow stem is not recommended for applications with a short lethal range it can be advantageous in specific applications as will be evident to those skilled in the art.

The spherical core particles can be substituted with fragmented plates that will shred whatever surface they come in contact with. This can be advantageous as it will more effectively penetrate the sheet metal body panels of an automobile shred the interior and not exit the other side. The same result is achieved when the spherical core particles are replaced with washer type plates. It should be noted that solid flat plates will not provide the same result. Without the center hole the flat plates turn on edge and will travel for long distances. The center hole creates aerodynamic instability causing the plates to flip at high rotational speeds decreasing their range of flight and increasing the damage as they rotate. These washer type plates are especially affective in close areas such as automobiles where their spinning will create a substantial amount of damage. When using this or any other embodiment to penetrate heavy metal such as is found in an armored vehicle the actuator without a stem would be used and would be manufactured in metal thereby providing greater weight.

An alternate to the foregoing peel back method is illustrated in in projectile wherein the core material containment area side is scored along the base score line providing a weakened breaking point. In this embodiment the wad has a diameter smaller than that of the core material containment area side to enable the core material containment area side to slide over the wad and rest on the gas seal as seen in . The score line fails under pressure and as it slides back in response to the air pressure the actuator and core particles are released.

In an alternate embodiment uses a bonding agent to maintain the core particles in a consolidated cylindrical form. The conventional crush section serves as a base unit while the actuator serves as a top portion. The actuator works in the same way as previously described. Upon initial impact the bonding agent holding the core particles in a cohesive form shatters thereby releasing the core particles to follow the actuator as described herein. Alternatively the actuator can be eliminated and the core particles bonded into a cylindrical unit affixed to the crush section. As stated above upon impact the bonding agent would shatter releasing the core particles. This embodiment would not have the control of expansion after impact provided by the foregoing embodiments incorporating the actuator however in specific applications this embodiment could provide advantages.

In heavily populated urban areas where it is desirable for the projectile to only travel a limited distance the projectile can be designed to drop out of the lethal range at a predetermined distance. Almost all tactical shooting in urban areas is done at a distance of 50 yards or less and therefore in many situations it would be desirable for the projectile to lose lethality in under 150 yards. In the projectile of the gas seal has been cut at separator lines . Each pair of separator lines defines brake segments .

The brake segments are deployed by escaping gas as the projectile clears the muzzle of the barrel. At operational velocity the pressure of the slip stream keeps the brakes compressed just slightly larger than the diameter of the projectile body. As the projectile slows pressure is relieved and the brakes expand as illustrated in into a more open position creating drag and slowing the projectile until it falls out of flight. The time period between initial firing and the opening of the brake segments can be predetermined by the thickness of the plastic and width of the segment. The travel distance between the opening of the brake segments and non lethality can be determined by the number of brake segments and their size.

When the core particles are silicon carbide the projectile using any of the embodiments above can be used to halt boats by penetrating the engine. The silicone carbide filled projectile performs the same as described heretofore however rather that lethal particles being released silicone carbide or other material having the same properties is propelled into the engine. When used to stop boats the round is fired through the engine cowling which peels back the containment area and releases the core material. The silicon is brought into the engine through the air intake port and is trapped within the engine abrading the interior until engine failure.

When using pure plastics or plastic compounds as the particle material additional weight must be mixed in to provide the needed weight. This can be accomplished by coating the heavier material with the plastic. The advantage to the use of plastic is that elimination or minimization of lead leaching into the ground from used bullets.

The use of a blow mold grade low density polyethylene has been found to provide a core material containment area material that will allow the core material containment area to peel back completely without tearing and at the desired rate. The actuator is preferably formed from high density polyethylene. The use of a very rigid polymer or other material such as a carboxylate is not preferred because of the tendency to be too rigid on impact.

It should be noted that for simplicity in description the term shot gun shell is used herein as representing the primary application of the ballistic projectile of the present invention. However the principles also apply to handgun ammunition and other types of ballistic projectiles.

