---

title: Structural content filtration of hypotheses in a cognitive control framework
abstract: Structural content filtration to reduce the number of hypotheses for the location of an active object in a recorded image generated by a graphical user interface (GUI) of an application program may be accomplished by transforming the recorded image and a corresponding playback image, determining a sub-image from the transformed recorded image which corresponds to an object to be searched for in the transformed playback image, determining a set of points on the transformed playback image which have appropriate values for matching the sub-image, and filtering hypotheses on the playback image which are more than a selected distance from any one of the subset of points.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07805008&OS=07805008&RS=07805008
owner: Intel Corporation
number: 07805008
owner_city: Santa Clara
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051114
---
The present invention relates generally to automatic control of software application programs and image analysis and more specifically to analyzing graphical user interface GUI images displayed by an application program for automatic control of subsequent execution of the application program.

Typical application program analysis systems capture keyboard input data and mouse input data entered by a user. The captured input data may then be used to replay the application program. These systems rely on playback of the application program on the same computer system used to capture the input data and thus are not portable.

Some existing application program analysis systems use image recognition techniques that are dependent on screen resolution and or drawing schemes or have strong dependencies to the underlying operating system OS being used. Such systems typically rely on dependencies such as Windows32 or X Windows application programming interfaces APIs . This limits their portability and usefulness.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise a cognitive control framework CCF for automatic control of software application programs that have a graphical user interface GUI . Examples of such applications programs may be executed on current operating systems such as Microsoft Windows and Linux for example as well as other operating systems. An embodiment of the present invention creates a system simulating a human user interacting with the GUI of the application program and using the GUI for automatic control of the application program without relying on dependencies such as specific graphical libraries windowing systems or visual controls interfaces or implementations. The CCF comprises an easy to use cross platform tool useful for GUI testing based on pattern recognition. By being independent of any OS specific controls and graphical libraries the CCF may be used for interaction with non standard graphical interfaces as well as with well known ones. The system provides for recording any kind of keyboard and mouse actions the user performs while working with the GUI of the application program and then providing playback of the recorded scenario. In the present invention image analysis of captured display data such as screen shots for example is performed to identify actions of the application program corresponding to user input data. These actions and input data may be stored for use in future playback of the same user scenario for automatically interacting with the application program.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise operating on two phases a recording phase and a playback phase. During the recording phase the system is learning how to control the application program. The system registers and captures input actions supplied by the user such as a mouse click or entering of text via a keyboard for example and display data e.g. screen shots of images displayed by the application program in response to those actions. The user actions the time interval between actions resulting display data of the GUI of the application program and possibly other data and or commands form an execution scenario. By following the execution scenario during the playback phase the system provides the same but fully automatic execution of the application program simulating the user control but without the real presence of the user . Automatic execution is made possible due to a plurality of image analysis and structural techniques applied correspondingly to images during the recording and playback phases.

At a later point in time during the playback phase the playback component may be initiated. At block simulated user activity may be generated based on the execution scenario. That is saved inputs and commands from the execution scenario may be input to the application program for purposes of automatic control using the CCF system. While the application program processes this data display data may be changed on the display as a result. At block the CCF system performs image analysis on the playback display data currently being shown as a result of application program processing and the display data captured during the recording phase. At block recorded time conditions may be checked to take into account possible variations in playback. For example the time when an object appears may be within a time interval based on a recorded time. For example in one embodiment a lower bound time time to start the search may be extracted from the saved data in the execution scenario and an upper bound time may be the lower bound time plus 10 or some other appropriate value. Processing of blocks and each result in data being stored in report . At block the CCF system controls execution of the application program based on the results of the image analysis. Blocks and may be repeated for each in a sequence of user input data items from the execution scenario.

The time interval between sequential actions is a part of the captured execution scenario. However while following the execution scenario in the playback phase one should not expect that the time interval between any two actions at playback will be equal to the time interval between the same two actions during the recording phase. There are a number of objective reasons why this interval could be different on playback than during recording. For example the application program during recording and playback may be executed on different computer systems having different processor speeds or an application program could require different times for the same actions during playback due to accesses of external data or resources. This indicates a requirement in the CCF system to handle flexible time conditions e.g. handle some tolerance for the time interval between actions during the playback phase. During that time interval at playback the system checks the recorded display data to the playback display data several times to determine if the playback display data is substantially similar to the recorded display data. A finding that the two are substantially similar indicates that a previous user action has completed and the system can progress to the next action in the execution scenario. This activity may be similar to the situation where the user is interacting with the application program and pauses periodically to view the display to determine if the expected visible changes to the display have been made by the application program based on previous actions. If so then a new action may be performed. If at the end of a higher bound of the time interval the application program has not produced an image on the display that the CCF system expected according to the execution scenario then the CCF system may interrupt the playback of the execution scenario and generate an error report describing how the execution scenario has not been followed. In one embodiment the scenario may be corrected and the CCF system may be required to use other branches to continue.

The cognitive control framework CCF system of embodiments of the present invention performs image analysis and object detection processing on display data from the GUI of the application program. The CCF system includes comparing an image captured during a recording phase called IR to the corresponding image captured during the playback phase called IP . One task of the system is to detect an object in the IR to which the user applied an action find the corresponding object in the IP and continue progress on the execution path of the execution scenario by applying the action to the detected object. These steps may be repeated for multiple objects within an image and may be repeated across multiple pairs of IRs and IPs over time. An object that the user has applied an action to may be called an object of action. Absence in the IP of the object of action corresponding to the one found at IR means that one should capture the IP again at a later time and try to find the object of action again. Finally either an object of action may be found in the IP or execution of the scenario may be halted and a report generated describing how the wrong state was achieved and the scenario may not be continued. In embodiments of the present invention this detection of objects of action may be done in real time during the playback phase progressing from one action to another. Thus the image analysis process employed must have good performance so as to introduce only a minimal disturbance to the time conditions at playback.

The CCF system of embodiments of the present invention comprises an image analysis and detecting process. Such a process has at least two requirements. First the process should be able to overcome some variations in the captured images such as different color scheme fonts and the layout and state of the visual elements. In one embodiment comparison constraints for checking these items color scheme fonts etc. may be set to specified parameters in accordance with specific needs. Overcoming these variations is desirable because recording and playback might be executed in different operating environments such as different screen resolutions different visual schemes different window layouts and so on. Additionally there could be insignificant differences in corresponding IR usually captured after an action was applied to an object of interest and IP pairs captured after a previous action was completed . Second the implementation of the image analysis and object detection process should be fast enough to introduce only minimal disturbances and delay of application execution during playback.

By processing captured images the system builds descriptions of the images in terms of the objects presented on them. Each display object may be represented by its contour and a plurality of properties. Table I enumerates some possible contour properties for use in the present invention. In other embodiments other properties may also be used.

Next during the playback phase handled by playback component at block the CCF system determines the contours of objects in the IP. At block the CCF system filters contours by size to determine contours that may become hypotheses for active objects and contours that connect them. At block the CCF system filters the objects by basic space layout in the IP to determine subsets of hypotheses for active and additional objects. For example filtering criteria for space layout may include tables wizards and menus. In one embodiment the user or CCF schema with a cascade search could set both strict e.g. as is and fuzzy e.g. object could be near each other conditions. At block the CCF system filters the objects by content to produce further subsets of hypotheses for active and additional objects. For example the filtering criteria by content may include images and text. Moreover in one embodiment the user or CCF schema with cascade search could set both strict e.g. image should have difference in a few points and text should have minimal differences on a base of Levenstein distance and fuzzy e.g. image could be stable to highlighting and have insignificant structural changes and text could have noticeable differences on a base of Levenstein distance without consideration of digits conditions. At block the CCF system performs structural filtering of the objects to produce a best hypothesis for active objects.

Finally at block the CCF system recalculates old actions for a new object by applying the action according to the execution scenario. For example suppose the user selected via the mouse the screen location at X 70 Y 200 and that a button is displayed at the rectangle denoted X1 50 Y1 150 X2 100 Y2 100 . In the IP the button may be represented as a rectangle denoted X1 250 Y1 300 X2 200 Y2 100 . For a general view coordinates of the top left corner and the size of the rectangle may be changed. The mouse click user selection may be recalculated based on the position of the button and the scaled size for X and Y coordinates . The calculation gives the new mouse click coordinates e.g. X 290 Y 350 .

During filtering at each step there is an evaluation of specific contour properties as required for a specific filter . This filtering pipeline is designed in such a way that the most time consuming evaluation steps are shifted to later in the processing pipeline when the number of contours hypotheses is smaller. By using this approach the overall computational cost may be decreased thereby helping to ensure good performance of the system.

It is useful to maintain a compromise in order to make sure that the system does not filter out some contours in the early steps that may be later determined to be either a hypothesis of an object of activity or objects connected with an object of activity. In this regard predefined input parameters may be set to broad limits that requires spending a little more time on processing of additional contours hypotheses but ensure that the system has not dropped important contours.

Embodiments of the present invention including image analysis and object of activity detection on two images may be illustrated by the following examples using a performance analyzer application program. These figures show applying the process blocks of to a first image from the recording phase IR and a corresponding image from the playback phase IP . is an example display of the GUI of an application program captured and saved during a recording phase. This IR screen shot shows that the item Tuning Activity was selected by the user using a mouse. is an example display of the GUI of an application program captured during a playback phase. Note there are some insignificant changes in the displayed windows in comparison to . is an example image illustrating objects identified during contouring operations of the recording phase according to an embodiment of the present invention as performed on the image of . shows the sample output from block of . is an example image illustrating objects of activity of the recording phase according to an embodiment of the present invention as performed on the image of . These contours were identified after performing blocks and of on the image from . The contour with the text labeled Tuning has been determined in this example to be the current object of activity. is an example image illustrating objects identified during contouring operations of the playback phase according to an embodiment of the present invention. This image is output from performing block of on the sample image of . Finally is an example image illustrating a hypothesis during the playback phase according to an embodiment of the present invention. shows hypotheses from for the Tuning Activity object of activity from . Size space content and structural filtration of blocks has been performed. The ellipse represents the contour which was selected as the best hypothesis from performing block of . A new point for the mouse click is recalculated relative to the given object i.e. the tuning display object .

In some scenarios filtration according to blocks through still result in many hypotheses to consider. When the number of hypotheses is large more computational resources are needed. In one embodiment of the present invention a structural content method for hypotheses filtration may be used to reduce the number of GUI hypotheses for objects in space two dimensional 2D for screen shots and multidimensional in the general case . This structural content method comprises a search scheme that is simple yet powerful to select the right hypotheses despite the presence of several GUI noise conditions. In embodiments of the present invention the noise conditions may comprise changeable color schemes highlighting of items noise from video devices anti aliasing and other effects.

After pre filtration according to size text etc. as in block through of many hypotheses may remain for the objects of . The term hypothesis as used herein means a contour of an object on the playback image which corresponds to a contour of an object on the recorded image at this point in time. This means the previously applied filters didn t reject this correspondence. Application of the structural content method of hypotheses filtration of an embodiment of the present invention within block of and block of decreases the number of active hypotheses.

The structural content approach to hypotheses filtration may be understood with reference to an actual example but a relatively simple example for purposes of explanation to avoid complex visual representations .

A general problem that embodiments of the present invention solves is how to reduce number of the GUI hypotheses in case of GUI noise conditions including changeable color schemes highlighting video devices anti aliasing etc. The present approach is used inside the Cognitive Control Framework as an important part of the search filters to detect the right hypotheses. Embodiments of the present invention adapt to changes to an application program during product evolution.

Initially several GUI noise artifacts may be identified that should not be used to reject the correct hypothesis. For example highlighted items may change colors but not merely inverting black to white and vice versa for part of an object s contour. represent this example. is an example image illustrating a highlighted item in a GUI during the playback phase according to an embodiment of the present invention. is an example image illustrating no highlighting of an item in a GUI during the playback phase according to an embodiment of the present invention. Note that a portion of a screenshot shown in was captured during the recording phase. During operation of the application program using the GUI a user selected the New item from the File menu. Detailed behavior for the given activity could be as follows mouse activity is typically used but usage of a hot key alternative is also possible . The user moved the mouse from the File menu header to the New item and selected this item. The highlighting for the selected item may be seen on the recorded image from the recording phase shown in . shows a screenshot which may be captured during the playback phase. will not include content for this highlighting because in this example the system was looking for the previous item and the user s mouse is situated at another location. In other words during recording a screenshot was captured when the mouse pointed on the New item and highlighting took place but during playback the mouse clicked the File item on the previous step and then a screen shot was captured where the mouse pointed on this File item.

It s possible to have more difficult conditions for highlighting especially when contouring algorithms are unable to separate text from nearby icons. is an example image illustrating complex highlighting for an item of a GUI during the playback phase according to an embodiment of the present invention. is an image illustrating no highlighting for a searched item of a GUI during the playback phase according to an embodiment of the present invention. present highlighting with a strict bound between text and the icon in this example the highlighting has a dotted border . Moreover some stochastic differences may exist because of anti aliasing for text note that Optical Character Recognition OCR is not a part of the present filter . Additionally sometimes a highlighted object may be found based on an object without any highlighting see the inverse problem for . In other words an inverse problem may be considered where an object on the recorded screen shot doesn t have highlighting but a corresponding object on the playback screen shot does. Some applications especially Web based applications highlight objects of interest but switch highlighting off in case of clicking on these objects.

In reality video driver software may also change some pixels in a screenshot. The changes may be insignificant but still occur e.g. RGB 254 0 0 is found instead of RGB 255 0 0 .

GUI noise could affect the contouring procedure especially noise concerning the width of contours. Active and additional objects could have different sizes in recorded and playback images. It s possible to have both merged and split contours there. is an example image illustrating contours of objects in a GUI during the playback phase according to an embodiment of the present invention. is another example image illustrating contours of objects in a GUI during the playback phase according to an embodiment of the present invention. present possible situations for respectively in this example changes are shaded in gray .

Such cases must not result in rejecting the correct hypothesis during application of the method of embodiments of the present invention. In one view wide bounds should be set for sizes of objects in order to keep the correct hypothesis even after filtering by size of object. In another view multiple incorrect hypotheses remain after filtration for sizes if the bounds are set too narrowly. Having many incorrect objects after this filtering step affects the effectiveness and performance of other subsequent filters especially the space structural filters.

The structural content filtration of embodiments of the present invention properly decreases the number of hypotheses. This method works well for filtration of additional objects especially for non textual objects. It is a useful component of the filters used for noise reduction in the Cognitive Control framework.

Usually it s necessary to apply the present structural content filtering search scheme to several objects. The first transformation for recorded and playback images may be done once. Then sub images may be obtained from the transformed recorded image and used for the search of the transformed playback image.

Let s consider a recorded image which has width W and height H. Color for every pixel of the image could be described by the value pair C i j . A simple transformation may be applied for the color recorded image to transform it into a black and white binary image e.g. where the color for every pixel is B i j as shown below. 0 1 0 Equation 1 1 0 0 Equation 2 or 1 1 0 Equation 3 1 01 0 Equation 4 

In one embodiment of the present invention a MatchTemplate function with a CV TM SQDIFF key may be used. The CV TM SQDIFF key means that the function MatchTemplate uses the sum of squared differences to compare image regions with the template image transformed one . The MatchTemplate function is provided in the OpenCV library publicly available from Intel Corporation. In other embodiments other methods may also be used.

The MatchTemplate function slides e.g. goes from the top left pixel to the bottom right pixel a template e.g. a transformed recording image through an image e.g. a transformed playback image compares overlapped portions of the image of size w h against the template e.g. a sub image from a transformed saved image using the specified CV TM SQDIFF method and stores the comparison results into a single channel 32 bit floating point result. If the size of the image is W H and the size of the template is w h then the size of the result must be W w 1 H h 1. Equation 5 defines the formula used in the function wherein I denotes image T denotes template and R denotes result. The summation is done over the template and or the image portion x 0 . . . w 1 y 0 . . . h 1 sum Equation 5 

Note that it s possible to use a more simple transformation for the case than Equation 5 sum Equation 6 

Let s consider a sub image from which corresponds to a selected contour from such as the Quick Performance Analysis Wizard small icon on the left side of the image. Let s use a template to obtain a result image by application of the search i.e. MatchTemplate function on . Let our template have a size of w h. The coefficient Qmay be set which helps to detect a subset of points R from the result image R 

The filter is so effective that it s possible to use a very soft bound Q e.g. 0.25 that really means about 22 27 difference in structure . Regardless in the present example there are three only close points R 3 3 0.107 R 2 3 0.225 R 3 3 0.226. This is a concrete example with real coefficients which are very soft. The MatchTemplate function provides the result image which has real value points. Only three points have appropriate values.

Finally it s necessary to filter wrong hypotheses in the playback image of . Every point from the Rset presents a top left corner of a rectangle of size w h. Hypotheses are rejected if the contour of a hypothesis does not have an intersection with any rectangle from R. It s also possible to use stronger procedures for filtration e.g. a bound for the distance between the top left corner of a rectangle from Rand a contour of a hypothesis.

Let s consider a more complex example which demonstrates the power of embodiments of the present invention as shown in . is an example image illustrating a GUI for an application program after all contours of hypotheses for an additional non text object are identified and before filtration results are presented according to an embodiment of the present invention. After applying the structural content filtration method of embodiments of the present invention other procedures in the Cognitive Control Framework especially fuzzy text and space structural filters may be used to help complete the search for the right active object.

Structural content filtration according to embodiments of the present invention helps to effectively refresh scenarios when used in testing GUIs of application programs. This is helpful for easily updating old tests for application to new product versions. Easy adaptation for scenarios is very useful during GUI updates in software products. Moreover the present method may be used in search schemes within the Cognitive Control Framework such as for noise reduction runs and filtration for image objects. Other uses may be in the areas of computer vision man machine interfaces and product version control.

hypotheses during the search which is stable despite several kinds of GUI noise e.g. changeable color schemes highlighting screen noise from devices anti aliasing effect etc. .

The structural content approach to hypotheses filtration has at least several advantages. A first advantage of this approach is that it is applicable to any application program exposing a visual interface on any platform and operating system and is not dependent on a specific API or architecture of visual system implementation like Win32 or X Windows API or specific operating system. It correlates with an advantage of the overall Cognitive Control Framework approach which works across platforms. All other known systems are dependent to a small or large extent on system APIs while working with visual elements. A second advantage of this approach is that it is an easy way to significantly decrease the number of hypotheses for active objects. A third advantage is that it is an easy way to help with automatic portability of old scenarios to new versions of products. It decreases the time needed to support a baseline of scenarios for application program testing. A fourth advantage is that the method does not require significant computing resources compared to other methods. It introduces only minimal disturbance and delay in application execution during playback.

Reference in the specification to one embodiment or an embodiment of the present invention means that a particular feature structure or characteristic described in connection with the embodiment is included in at least one embodiment of the present invention. Thus the appearances of the phrase in one embodiment appearing in various places throughout the specification are not necessarily all referring to the same embodiment.

Although the operations detailed herein may be described as a sequential process some of the operations may in fact be performed in parallel or concurrently. In addition in some embodiments the order of the operations may be rearranged without departing from the scope of the invention.

The techniques described herein are not limited to any particular hardware or software configuration they may find applicability in any computing or processing environment. The techniques may be implemented in hardware software or a combination of the two. The techniques may be implemented in programs executing on programmable machines such as mobile or stationary computers personal digital assistants set top boxes cellular telephones and pagers and other electronic devices that each include a processor a storage medium readable by the processor including volatile and non volatile memory and or storage elements at least one input device and one or more output devices. Program code is applied to the data entered using the input device to perform the functions described and to generate output information. The output information may be applied to one or more output devices. One of ordinary skill in the art may appreciate that the invention can be practiced with various computer system configurations including multiprocessor systems minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention can also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks may be performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network.

Each program may be implemented in a high level procedural or object oriented programming language to communicate with a processing system. However programs may be implemented in assembly or machine language if desired. In any case the language may be compiled or interpreted.

Program instructions may be used to cause a general purpose or special purpose processing system that is programmed with the instructions to perform the operations described herein. Alternatively the operations may be performed by specific hardware components that contain hardwired logic for performing the operations or by any combination of programmed computer components and custom hardware components. The methods described herein may be provided as a computer program product that may include a machine accessible medium having stored thereon instructions that may be used to program a processing system or other electronic device to perform the methods. The term machine accessible medium used herein shall include any medium that is capable of storing or encoding a sequence of instructions for execution by a machine and that cause the machine to perform any one of the methods described herein. The term machine accessible medium shall accordingly include but not be limited to solid state memories and optical and magnetic disks. Furthermore it is common in the art to speak of software in one form or another e.g. program procedure process application module logic and so on as taking an action or causing a result. Such expressions are merely a shorthand way of stating the execution of the software by a processing system cause the processor to perform an action of produce a result.

