---

title: Metal-enhanced fluorescence from plastic substrates
abstract: The present invention relates to methods for functionally modifying a polymeric surface for subsequent deposition of metallic particles and/or films, wherein the polymeric surface is modified by increasing hydroxyl and/or amine functional groups thereby providing an activated polymeric surface for deposition of metallic particles to form a fluorescence sensing device. The device can be used for metal-enhanced fluorescence of fluorophores positioned above the metallic particles that can be readily applied to diagnostic or sensing applications of metal-enhanced fluorescence.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08075956&OS=08075956&RS=08075956
owner: University of Maryland, Baltimore County
number: 08075956
owner_city: Baltimore
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051028
---
This application is filed under the provisions of 35 U.S.C. 371 and claims the priority of International Patent Application No. PCT US2005 039498 filed on Oct. 28 2005 which in turn claims priority of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 625 212 filed on Nov. 5 2004 and U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 630 992 filed on Nov. 24 2004.

The invention disclosed herein was made with U.S. Government support under Grant No. GM070929 01 from the NIH. Accordingly the U.S. Government has certain rights in this invention

The present invention relate generally to a fluorescence sensing system and more particularly to a system including a polymeric surface having metallic particles deposited thereon and method of forming such metallizable polymeric surfaces.

Fluorescence systems have become a dominant technology in medical testing drug discovery biotechnology and cellular imaging. The use of fluorescence technology has greatly enhanced the ability to detect specific molecules leading to rapid advancements in diagnostics. For example fluorescence detection is widely used in medical testing and DNA analysis because of the high degree of sensitivity obtained using fluorescent techniques. Importantly a small numbers of molecules can be detected using fluorescence technology. Typically extrinsic fluorophores are added covalently or non covalently to allow molecules that do not ordinarily fluoresce or do not fluoresce at useful levels to be detected.

Detection of the molecule of interest is generally limited by the properties of the fluorophore used. In some cases labeling a biomolecule with an extrinsic fluorophore can alter the biological activity of the biomolecule potentially creating experimental artifacts. Problems with current fluorescent techniques stem in part from the low fluorescent intensities of commonly used fluorophores. Additionally background fluorescence can be significant when using low wavelength excitation radiation required by some fluorophores or when large quantities of fluorophores are required.

At present the use of noble metals particles and surfaces for applications in sensing biotechnology and nanotechnology has drawn considerable attention. For example U.S. application Ser. No. 10 073 625 discloses compositions and methods for increasing fluorescence intensity of molecules by adding either intrinsic or extrinsic fluorophores and positioning same at a specific distance from a metal particle. Specifically metal particles deposited on glass or quartz type material and biomolecules with a fluorophore are positioned at a distance from the metal particles. This positioning of the fluorophore at a specific distance from the metal particle can alter or increase the intrinsic emission of electromagnetic radiation from the biomolecule in response to an amount of exciting electromagnetic radiation.

Favorable effects of silver particles on fluorophores include increased quantum yields decreased lifetimes and increased photostability of fluorophores commonly used in biological research. These effects of conducting metallic particles on fluorescence have been the subject of numerous theoretical studies related to surface enhanced Raman scattering and the application of these considerations to molecular fluorescence. There is now interest in using the remarkable properties of metallic islands colloids or continuous surfaces.

Consequently it is of interest to develop convenient methods for forming metallic particles and or films on different surfaces. These approaches include electroless deposition electroplating on insulators lithography and the formation of colloids under constant reagent flow. Metallic particles can be assembled into films using electrophoresis and gold particles have been used for the on demand electrochemical release of DNA. It is anticipated that many of these approaches will find uses in medical diagnostics and lab on a chip type applications.

Heretofore all of these findings have been based on metallic silver being deposited on glass or quartz type substrates with a subsequent spacer layer used to separate the fluorophore from the metal. Thus it would be of great value to devise methods for localized or continuous silver deposition on other surfaces that are more flexible that glass planar surfaces or glass based substrates.

The present invention relates to methods for functionally modifying a polymeric surface for subsequent deposition of metallic particles and or films wherein a polymeric surface comprising low density of functional groups is modified by increasing the number of hydroxyl and or amine functional groups relative to an unmodified surface thereby providing an activated polymeric surface useful for metal enhanced fluorescence of fluorophores positioned above the metallic particles that can be readily applied to diagnostic or sensing devices for applications of metal enhanced fluorescence MEF .

In another aspect the present invention relates to uses of such polymeric surfaces for enhancement of effect of fluorophores near metallic surfaces comprising at least silver particles. These effects include increased quantum yields decreased lifetimes increased photostability and increased energy transfer. These effects are due to interactions of the excited state fluorophores with the surface plasmon resonances on the metallic surfaces. These interactions of the fluorophore with the metal surface can result in increased rates of excitation quenching increased intensities and or increased quantum yield.

In yet another aspect the present invention relates to a method for depositing a noble metal on a polymeric surface the method comprising 

Subsequent to the deposition of the noble metal particles a spacer can be applied to the metal surface to provide a required distance from the metal surface to the fluorophore for metal enhanced fluorescence.

In yet another aspect the present invention relates to a method for forming a patterned metallic surface on a polymeric substrate the method comprising 

The present invention further comprises a detection device for detecting fluorescence emissions including but not limited to visual inspection digital CCD cameras video cameras photographic film or the use of current instrumentation such as laser scanning devices fluorometers luminometers photodiodes quantum counters plate readers epifluorescence microscopes scanning microscopes confocal microscopes capillary electrophoresis detectors or other light detectors capable of detecting the presence location intensity excitation and emission spectra fluorescence polarization fluorescence lifetime and other physical properties of the fluorescent signal.

A source of electromagnetic energy may include lasers emitting radiation from the UV to IR spectrum masers LEDs incandescent lamps etc and which will be determined by the frequency or wavelength of energy required for excitation of the specific fluorophore.

A further aspect of the present invention relates to a kit for detecting a target molecule in a sample the kit comprising

Other aspects and advantages of the invention will be more fully apparent from the ensuing disclosure and appended claims.

In the past several years a number of different metal fluorophore combinations and geometries 1 5 have been developed which ultimately yielded significantly brighter and more photostable fluorophores. These advances were not due to chemical structure modifications but are due to the control of the intrinsic fluorophore radiative decay rate. Specifically this new technology has been named this metal enhanced fluorescence 1 5 and radiative decay Engineering RDE 2 3 . Primarily with the use of MEF silver nanostructures deposited onto clean glass microscope slides or quartz plates have been used. This has been because the chemistries of the surface of glass are well established and therefore the covalent immobilization of silver nanostructures onto glass less arduous and indeed reproducibly reliable.

Polymer substrates are known to be very promising substrates for a variety of applications and industrial interest in utilizing plastics is primarily driven by the fact that these materials are less expensive and easier in mass production than silica based substrates 6 . There are also a wide variety of materials to choose from with an even greater array of chemical and physical properties 6 .

The present invention shows that polymeric substrates can be used as substrates for metal enhanced fluorescence which given their cost are likely to be much better received by industry. While high surface density of either hydroxyl or amino groups which are readily used for silver deposition the present invention provides modification of a polymeric surface exhibiting low density of surface functionality. This modification allows for MEF to be introduced into already existing plastic based technologies such as with plastic high throughput screening well plates and fluorescence based clinical assays. The practical approaches to polymer surface modification are corona discharge treatment plasma surface graft light and chemical modification 12 .

The presence of a nearby metal film island or particle can also alter the emission properties of fluorophores. The most well known effect is the quenching of fluorescence by a near by metal. The emission of fluorophores within 50 of a metal surface is almost completely quenched. This effect is used in fluorescence microscopy with evanescent wave excitation. For a fluorophore located on a cell membrane and near the quartz water interface the fluorescence emission is quenched allowing selective observation of the emission from a fluorophore in the cytoplasmic region of the cell which is more distant from the solid liquid interface. In addition to quenching metal surfaces or particles can cause significant increases in fluorescence. Remarkably depending on the distance and geometry metal surfaces or particles can result in enhancement factors of up to 1000 for the fluorescence emission 17 19 . Fluorophores near a metal film are not expected to emit isotropically but rather the emission is directed into selected directions that are dependent on the sample configuration and the nature of the metallic surface. In addition to directionality the decay times of fluorophores are altered by the metal. In fact the lifetimes of fluorophores placed at fixed distances from a continuous metallic surface oscillate with distance 20 .

The effects of metallic particles and surfaces on fluorophores are due to at least three known mechanisms. One mechanism is energy transfer quenching k to the metals with a ddependence. This quenching can be understood by damping of the dipole oscillations by the nearby metal. A second mechanism is an increase in the emission intensity due to the metal increasing the local incident field on the fluorophore E with a maximum theoretical enhancement effect of about 140. This effect has been observed for metal colloids and is appropriately called the Lightning Rod effect. This enhancement can be understood as due to the metal particles on concentrating the local field and subsequently increasing the rate of excitation. The third mechanism is that a nearby metal can increase the intrinsic decay rate of the fluorophore that is to modify the rate at which the fluorophore emits photons. These later two fluorophore metal interactions offer remarkable opportunities for advanced fluorescence assay technology.

The distance dependence of fluorescence enhancements and those of quenching may be determined by standard methods disclosed herein.

In fluorescence the spectral observables are governed by the magnitude of the radiative rate relative to the sum of the non radiative decay rates ksuch as internal conversion and quenching. In the absence of metallic particles or surfaces the quantum yield Qand fluorescence lifetime are given by 

Fluorophores with high radiative rates have high quantum yields and short lifetimes Increasing the quantum yield requires decreasing the non radiative rates k which is often only accomplished when using low solution temperatures or a fluorophore binding in a more rigid environment. The natural lifetime of a fluorophore is the inverse of the radiative decay rate or the lifetime which would be observed if the quantum yield were unity. This value is determined by the oscillator strength extinction coefficient of the electronic transition 21 24 . The extinction coefficients of chromophores are only very slightly dependent on their environment. Hence for almost all examples currently employed in fluorescence spectroscopy the radiative decay rate is essentially constant.

The concept of modifying the radiative decay rate of fluorophores is unfamiliar to most spectroscopists. It is therefore intuitive to consider the novel effects of fluorescence enhancement due to metal particles m by assuming an additional radiative rate as shown in . In this case the quantum yield and lifetime are given by 

These equations result in important predictions for a fluorophore near a metal surface. As increases the fluorescence quantum yield increases while the lifetime decreases as shown in which is converse to the free space condition where both change in unison. An ability to modify and control the radiative decay rate can have profound implications for the use of fluorescence in basic research and its applications.

The reduction in lifetime of a fluorophore near a metal is due to an interaction between fluorophore and metal particle which enhances the radiative decay rate quantum yield increase or depending on distance d causes quenching. A shorter excited state lifetime also allows for less photochemical reactions which subsequently results in increased fluorophore photostability.

Fluorophore photostability is a primary concern in many applications of fluorescence. This is particularly true in recent trends in single molecule spectroscopy. A shorter lifetime also allows for a larger photon flux. The maximum number of photons that are emitted by a fluorophore each second is roughly limited by the lifetime of its excited state. For example a 10 ns lifetime can yield about 10photons per second per molecule but in practice only 10photons can readily be observed. The small number of observed photons is typically due to both photodestruction and isotropic emission. If the metal surface decreases the lifetime then one can obtain more photons per second per molecule by appropriately increasing the incident intensity. On the other hand the metal enhanced fluorescence effects of the present invention enhances intensity while simultaneously shortening the lifetime. Decreases in the excitation intensity will still result in increases in the emission intensity and therefore photostability.

The ability to increase the radiative decay rate suggests that any chromophore even non fluorescent species such as bilirubin fullerenes metal ligand complexes or porphyrins could display usefully high quantum yields when appropriately placed near a metal surface.

The effects of metal surface fluorophore interactions are highly dependent upon distance and the nature of the metal surface. The emission enhancement is observed when fluorophore distances near 4 50 nm to the metal surfaces. At this scale there are few phenomena that provide opportunities for extremely high levels of assay sensing manipulation and control. In addition devices at this scale may lead to dramatically enhanced performance sensitivity and reliability with dramatically decreased size weight and therefore cost important considerations for field deployable bio terrorism anthrax sensors. Slightly different effects can be expected for mirrors sub wavelength or semi transparent metal surfaces silver island films or metal colloids.

Before the present invention is disclosed and described it is to be understood that this invention is not limited to the particular process steps and materials disclosed herein as such process steps and materials may vary somewhat. It is also to be understood that the terminology used herein is used for the purpose of describing particular embodiments only and is not intended to be limiting since the scope of the present invention will be limited only by the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

It must be noted that as used in this specification and the appended claims the singular forms a an and the include plural references unless the content clearly dictates otherwise.

The term fluorophore means any substance that emits electromagnetic energy such as light at a certain wavelength emission wavelength when the substance is illuminated by radiation of a different wavelength excitation wavelength . Extrinsic fluorophores refer to fluorophores bound to another substance. Intrinsic fluorophores refer to substances that are fluorophores themselves. Exemplary fluorophores include but are not limited to those listed in the Molecular Probes Catalogue which is incorporated by reference herein. Representative fluorophores include but are not limited to Alexa Fluor 350 Dansyl Chloride DNS Cl 5 iodoacetamida fluoroscein 5 IAF fluoroscein 5 isothiocyanate FITC tetramethylrhodamine 5 and 6 isothiocyanate TRITC 6 acryloyl 2 dimethylaminonaphthalene acrylodan 7 nitrobenzo 2 oxa 1 3 diazol 4 yl chloride NBD Cl ethidium bromide Lucifer Yellow 5 carboxyrhodamine 6G hydrochloride Lissamine rhodamine B sulfonyl chloride Texas Red sulfonyl chloride naphthalamine sulfonic acids including but not limited to 1 anilinonaphthalene 8 sulfonic acid ANS and 6 p toluidinyl naphthalen e 2 sulfonic acid TNS Anthroyl fatty acid DPH Parinaric acid TMA DPH Fluorenyl fatty acid Fluorescein phosphatidylethanolamine Texas red phosphatidylethanolamine Pyrenyl phophatidylcholine Fluorenyl phosphotidylcholine Merocyanine 540 1 3 sulfonatopropyl 4 .beta. 2 di n butylamino 6 naphthyl vinyl pyridinium betaine Naphtyl Styryl 3 3 dipropylthiadicarbocyanine diS C 5 4 p dipentyl aminostyryl 1 methylpyridinium di 5 ASP Cy 3 Iodo Acetamide Cy 5 N Hydroxysuccinimide Cy 7 Isothiocyanate rhodamine 800 IR 125 Thiazole Orange Azure B Nile Blue Al Phthalocyanine Oxaxine 1 4 6 diamidino 2 phenylindole DAPI Hoechst 33342 TOTO Acridine Orange Ethidium Homodimer N ethoxycarbonylmethyl 6 methoxyquinolinium MQAE Fura 2 Calcium Green Carboxy SNARF 6 BAPTA coumarin phytofluors Coronene and metal ligand complexes.

Representative intrinsic fluorophores include but are not limited to organic compounds having aromatic ring structures including but not limited to NADH FAD tyrosine tryptophan purines pyrimidines lipids fatty acids nucleic acids nucleotides nucleosides amino acids proteins peptides DNA RNA sugars and vitamins. Additional suitable fluorophores include enzyme cofactors lanthanide green fluorescent protein yellow fluorescent protein red fluorescent protein or mutants and derivates thereof.

In accordance with this invention any flexible or rigid polymeric substrate can be utilized in the process of this invention. Typical film or relatively rigid substrates include polymeric compositions containing polyamide polycarbonate polyester polyetherimide polyimide polynitrocellulose polyolefins such as polyethylene polypropylene poly ethylenevinylacetate poly 2 pentene EPDM polyionomers such as Surlyn polyphenylene oxide polyphenylene sulfide polysulfone polystyrene polyvinyl vinylidine chloride or fluoride or the like.

Alternatively rigid substrates may include any rigid substrates coated with a polymeric surface including but not limited to ceramics glass paper compositions or the like or composite substrates such as epoxy fiber glass epoxy paper laminate paper fiber glass laminate urea formaldehyde fiber glass laminate phenolic fiber glass laminate a polymeric fluorocarbon fiber glass laminate or the like or with other reinforcing components such as carbon fiber synthetic polymer fiber pigments or the like.

The preferred substrates include polycarbonates polyesters polyetherimides polyimide polyolefins or polysulfone. More preferably the substrate is a polymeric material that upon treatment with an activation agent increases hydroxyl groups on the surface of the polymeric substrate. Most preferably the polymeric substrate includes polyimides Kapton polyesters Mylar polycarbonates Lexan and polyetherimides Ultem due to their physical and thermal stability over wide temperature ranges chemical inertness and radiation resistance.

It may be necessary to pre treat the polymeric substrate in order to remove any unwanted surface contamination before the functionalization process. For example the surface of polyethylene is typically contaminated with low molecular weight wax like incompletely polymerized oligomers of ethylene the monomer for polyethylene. These poorly adherent fragments should be removed and can be easily and quickly degraded into volatile compounds and can be removed by short plasma treatment thereby leaving the polymeric surface essentially intact and minimally etched if short treatment times are used. For example argon may be used since the plasma treatment to remove contaminants and it time is relatively short thereby reducing any unwanted chemistry.

A typical cleaning procedure for example polyethylene would be to treat with Argon at a pressure of 0.01 to 0.4 Torr with a power density of about 0.5 W cmat 13.56 MHz rf on parallel plate electrodes. Once Contaminants are removed if necessary a more stable polymer surface is exposed to an activating agent to provide an increased density of hydroxyl or amine functional groups of the surface of the polymeric substrate relative to a polymeric surface without the activation treatment. 16 .

After cleaning or removal of contaminants if necessary of the surface of the polymeric substrate etching is used to increase the density of functional groups on the surface substrate. The polymeric substrate is etched to provide attraction sites for subsequent catalytic metal deposition.

Etching involves solvating the polymeric substrate with a solvent to chemically modifying the surface substrate to provide attraction sites for catalytic metal deposition. For the present invention a wide variety of etchants are satisfactory as long as selective solvation and chemical modification occurs. Typically the first step in this process is to create hydroxyl groups if they do not already exist on the support or amino groups on the support. Surface activation comprises formation of reactive hydrogen groups in a surface region of the substrate wherein the reactive hydrogen groups are selected from one or more members of the group comprising OH OOH and COOH groups.

Some polymeric surfaces may be activated by a wet process comprising hydrolysis by a dilute aqueous base such as NaOH NHOH LiOH KOH or N CH OH. Preferably the base hydrolysis of the polymeric surface is performed in aqueous NaOH at a temperature ranging from about 15 C. to about 45 C. for a time ranging from about 10 minutes to about 5 hours and more preferably from about 1 minute to one hour depending on the polymeric material.

In another embodiment the surface activation step of the present invention may comprise formation of reactive hydrogen groups in a surface region of the polymeric surface by photo oxidation which preferably comprises irradiation of the surface of the substrate with a dose of UV radiation in the presence of oxygen.

UV radiation comprises radiation in the region of the electromagnetic spectrum including wavelengths from about 100 to about 380 nm. The preferred wavelengths to which substrates are exposed in the activation step is variable and depends on the composition of the specific substrate. For example polyimides or polycarbonates are preferably irradiated with UV radiation having wavelengths from about 200 to about 300 nm.

Preferably the source of UV radiation is a low pressure quartz mercury lamp having an intensity of from about 1 to about 5 mW cm. The duration of the UV exposure is preferably from about 1 minute to about 120 minutes more preferably from about 2 to about 20 minutes. The preferred UV dose is from about 0.7 J cmto about 5 J cm more preferably from about 2 to about 5 J cm depending on the substrate and the amount of functionalization desired. These parameters are preferred for production of reactive hydrogen groups. Irradiation for longer times and or at higher intensities can result in a decrease in the amount of active hydrogen groups and an increase in the amount of other oxygen containing groups such as ketone carbonyl groups.

The activation of the polymeric surface substrate in the presence of UV radiation is believed to be a result of simultaneous excitement of molecules comprising the substrate and attack by molecular oxygen as well as ozone atomic oxygen and singlet oxygen generated from molecular oxygen by UV radiation.

As a result of the photochemically induced oxidative surface modification oxygen containing reactive hydrogen groups such as OH OOH and COOH are formed on the surface of the substrate. Preferably surface activation of the substrate occurs to a depth of about 200 to about 1000 nm below the surface of the substrate producing a surface region of the substrate containing active hydrogen groups.

It is possible to monitor the progress of the surface activation reaction by measuring the water contact angle of the substrate surface at different times during the activation step because the water contact angle decreases due to the increased hydrophilicity of the polymer surfaces.

Although the surface activation substrates has been described above with reference to oxidative activation by molecular oxygen and UV and a wet process for polyimides it is to be understood that other processes may be used to activate the polymeric surface of a substrate. For example dry processes such as oxidation in oxygen containing plasmas oxygen ion beam modification oxidation by fast atomic oxygen FAO and corona discharge may be used to produce reactive hydrogen groups on the surface of a solid substrate.

Next the activated polymeric surface having an increased number of hydroxyl groups is silylated by reacting at least some of the reactive hydrogen groups formed in the upper region of the substrate by the surface activation step with a silylating agent whereby silicon containing groups of the silylating agent become chemically bonded to polymer molecules in the surface region of the substrate. Notably the term silanization is interchangeable with the term silylation .

The silylation step according to the present invention may preferably be carried out as a vapor phase or liquid phase reaction preferably using a silylating agent containing organosilicon groups and selected from the group comprising monofunctional and polyfunctional silylating agents that include amino groups.

Preferred monofunctional silylating agents include 3 aminopropyl triethoxysilane APS dimethylsilyldimethyl amine DMSDMA 1 1 3 3 tetramethyl disilazane TMDS N N dimethylamino trimethylsilane TMSDMA N N dietlhylaminotrimethylsilane TMSDEA and hexamethyldisilazane HMDS . Preferred polyfunctional silylating agents include Bis dimethylamino methylsilane Bis dimethylamino dimethylsilane and 1 1 3 3 5 5 hexamethylcyclotrisilazane HMCTS .

Gas phase silylation is preferably carried out in a vapor of silylating agent most preferably in a nitrogen carrier gas at elevated temperatures preferably in the range of about 140 to 200 C.

Notably in the process of the present invention liquid phase silylation may also be used. The liquid phase silylation solution is comprised of two and possibly three components 1 the silylating agent 2 the transport solvent and possibly 3 a diffusion enhancer. The silylating agent is as previously outlined the chemical agent that carries the necessary silicon for binding to the activated polymeric surface. The transport solvent acts as the solvent for the silylating agent and should be relatively inert otherwise. The diffusion enhancer is a solvent that dissolves the surface of the substrate slightly allowing the silylating agent to diffuse deeper and more rapidly below the surface of the substrate preferably throughout the entire surface region containing reactive hydrogen groups.

Preferred transport solvents are those that act as a solvent for the silylating agent and are inert toward the substrate that is they do not dissolve or swell the substrate. The most preferred solvents are hydrocarbons such as ethanol and aromatic solvents such as xylene and aliphatic solvents such as n decane.

Preferably the silylating agent diffuses into the substrate to react with active hydrogen atoms throughout the activated surface region of the substrate. The diffusion rate of the silylating agent may preferably be increased by slight heating up to about 60 C. and by the addition to the silylation bath of the diffusion enhancer. For polymers such as Kapton PEEK and PET a diffusion enhancer such as n methylpyrrolidone NMP can be added. Silylation is generally carried out at 50 80 C. the substrate being immersed in a solution of silylating agent for about 3 minutes to 24 hours.

After silylation the polymeric surface is ready for deposition of metallic particles. The metal particles used in the present invention can be spheroid ellipsoid triangular or of any other geometry and preferably are deposited on the polymeric surface to form small islands. Metal particles preferably noble metals most preferably silver may be chemically reduced on a surface.

The island particles may be prepared in clean beakers by reduction of metal ions using various reducing agents. 25 . For example sodium hydroxide is added to a rapidly stirred silver nitrate solution forming a brown precipitate. Ammonium hydroxide is added to re dissolve the precipitate. The solution is cooled and dried polymeric substrates are added to the beaker followed by glucose. After stirring for 2 minutes the mixture is warmed to 30 C. After 10 15 minutes the mixture turns yellow green and becomes cloudy. A thin film of silver particles has formed on the polymeric surfaces and then the polymeric substrate is rinsed with pure water prior to use.

Alternative procedures for preparing metal particles are also available 26 30 . Silver is primarily used because of the familiar color from the longer surface plasmon absorption of silver.

Determining the correct positioning of the fluorophore attached to a target molecule relative to the metallic particle is essential for maximum fluorescence enhancement geometries distance dependence . The present inventors have previously conducted calculations for several probes. Similar calculations may also be done for many other commercially available fluorophores. By controlling the fluorophore environment such as modifying the pH the functional properties of the metallized polymeric surface fluorophore sensor in terms of enhanced fluorescence and improved photostability may be determined. After each environmental change spectroscopic data may be acquired analyzed and assessed in terms of the probe functionality in various nano sites. Such measurements will allow immediate comparison of the fluorophore and the relative distance that display substantial enhancement due to the appropriate proximity to the metal surface and those which are not affected i.e. too far from metal surface and can be used for fluorescence sensors on the nanometer scale.

Once the appropriate distance is determine between the fluorophore and metallic particle the distance may be maintained by using Langmuir Blodgett films with fatty acid spacers. The fatty acids may be from natural sources including concentrated cuts or fractionations or synthetic alkyl carboxylic acids. The Langmuir Blodgett technique provides an accurate means of controlling film thickness and surface uniformity and allows an accurate control of the metal fluorophore distance.

Further metal fluorophore distances may be achieved by using polymer films. Examples of the polymer include but not limited to polyvinyl alcohol PVA . Absorbance measurements and ellipsometry may be used to determine polymer film thickness. One type of polymer films may include spin coated polymer films.

The film spacer layer may be one or multiple layers formed from an oxide. The oxide layer may be formed from a deposition technique such as vapor deposition. Preferably the oxide is a silicon oxide more preferably SiO. The vapor deposition of SiOis a well established technique for the controlled deposition of a variety of substrates.

Further proteins or oligonucleotides may be bound to silver surfaces or particles by using amino or sulfhydryl groups using methods known in the art. The length of the complimentary captured protein or oligonucleotide within the enhancement region 40 500 can also be determined by the metal enhanced fluorescence experiments with the Langmuir Blodgett films and spin coated PVA as discussed above. Fluorophore metal distances that provide maximum fluorescence enhancement are determined empirically and are thus used in determining the amino acid or DNA sequence length to use for capturing the sequences so that fluorescence of same is optimally enhanced.

Detection devices applicable for detecting fluorescence emissions include but not limited to visual inspection digital CCD cameras video cameras photographic film or the use of current instrumentation such as laser scanning devices fluorometers luminometers photodiodes quantum counters plate readers epifluorescence microscopes scanning microscopes confocal microscopes capillary electrophoresis detectors or other light detector capable of detecting the presence location intensity excitation and emission spectra fluorescence polarization fluorescence lifetime and other physical properties of the fluorescent signal.

A polycarbonate film PC was modified using chemical modification for silver deposition and therefore metal enhanced fluorescence. Base catalyzed hydrolysis of the PC film readily created additional surface functionality for silver island film deposition. Polycarbonate was chosen as the polymer of interest due to its widespread use in biotechnology 6 12 13 .

Metal enhanced fluorescence is known to be a through space phenomenon where the close proximity of fluorophores to silver nanostructures results in quenching of the emission 1 2 5 . The fluorophore was positioned about 4 nm from the metallic surface using a labeled protein namely FITC HSA. The disclosed results clearly show that plastics can indeed be modified for silver deposition and notable enhancements in fluorescence emission can be achieved from the plastic substrates similar to that observed from glass 5 .

Polycarbonate PC films with 50 pm thickness were cut into 75 25 mm pieces and placed onto Fisher brand glass microscope slides in order to provide support for the films. PC films were hydrolyzed in 2 M aqueous NaOH solution for 1 minute and rinsed with deionized water. PC films were then transferred onto new glass slides and finally dried under a stream of cooled air. The hydrolyzed PC films were silanized with a 2 v v solution of 3 aminopropyl triethoxysilane APS in denatured ethanol for 2 hours. The APS coated PC films were removed from the solution and rinsed several times with ethanol and deionized water to remove the unbound APS. Silver Island Films SiFs were formed on half of the silanized PC films the non silvered half is used as a control similar to our previous procedure 3 5 . SiFs were also formed on virgin PC films i.e. unmodified films.

In previous reports of metal enhanced fluorescence MEF silvered glass or quartz surfaces were coated with fluorophore labeled protein 5 . This same experimental format has been adopted for two main reasons the first being that the protein coverage with Human Serum Albumin HSA is known to bind to silvered surfaces and indeed forms a monolayer 4 5 and secondly the dimensions of the protein being such that the protein allows for a mean 4 nm separation of the silver and the fluorophore MEF being a through space phenomenon 1 2 5 .

Binding the FITC HSA to the PC films was accomplished by soaking in a 10 M FITC HSA solution for 2 hours followed by rinsing with water to remove the unbound material. PC films were then transferred onto new glass slides. Both the unsilvered and silvered PC films were coated with labeled HSA which is known to passively absorb to noble metal surfaces and form a 4 nm thick protein monolayer allowing us to study the fluorescence spectral properties of noncovalent FITC HSA complexes in the absence and presence of SiFs. By equally coating a PC film with FITC HSA determination of the enhancement factor benefit obtained from using the silver i.e. Intensity on Silver Intensity on PC film given that both surfaces are known to have an equal monolayer coverage 5 .

All absorption measurements were performed using a HP 8453 UV Vis spectrophotometer. Fluorescence measurements on PC films were performed by placing the films on a stationary stage equipped with a fiber optic mount on a 15 cm long arm normal to sample . The output of the fiber was connected to an Ocean Optics HD2000 spectrofluorometer to measure the fluorophore emission spectra. The excitation was from the second harmonic 470 nm of the diode pumped Nd YV04 laser compact laser pointer design output power 30 mW at angle of 45 degrees. The emission was observed through a 500 nm long pass filter Edmund Scientific .

The real co or photographs of FITC HSA on non silvered PC films and PC films with SiFs were taken with a Olympus Digital camera C 740 3.2 Mega Pixel 10 Optical Zoom using the same long pass filter that was used for the emission spectra. Time resolved intensity decays were measured using reverse start stop time correlated single photon counting TCSPC 14 with a Becker and Hickl Gmbh 630 SPC PC card and an un amplified MCP PMT. Vertically polarized excitation at 440 nm was obtained using a pulsed laser diode 1 MHz repetition rate. The intensity decays were analyzed in terms of the multi exponential model 

The values of and were determined by non linear least squares impulse reconvolution with a goodness of fit criterion. 14 

Initial attempts at directly depositing silver island films SiFs onto plastic substrates resulted in relatively poor silver attachment to the virgin polycarbonate PC surface FIG. Left. However after etching the PC film in 2 M NaOH for 1 min followed by silanization providing an amino coating on the surface using APS 3 aminopropyl triethoxysilane silver island films were readily formed FIG. right and could not be washed from the surface. It is theorized that the strong base provided additional surface hydroxyl groups for APS attachment by hydrolyzing the PC film a procedure previously reported by Dauginet et al 12 . For the thin films used in this report immersion in 2 M hydroxide for 1 minute was found to be sufficient for SiF preparation on the plastic surface where the SiFs have a maximum optical density around 0.3 consistent with previous reports 3 5 . The plasmon absorption band for the SiFs was also found to be slightly red shifted on the PC film as compared to that typically observed on glass substrates as shown in 3 5 .

To test the silver coated plastic surfaces for metal enhanced fluorescence unmodified and modified films were equally coated with fluorescein labeled HSA Human Serum Albumin as shown in where the FITC HSA has been shown to be an ideal labeled protein 3 4 5 with regard to positioning the fluorophore a couple of nanometers from the silver nanoparticles to facilitate metal enhanced fluorescence 1 2 .

The metal enhanced fluorescence from the silver coated modified plastic film was found to be approximately 7 times greater than the modified PC film but with no SiFs i.e. the control sample . This relatively large increase in emission intensity could also be seen visually through the same long pass filter as used in . As the 470 nm laser excitation is moved from the unsilvered plastic Middle to the silvered plastic side Bottom a dramatic increase in fluorescein emission was seen.

Metal enhanced intensity accompanied fluorescence resulted in both increased emission intensity accompanied by a reduction in fluorophore lifetime i.e. a radiative modification 1 5 . shows the reduction in lifetime on the SiFs as plastic. The amplitude weighted lifetime was found to decrease from 2.58 ns on the unsilvered plastic to 1.68 ns on the silvered plastic and Table I.

The photostability of the FITC HSA was measured on both the unsilvered and silvered modified PC film . Using the same laser power significantly more fluorescence was observed from the silvered plastic by simply considering the integrated area under the respective curves FIG. Top. However when the laser power on the silver surface was attenuated to give the same initial emission intensity as observed on the unsilvered but modified plastic similar photostability characteristics FIG. bottom were noticed.

By base hydrolysis of thin polycarbonate films more surface functionality for silver deposition was provided. Subsequently by coating these silvered surfaces with a labeled protein metal enhanced fluorescence was observed in an approximate 7 fold increase in fluorescein emission intensity observed from modified and silvered plastic as compared to a modified but unsilvered PC film. Further by comparing the emission intensity from the virgin PC film to the modified and silvered film a substantial increase in fluorophore emission intensity can be realized. Given the widespread use of plastic substrates in fluorescence based clinical assays and in drug discovery e.g. HTS well plates then simple surface modifications of plastics could facilitate silver depositions for metal enhanced fluorescence. Alternatively unmodified hydrophilic plastics with an abundance of surface hydroxyl or even amino groups 15 could be ideal for silver deposition and alleviate the need for surface plastic modification. In addition surface plastic modification using specific light wavelengths to break covalent bonds and therefore provide for additional polymer surface functionality will be applicable to modification according to the present invention. This reagentless approach could readily be used to prepare plastics for silver deposition.

The contents of all references cited herein are hereby incorporated by reference herein for all purposes.

2. J. R. Lakowicz 2001 Radiative decay engineering Biophysical and biomedical applications Appl. Biochem. 298 1 24.

3. J. R. Lakowicz Y. Shen S. D Auria J. Malicka J. Fang Z. Grcyzynski and I. Gryczynski 2002 Radiative decay engineering 2. Effects of silver island films on fluorescence intensity lifetimes and resonance energy transfer Anal.Biochem. 301 261 277.

4. C. D. Geddes H. Cao I. Gryczynski Z. Gryczynski J. Fang and J. R. Lakowicz 2003 Metal enhanced fluorescence due to silver colloids on a planar surface potential applications of lndocyanine green to in vivo imaging. J Phys Chem A 107 3443 3449.

5. C. D. Geddes K. Aslan I. Gryczynski J. Malicka and J. R. Lakowicz 2004 Noble Metal Nanostructure for Metal Enhanced Fluorescence Reviews in Fluorescence 2004 Ed. C. D. Geddes pp. 365401 Springer New York.

6. Y. Liu D. Ganser A. Schneider P. Grodzinski N. Kroutchinina 2001 Microfabricated Polycarbonate CE Devices for DNA Analysis Anal Chem 73 4196 4201.

8. M. A. Roberts J. S. Rossier P. Bercier H. Girault H. 1997 UV Laser Machined Polymer Substrates for the Development of Microdiagnostic Systems Anal Chem 69 2035 2042.

9. L. Martynova L. E. Locascio M. Gaitan G. W. Kramer R. G. Christensen W. MacCrehan 1997 Fabrication of plastic microfluid channels by imprinting methods Anal Chem 69 4783 4789.

10. J. Xu L. Locascio M. Gaitan C. S. Lee 2000 Room Temperature Imprinting Method for Plastic Microchannel Fabrication Anal Chem 72 1930 1933.

11. R.M. McCormick R. J. Nelson M. G. Alonso Amigo D. J. Benvegnu H. H. Hooper 1997 Microchannel Electrophoretic Separations of DNA in Injection Molded Plastic Substrates Anal Chem 69 2626 2630.

12. L. Dauginet A. S. Duwez R. Legras S. Demoustier Champagne Surface Modification of Polycarbonate and Poly ethyleneterephthalate Films and Membranes by Polyelectrolyte Deposition Langmuir 17 3952 3957.

13. Y. Xu B. Vaidya A. B. Patel S. M. Ford R. L. McCarley S. A. Soper 2003 Solid Phase Reversible Immobilization in Microfluidic Chips for the Purification of Dye Labeled DNA Sequencing Fragments Anal Chem 75 2975 2984.

15. W. Ward T. J. McCarthy 1989 In Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Engineering ed. Mark H. F. Bikales N. M. Overberger C. G. Menges G. Kroschwitz J. I. Eds. John Wiley and Sons New York 1989 suppl. vol. pp. 674 689.

16. D M. Coates S. L Kaplan . 1996 Modification of Polymeric Material Surfaces with Plasmas Chapter IV of Plasma Processing of Advanced Materials edited by George A. Collins and Donald J. Rej MRS Bulletin.

17. A. Wokaun H. P. Lutz A. P. King U. P. Wild and R. R. Ernst 1983 . Energy transfer in surface enhanced fluorescence J. Chem. Phys. 79 1 509 514.

18. W. R. Holland and D. G. Hall 1985 . Waveguide mode enhancement of molecular fluorescence. Optics Letts. 10 8 414 416.

19. A. M. Glass P. F. Liao J. G. Bergman and D. H. Olson 1980 . Interaction of metal particles with adsorbed dye molecules absorption and luminescence. Optics Letts. 5 9 368 370.

20. W. L. Barnes 1998 . Fluorescence near interfaces The role of photonic mode density J. Modem Optics 45 4 661 699.

21. J. R. Lakowicz Y. Shen S. D Auria J. Malicka J. Fang Z. Gryczynski and I. Gryczynski 2002 . Radiative Decay Engineering 2. Effects of silver island films on fluorescence intensity Lifetimes and Resonance energy transfer Anal. Biochem. 301 261 277.

22. I. Gryczynski J. Malicka L. Gryczynski C. D. Geddes and J. R. Lakowicz 2002 The CFS engineers the intrinsic radiative decay rate of low quantum yield fluorophores J. FJuoescence 12 1 11 13.

23. J. R. Lakowicz I. Gryczynski Y. B. Shen J. Malicka and Z. Gryczynski 2001 . Intensified fluorescence Photonics Spectra 35 10 96 104.

25. L. Rivas S. Sanchez Cortes J. V. Garcia Ramos and G. Morcillo Growth of Silver Colloidal Particles Obtained by Citrate Reduction to Increase the Ramen Enhancement Factor Langmuir 17 3 574 577 2001 .

26. N. Shirtcliffe U. Nickeland S. Schneider Reproducible preparation of silver sols with small particle size using borohydride reduction For use as nuclei for preparation of large particles J. Colloid Interface Sci. 211 1 122 129 1999 .

27. I. Pastoriza Santos and L. M. Liz Marzan Reduction of silver nanoparticles in DMF. Formation of monolayers and stable colloids Pure Appl. Chem. 72 1 2 83 90 2000 .

28. I. Pastoriza Santos C. Serra Rodriquez and L. M. Liz Marzan Self assembly of silver particle monolayers on glass from Agsolutions in DMF J. Colloid Interface Sci. 221 2 236 241 2000 

29. R. Bright M. D. Musick and M. J. Natan Preparation and characterization of Ag colloid monolayers Langmuir 14 20 5695 5701 1998 .

30. F. Ni and T. M. Cotton Chemical procedure for preparing surface enhanced Raman scattering active silver films Anal. Chem. 58 14 3159 5163 1986 .

