---

title: Systems and methods for monitoring thermal growth and controlling clearances, and maintaining health of turbo machinery applications
abstract: A system and method for determining thermal growth of motor or engine parts to thereupon control the clearance of motor or engine fan blades is disclosed herein. In addition, a system and method for monitoring the health of a turbine engine, its components and sub-components is also described herein. The system(s) and method(s) described herein permit continuous monitoring during the life of the engine for radial clearances and blade and rotor vibration problems, which will assist in correcting and retaining performance for a longer on-wing time in operation. In addition, inconsistent engine-to-engine performance variations due to component tolerances, engine operation characteristics, and operation during extremes in ambient temperatures can be eliminated or significantly minimized when employing the system(s) and method(s) described herein.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07455495&OS=07455495&RS=07455495
owner: United Technologies Corporation
number: 07455495
owner_city: Hartford
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050816
---
The U.S. Government has certain rights in this application pursuant to Contract No. F33615 98 C 28012 awarded by the Department of the Air Force.

The present invention generally relates to a system and method of clearance control of motor or engine fan blades and more particularly relates to a system and method of determining thermal growth of motor or engine parts to thereupon control the clearance of motor or engine fan blades.

The knowledge and control of radial growth of turbo machinery components has long been a stumbling block on the way to achieving higher efficiency and stability levels demanded by the designers of gas turbine engines pumps and compressors. This undesirable situation is driven in part by lack of reliable accurate and affordable sensors for measuring radial growth. Alternatively the radial growth can be computed using a mathematical model that relates growth to various turbomachine measured and otherwise obtained parameters. Numerous attempts were made in the past to devise such an algorithm. However none of the known algorithms delivered required steady state and transient accuracy ability to calibrate the equations to high fidelity data and formulation suitable for implementation in a digital computer.

Imperfect control of the clearance between a turbine engine fan blade and case can result in either the clearance being too loose or the clearance being too tight resulting in excessive rubs. In either instance imperfect clearance results in loss of performance e.g. engine efficiency thrust and or violation of the engine operating limits e.g. exhaust gas temperature overshoot and or reduced compressor stability. Standard practice has been to design a clearance control system to prefer loose clearance over tight clearance which may also result in damage to the blades and case. Some engines such as for example the PW4000 use an open loop clearance control system that sacrifices significant performance in comparison with a perfect clearance control system. Other engines such as for example the V2500 use a closed loop system that relies on crudely modeled clearances and therefore sacrifices less performance but still falls short of ideal clearance control.

Improved accuracy and reliability in estimating tip clearances will also enable the clearance control system to be active during those parts of an airplane mission that are more likely to experience abrupt changes in operating conditions. For example a typical active clearance control system is traditionally deactivated during airplane takeoff where tip clearances are particularly hard to predict due to rapidly changing engine operating conditions. This approach worked well in the past for the cases where takeoff constituted a relatively small portion of the overall airplane mission and the engine stability margins were conservatively high. In contrast takeoff fuel economy gains importance for the engines designed for short haul aircraft applications such as for example PW6000 designed for A318 application. The ability to deploy active clearance control during takeoff also increases the exhaust gas temperature margin which otherwise diminishes with increased clearance and helps to avoid clearance induced stability loss. Thus it is desirable to further improve clearance control accuracy to in turn improve engine performance while maintaining all operating limits compressor stability and ensuring reliable rub free operation throughout the airplane mission.

The principal difficulty in modeling clearances for a closed loop system resides in modeling the thermal growths of the engine components not in modeling the mechanical strains which are relatively easy to calculate. Thermal growths are far more difficult to model because the physical configurations of the engine components and the multiple time varying influences to which those components are subjected i.e. throttle transients multiple fluid streams of different and time varying temperatures flow rates etc. complicate the problem of modeling the heat transfer and energy storage phenomenon.

For instance engine components each experience thermal growth at their own respective pace due to their location with the engine housing varying operating conditions including temperatures shaft speeds fluid stream exposure. As a result one component may experience a greater amount of thermal growth than another component such that one area of the gas turbine engine may experience a greater amount of thermal growth than another area. In turn the internal wall of the engine housing opposite these varying areas of thermal growth on the gas turbine engine will also experience varying amounts of thermal growth due to the inconsistent heat transfer occurring between engine components. As a result one area of the internal wall of the engine housing may exhibit a greater amount of thermal growth and correspondingly a smaller clearance as opposed to another area of the engine housing. At that point the obstacles pertaining to modeling the heat transfer and energy storage phenomenon of a gas turbine engine become more apparent.

To that end there is a need for systems and methods directed to controlling thermal growth maintaining clearance control and monitoring the health of turbomachinery applications.

In accordance with the present systems and methods disclosed herein a method of controlling clearance in a turbomachine broadly comprises providing a closed loop sensed active clearance control system comprising three or more microwave based sensors disposed adjacent to and opposing one or more components and sub components of the turbomachine determining from a measurement an actual amount of thermal growth on one or more components and the sub components using the active clearance control system determining from a measurement an actual amount of clearance between each of the one or more components and sub components and a wall adjacent to and opposing the one or more components and sub components where thermal growth is present using the active clearance control system and controlling the amount of clearance based on a difference between a desired amount of clearance and the actual amount of clearance for each of the one or more components and sub components as determined by the thermal growth using the active clearance control system.

A method for monitoring the health of a turbomachine broadly comprises providing a closed loop sensed active time of arrival monitoring system disposed in a wall adjacent to and opposing one or more components and sub components of the turbomachine determining from a measurement a speed of a rotor of a turbine engine of the turbomachine determining from the rotor speed an expected time of arrival of the one or more components and sub components using the active time of arrival monitoring system determining from a measurement an actual time of arrival of the one or more components or sub components at one or more positions using the active time of arrival monitoring system comparing the actual time of arrival with the expected time of arrival of the one or more components and sub components using the active health monitoring system determining from the comparison an absence of or a presence of a change in time of arrival of the one or more components and sub components using the active time of arrival monitoring system and assessing from the comparison the health of the one or more components and sub components using the active time of arrival monitoring system.

A system for controlling clearance in a turbomachine broadly comprises means for determining from a measurement an actual amount of thermal growth on one or more components and the sub components using the active clearance control system means for determining from a measurement an actual amount of clearance between each of the one or more components and sub components and a wall adjacent to and opposing the one or more components and sub components where thermal growth is present using the active clearance control system and means for controlling the amount of clearance based on a difference between a desired amount of clearance and the actual amount of clearance for each of the one or more components and sub components as determined by the thermal growth using the active clearance control system.

A turbine engine system broadly comprises a turbine engine including a case and blades rotatable within the case means for determining from a measurement an actual amount of thermal growth on one or more components and the sub components using the active clearance control system means for determining from a measurement an actual amount of clearance between each of the one or more components and sub components and a wall adjacent to and opposing the one or more components and sub components where thermal growth is present using the active clearance control system and means for controlling the amount of clearance based on a difference between a desired amount of clearance and the actual amount of clearance for each of the one or more components and sub components as determined by the thermal growth using the active clearance control system.

The details of one or more embodiments of the invention are set forth in the accompanying drawings and the description below. Other features objects and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the description and drawings and from the claims.

A system and method for determining thermal growth of motor or engine parts to thereupon control the clearance of motor or engine fan blades is disclosed herein. In addition a system and method for monitoring the health of a turbine engine its components and sub components is also described herein. Increasing radial clearances caused by the blade tips rubbing into the outer airseals and or erosion are common root causes of a loss of engine performance. Early detection of problems with turbo machine blades and or rotors enables avoidance of component failures. The system s and method s described herein permit continuous monitoring during the life of the engine for radial clearances and blade and rotor vibration problems which will assist in correcting and retaining performance for a longer on wing time in operation. In addition inconsistent engine to engine performance variations due to component tolerances engine operation characteristics and operation during extremes in ambient temperatures can be eliminated or significantly minimized when employing the system s and method s described herein.

The exemplary system and method of use for determining thermal growth of motor or engine parts to thereupon control the clearance of motor or engine fan blades will be described first. In one embodiment the sensing system utilizes microwave energy directed through a passage within a sensing body or probe out towards the tips of a rotating blade to measure an actual or real time radial clearance as the blade passes by an electromagnetic field generated in the vicinity at the exit of the passage. The system will process the feedback signals and output data to accurately turn on and or off an actuation system capable of responding to input from the controller for modulating the radial clearance between the rotating blades and static components of the turbine.

The system may act as a stand alone component in a turbomachinery application or incorporated into a gas turbine Electronic Engine Control EEC system such as but not limited to a Full Authority Digital Engine Control system FADEC and the like that oversees the entire turbomachinery application e.g. a civilian commercial or military aircraft. In either format the EEC and the system are directly linked in order to receive information contemporaneously concerning all engine performance parameters related to the turbomachinery application. The EEC may provide information including but not limited to determining fluid streams that exchange heat with a component or a sub component of the turbomachine and providing temperature s and flow rate s for each fluid stream that exchanges heat with a component and sub component determining component and sub component performance parameter correlations such as temperatures pressures and shaft speeds determining component and sub component heat transfer performance parameters such as shaft speeds pressures temperatures and determining the steady state growth of the turbomachine components and sub components each as a weighted average of growths resulting from thermal exchange with fluid streams of varying temperatures flow rates and thermo physical properties where weighting factors include heat transfer performance parameters and the like.

The system is capable of simultaneously measuring radial clearance and time of arrival of each blade as the blade passes by a microwave air path blade tip clearance system. Multiple microwave sensors of the system are positioned in a predetermined circumferential spacing around a blade row. The microwave air path blade tip clearance system measure and provide information concerning how the position clearance space and time or arrival vary for each blade within a row. Time of arrival should directly correlate with engine motor revolutions per minute rpm provided there is no blade vibration present. The system ensures this correlation by accurately measuring variations in blade time of arrival at multiple angle locations and comparing these variations to expected time of arrival measurements at known speeds. The result is that tighter operating clearances can be implemented with confidence throughout the operating regime or cycle of the engine.

Referring specifically now to a system for determining thermal growth of motor or engine parts to thereupon control the clearance of motor or engine fan blades is depicted. As represented flight conditions and engine power setting data may be relayed to a clearance request logic algorithm of an EEC system containing system . Algorithm may process data and transfer data to a junction where a measured tip clearance data may be received from a turbine engine . The combined data and may be transferred from junction to a closed loop compensation algorithm that may control via a command a valve not shown utilized for diverting an auxiliary or cooling air flow from a fan stream onto an engine case not shown housing turbine engine for cooling the engine case in order to provide a desired clearance between the case and the engine blades. System provides the measured tip clearance data using the system and methods which will now be described in greater detail.

Referring now to microwave sensing system is generally disposed within a non rotating gas turbine engine case structure and its components. System may be and preferably is in direct communication with a gas turbine engine generally including a fan a compressor a turbine and a modulation system for cooling the engine case which will be discussed in greater detail. Compressor may be a low pressure compressor or a high pressure compressor depending upon whether a low pressure or high pressure turbine is being utilized. One or more rows of blades not shown may be mounted on rotors not shown employed in fan compressor and turbine or other area s of turbine engine .

Microwave sensing system may generally comprise a controller a microwave source a signal buffer a processor a record buffer and a waveguide multiplexor in communication with the microwave air path clearance system disposed within engine in addition to other electronic components known to one of ordinary skill in the art. As mentioned system may stand alone or may be incorporated into an EEC . In either embodiment system receives information concerning engine performance parameters and other related data transferred from one or more engine sensors to controller . As system monitors the thermal growth of the components and sub components of engine system modulates the flow of one or more fluid streams in and around the housing of engine using a modulation system comprising for example a torque motor and an actuator that are in communication with both engine and controller .

Residing in controller is the control software that includes but is not limited to logic that determines high pressure turbine clearance and a control algorithm that determines the angle of actuator in response to the difference between the desired and the actual clearance. Controller directs directly and or indirectly the performance and interaction of the components within system and between system and engine .

Generally controller sends a command to processor to initiate determining the location of a component or sub component for example a blade and the measurement of the blade s clearance to the wall adjacent to and opposing the blade. Controller may contemporaneously send a command to waveguide multiplexor to initiate the microwave air path blade tip clearance system integrated within a wall adjacent to and opposing one or more blades of the rows of blades of the rotors configured within fan compressor and turbine . The microwave air path blade tip clearance system communicates with multiplexor and the other components using coaxial cables or other similar devices for transmitting signals and or commands and or transferring data. Processor initiates a signal transfer to signal buffer . Controller may send a clear command to signal buffer and or initiate a frequency selection command prior to the signal transfer being initiated. Signal buffer may forward frequency selection to microwave source where source generates an amount of microwave radiation sufficient for determining the location of a blade and measuring the clearance of the blade.

The microwave radiation generated is relayed to the microwave air path blade tip clearance system as microwaves through a source of waveguide multiplexor . The microwave air path blade tip clearance system is described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 818 242 to Grzybowski et al. assigned to United Technologies Corporation which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Referring specifically now to a microwave air path or blade tip clearance sensor system for use in the systems and methods described herein comprises one or more microwave air path clearance sensors in which each sensor is connected to one end of a coaxial cable e.g. a standard coaxial microwave transmission line having a characteristic impedance of approximately 50 ohms. The coaxial cable allows a transmit or excitation microwave signal to be transmitted to the sensor and a receive or return or reflected microwave signal to be received from the sensor . The coaxial cable is connected on the other end to a clearance thickness circuit which provides and receives the microwave signals to and from the sensor respectively. Other coaxial cables or transmission mediums and or impedances may be used if desired.

One or more sensors are mounted in a housing or casing of an engine. The inner most region of the engine housing comprises an abradable seal i.e. a seal capable of rubbing or wearing away made of an abradable high temperature electrically conductive metal and a seal back plate made of a high temperature electrically conductive material e.g. Inco comprising nickel cobalt and steel . The seal and the plate each have a thickness of about 0.1 inches 2.54 mm . Other thicknesses and materials may be used for the seal and plate . The remaining outer portion of the housing is indicated by a numeral and may comprise many sections and layers of materials as is known. Other materials for the seal may be used if desired. Also the regions may be made of the same material or more than one material if desired.

The sensors are recessed within an inner surface of the abradable seal by a predetermined recess distance or thickness D e.g. 25 50 mils 0.635 1.27 mm . Other distances may be used for the distance D if desired. As the seal wears the recess distance D decreases. To avoid blade contact with sensors the distance D should be set to be greater than the maximum distance that the seal will be allowed to wear before replacement of the seal .

Sensors detect the amount of wear of the seal which occurs i.e. the reduction in the thickness D. Also sensors detect the air path clearance G between a tip of a blade and the inner surface of the seal as discussed hereinafter .

Referring specifically now to each sensor comprises a sensing assembly a spark plug assembly and an electrical connecting wire connecting the two assemblies . The sensing assembly comprises a center conductor which is electrically connected to a center conductor of the coaxial cable as discussed hereinafter . Outside and concentric with the conductor is an insulator made of a high temperature ceramic such as alumina. Outside and concentric with the insulator is an electrically grounded outer conductor . The sensing assembly is connected to the plate by screw threads and connected to the spark plug assembly by threads . Instead of the threads each sensor may be inserted through a hole in the plate and seal and the outer portion of the engine case may be partially threaded to accept the sensor . Each sensor may be fitted with a seal such as air tight threading tape or a gasket at an interface between the upper surface of the plate and the assembly so as to minimize leakage through the seal . Other techniques may be used to minimize leakage if desired. Also the inner conductor the insulator and the outer conductor may be bonded together with an adhesive such as a ceramic adhesive to minimize movement. Alternatively the length L of the outer conductor may be long enough such that it extends out beyond the outer region of the casing . Other techniques for affixing each sensor into the seal may be used if desired.

The dimensions of the inner conductor the insulator and the outer conductor may be selected in conjunction with the choice of microwave frequency to 1 avoid higher order radial and circumferential propagating electromagnetic modes 2 suppress electromagnetic radiation from the open end of the sensor facing the blades 3 reduce direct coupling between the inner conductor and the outer conductor which would reduce fringing electric fields and or 4 maximize the sensitivity of each sensor to the blades over the expected range of air gaps G without introducing excessive losses. Such characteristics are not required but provide best performance.

For example for a 20 GHz sensor excitation the outer conductor is a hollow tapered cylinder and has outer diameters Dc Dc of about 0.9 cm and 1.5 cm respectively. The larger outer diameter Dc provides a stop for the insertion of the sensor . If desired the outer conductor may have one common outer diameter Dc instead of two different outer diameters Dc Dc. The inner diameter Dc of the outer conductor near the conductor which is also the outer diameter of the insulator tapers down from a value of about 6 mm down to about 5 mm. The center conductor is a solid tapered cylinder and has a diameter Dc which is also the inner diameter of the insulator of about 4 mm at the widest point and tapers to about 3 mm. The length of a straight portion is about 1 mm and the angle of taper is about 30 degrees from the vertical. The taper helps keep the inner conductor and insulator from falling out of the outer conductor . The overall length L of the outer conductor is about 17 mm. Other lengths angles and dimensions may be used if desired.

The insulator protrudes toward the blades a distance of about 1 mil 0.0254 mm from a lower face of the outer conductor . Also the inner conductor protrudes toward the blades a distance of about 2 mils 0.05 mm from the lower face of the outer conductor . Such protrusion of the inner conductor and the insulator is not required but helps increase the sensing range of the sensor by increasing the extension of the fringing electric fields.

Other dimensions and shapes for the parts may be used if desired. Generally the higher the excitation frequency the smaller the allowable dimensions. Also in general the larger the surface area of the face of the conductor facing the blades the more intense and the larger the extension of the fringing fields and the more resolution and sensitivity to changes in seal thickness and air gap clearance.

The connecting wire is an electrically conductive wire which extends from a small insertion hole in the top side of the conductor to the bottom side of the spark plug assembly . A region around the wire between the wire and the inner diameter of the outer conductor is air. The wire is about 7 mm long and has a diameter of about 0.64 mm 8 mils . Other lengths and diameters may be used if desired for the wire provided the impedance is substantially matched to the connecting parts . Also the region may be filled with a material other than air such as a high temperature ceramic material designed for substantially matched impedance. Alternatively the conductor may have a conductive portion protruding upwardly which connects to the conductor . Other conductive connecting interfaces may be used to connect the spark plug assembly to the sensing assembly if desired.

The spark plug assembly may be a K Connector Part No. K102F made by Wiltron or an equivalent 50 ohm connector. The assembly is about 8 mm long and has an outer diameter Ds of about 5 mm. The assembly is secured by the screw threads into the upper portion of the outer conductor . The assembly comprises an outer conductor or spark plug a center conductor a cylindrical conductor bead which is slid into and in electrical contact with the spark plug and an insulator between the center conductor and the conductor bead . The spark plug assembly is designed to maintain an impedance which substantially matches that of the coaxial cable i.e. 50 ohms . The center conductor is cylindrical and an upper portion of the conductor protrudes about 5 mm upwardly from the bead and the insulator . A region around the protruded portion between the portion and an inner diameter Ds of the spark plug is air. The inner diameter Ds is about 3 mm. Materials other than air may be used if desired provided the impedance is matched. Also the center conductor is hollow at each end to provide insertion holes for connection to other conductors. The lower insertion hole of the conductor has the wire inserted therein and the upper insertion hole has a center conductor of the coaxial cable inserted therein. Other lengths shapes dimensions and diameters of the spark plug assembly or any portion thereof may be used if desired.

The coaxial cable comprises the center conductor surrounded by an electrical insulator . The insulator is surrounded by an electrically grounded shield conductor which is surrounded by an outer insulator . A portion of the shield is folded over the outer insulator and an end cap is secured to the shield and to the end of the cable . The end cap has an insulating portion which the conductor passes through and a conductive portion . The conductive portion of the end cap has a flange extending radially therefrom and a nut is rotatably mounted to the flange . Also there is a conductive washer disposed on the end cap and connected to the conductor . The threaded inner portion of the nut is screw threaded onto the threaded upper outer portion of the spark plug by the screw threads . When the coaxial cable is connected to each sensor the conductor extends into the upper insertion hole of the protruding portion of the conductor . The drawing in are not drawn to scale.

The impedance seen by the coaxial cable from the conductor to the inner conductor is substantially 50 ohms. Instead of the sensing assembly the spark plug assembly and the connecting wire any other configurations dimensions shapes and materials to that described herein may be used to make up each sensor or any portion s thereof provided it is a coaxial microwave transmission media having an impedance substantially matched to that of the coaxial cable .

Referring now to the microwave energy passes through each sensor strikes and then reflects off of a tip of one or more blades as reflected microwave energy at one or more of blade tip positions indicated. For example the blade tips travel about the rotor the blade may be found at any one of the five 5 positions at various time intervals. Each reflected microwaves may possess a different phase when compared to the microwave radiation generated depending upon the position and distance of the blade tip relative to the microwave air path blade tip clearance sensor . As illustrated each reflected microwave possesses a different phase relative to the reference as a result of being reflected from a different location on the rotating blade tip back towards the sensor. The distance between the tip of a blade and the wall adjacent to and opposing the blade may be mathematically calculating by comparing the energy and phase shift of the reflected waveform to that of the reference signal.

Microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors may operate asynchronously or alternately be linked or multiplexed to read the clearance of each blade relative to the wall adjacent to and opposing the blades. Multiple microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors may be spaced circumferentially to ascertain any non uniformity in the clearance so that system can modulates the flow of one or more fluid streams in and around the housing of engine using a modulation system comprising for example a torque motor and an actuator and control the clearance to a uniform distribution.

Microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors receive the reflected microwaves and relay the information via coaxial cables to a signal processor of waveguide multiplexor . The reflected microwaves may be translated by signal processor into phase data using one or more mathematical algorithms as known to one of ordinary skill in the art. Signal processor of waveguide multiplexor may relay the phase data as a signal to signal buffer where buffer may temporarily store signal before relaying signal to processor . Processor may employ one or more mathematical algorithms to determine the location and clearance measurement of blade based upon the phase data. Once determined processor may relay the location and clearance measurement data to controller . Controller temporarily stores the location and clearance measurement data of blade and of all of the rows of blades of the rotors being measured using a data transfer to record buffer . In the meantime controller relays the location and clearance measurement data including other pertinent and relevant data acquired as an output to the turbo machinery application itself. Record buffer may temporarily store the location and clearance measurement data for each component and sub component measured or alternatively or in addition to may archive data . Such an archival and retrieval system can enable a user to monitor the location and clearance information of the components and sub components during their lifetime of use.

In another embodiment a system and method for monitoring the health of the components and sub components of a turbine engine is described herein. The system and method described herein detects variations in blade passing frequencies thus indicating any of the following damage or failure conditions that may be present.

Referring again generally to microwave sensing system may also be employed to monitor the health of one or more components and sub components of the turbomachinery application. The above referenced damage or failure conditions may be discovered through analyzing the waveforms of reflected microwaves returning from the components and sub components for example one or more blades and or monitoring the time of arrival as each component and sub component for example one or more blades passes by and reflects microwaves emanating from microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors in succession.

System may measure a first time of arrival by initiating microwave source as described and reflecting microwaves off of one or more components or sub components for example one or more blades. As depicted in the representation of a plurality of microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors may log the first time of arrival measurement from reflected microwaves off of blade at a first time measured in milliseconds relative to an index. A second sensors may log a second time of arrival measurement from the same blade at a second time relative to an index. The plot of depicts a how time of arrival may be ascertained from the reflected microwave from the microwave sensors and . System then compares the first time of arrival measurement with the second time of arrival measurement. Based upon this comparison system detects the absence or presence of a change in the frequency of the component or sub component for example blade and whether one or more damage or failure conditions are present in the component or sub component.

For example a blade arriving too early or too late when traveling from a sensor position to another may indicate blade may be cracked. In another example a shift in the phase of the signal of reflected microwaves otherwise know as a periodic change may indicate blade may be experiencing vibrational or torsional forces. Over an appreciable amount of time either type of force may eventually cause damage or failure conditions.

Microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors may all be linked or multiplexed while synchronously reading the position and location of each blade tip. Synchronous readings allow the system to collect at least three measurements for each blade during a single revolution. A non synchronous array of sensors would only provide a single measurement of each blade during a single revolution. As described microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors are preferably integrally mounted to engine housing or within turbine engine adjacent to and opposing blades . In addition microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors may be disposed circumferentially within close proximity to one another. It should be noted that employing less than three microwave sensors will not provide the advantages with respect to synchronous measurements as not enough measurements will be taken during a single revolution with less than three sensors . In another embodiment a plurality of sets of microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors each set comprising three or more sensors may be circumferentially disposed about and preferably integrally disposed within the wall adjacent to and opposing the blades. Microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors may be disposed at an angle in the same plane as a centerline of the gas turbine engine and preferably axially disposed in a line or strip of three or more microwave air path blade tip clearance sensors within the same plane as the engine centerline.

Referring now to in yet another alternative embodiment the systems and methods for monitoring thermal growth and controlling clearances and maintaining health of turbomachinery applications described herein may all further comprise a redundancy measure for example an analog clearance model as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 487 491 491 patent to Karpman to serve as a back up system and or check measurements. Karpman patent discloses a system and method describing how an accurate estimate of the actual clearances in a turbomachine can be made with a real time mathematical model on board engine controller. As illustrated in flight conditions and engine power setting data was relayed to a clearance request logic algorithm of a FADEC system . Algorithm processed data and transferred data to a junction where a calculated tip clearance data was received from an analog turbine tip clearance model . Data and was forwarded from junction to a closed loop compensation algorithm . Based upon the data received algorithm provided such data in a transfer to clearance model and controlled the position of a valve not shown utilized for diverting an auxiliary or cooling air flow from a fan stream onto an engine case not shown housing turbine engine for cooling the engine case in order to provide a desired clearance between the case and the engine blades. In turn turbine engine would provide an engine parameter data to clearance model . The clearance request logic algorithm may comprise the algorithm disclosed in Karpman which is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety or any algorithm designed to accurately estimate the actual clearances in a turbomachine using a real time mathematical model as known to one of ordinary skill in the art.

Imperfect control of the clearance between a turbine engine fan blade and case can result in either the clearance being too loose or the clearance being too tight resulting in excessive rubs. In either instance imperfect clearance results in loss of performance e.g. engine efficiency thrust and or violation of the engine operating limits e.g. exhaust gas temperature overshoot and or reduced compressor stability. Standard practice has been to design a clearance control system to prefer loose clearance over fight clearance which may also result in damage to the blades and case. Some engines such as for example the PW4000 use an open loop clearance control system that sacrifices significant performance in comparison with a perfect clearance control system. Other engines such as for example the V2500 use a closed loop system that relies on crudely modeled clearances and therefore sacrifices less performance but still falls short of ideal clearance control.

The methods and systems described herein provide several advantages over analog based closed loop systems and other non active closed loop systems. One advantage is improved accuracy and reliability in estimating tip clearances and monitoring the health of the components and sub components of a turbine engine. Another advantage is the ability to enable the clearance control system to be active during those parts of an airplane mission that are more likely to experience abrupt changes in operating conditions such as during airplane takeoff where tip clearances are particularly hard to predict due to rapidly changing engine operating conditions. Yet another advantage is the ability to increase the exhaust gas temperature margin which otherwise diminishes with increased clearance and help avoid clearance induced stability loss. These advantages all lead to further improving clearance control accuracy which in turn improves engine performance while maintaining all operating limits compressor stability and ensuring reliable rub free operation throughout the airplane mission. Yet another advantage is the systems ability to synchronously measure each blade in a single revolution using three or more sensors as opposed to non synchronous measurements leading to a single measurement of each blade during a single revolution. Another advantage is the system s ability to receive contemporaneously information concerning the locations and positions of each component and sub component using three or more microwave based sensors rather than relying upon mathematical modeling to predict heat transfer and energy storage phenomenon. Yet another advantage is the system s ability to modulate the fluid streams flowing in and around the engine housing in order to cool certain areas experiencing a greater amount or any amount of thermal growth and exhibiting smaller clearance areas or any clearance area less than a desired clearance area.

It is to be understood that the invention is not limited to the illustrations described and shown herein which are deemed to be merely illustrative of the best modes of carrying out the invention and which are susceptible to modification of form size arrangement of parts and details of operation. The invention rather is intended to encompass all such modifications which are within its spirit and scope as defined by the claims.

