---

title: Multimedia projector-printer
abstract: A multimedia projector/printer system capable of displaying, printing, and controlling all multimedia content associated with a multi-media document. The multimedia projector/printer has a multimedia image generator. A print driver interface is provided that allows users to “print” a multimedia document to the projector. The multimedia driver embeds instructions and codes within a document that are retrieved and removed before the projector produces an image. The instructions and codes indicate multimedia data to be fetched over the network. The multimedia projector/printer also provides the option to display multimedia data regardless of the software application from which created it.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07603615&OS=07603615&RS=07603615
owner: Ricoh Co., Ltd.
number: 07603615
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050330
---
This application is a continuation in part of the following co pending U.S. patent applications each of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 814 580 titled Printer With Document Triggered Processing by Jonathan J. Hull Kurt W. Piersol and Peter E. Hart filed Mar. 30 2004 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 814 842 titled Printer with Multimedia Server by Jonathan J. Hull Jamey Graham Peter E. Hart and Kurt W. Piersol filed Mar. 30 2004.

The present invention relates generally to the field of generating images or multi media documents from digital data. More specifically the present invention relates to receiving multimedia documents containing a variety of data formats and outputting the multimedia document in a variety of formats.

Data projectors are well known and have become commonplace in the home and business environment. Conventional data projectors are designed to display electronic documents formatted in a projectable image format like RGB or CYN. Typically a host personal computer PC or laptop computer is physically connected to the projector such that a presentation document is hosted on the host PC and then sent to the projector for display on a screen. A user controls the desired appearance of the presentation document through the laptop or PC.

A conventional projector is shown in and includes a memory an image processing unit a display controller a system controller a video decoder codec and optics . The system controller of the projector receives raw video data like RGB data and stores the data in the memory buffer . The memory buffer is used to store the data in various formats before use by the video decoder the image processing unit and the display controller . Once stored in the memory buffer the video decoder converts the raw video data into a format that is understandable to the image processing unit . After conversion by the decoder the video data is converted to pixel and color data by the image processing unit . Finally the display controller and optics use the pixel and color data to generate an image in light output by the projector and displayed on the screen .

A distinct disadvantage with conventional projectors occurs when a user is preparing to display a presentation. The user must first verify that the particular software program or application that created the multi media document is available on the laptop or PC that has been selected to host the presentation. Oftentimes the particular specialized applications available on the hosting PC or laptop are quite different than the applications available on the PC or laptop where the document was created. Supporting multiple copies of costly multi media applications on multiple PCs or laptops is possible particularly for organizations like public schools and small businesses where only a limited number of licenses to a particular software application might be available. Another disadvantage relates to the resolution of the display of a multi media document on a conventional digital projector being constrained by the resolution of the PC or laptop that is hosting the presentation.

Like data projectors printers are also well known and have become ubiquitous. Conventional printers are designed to print electronic documents formatted in a standard printer language like postscript or printer control language PCL . These types of printer languages are standard within the printer industry thus allowing universal compatibility with a variety of machines manufactured by a variety of different companies. Documents rendered in a standard page description language PDL such as PCL or postscript describe the page to be printed in terms of primitive shapes which are interpreted by the printer s own controller. A conventional printer typically ignores any non PDL data content contained within a document to be printed when an image is being rendered.

A conventional printer including an input output I O controller a memory unit an image processing unit coupled to memory unit a print codec print engine and a system controller coupled to the I O controller image processing unit print codec memory unit and print engine is shown in . Input output controller receives and directs incoming raw image data i.e. a description of a document in a language understood by the printer such as PCL or postscript data to the system controller for distribution and storage in printer . Raw image data is converted if necessary by the print codec and the image processing unit renders the converted data at a print element level in preparation for the data to be printed as document by the print engine . Memory unit is available to store multiple decompressed data print files for printing based on the order in which the Input output controller I O receives the incoming image data . For example memory unit allows the printer to receive data faster than it can be printed such that the printer can do another task while printing continues.

Unfortunately postscript PCL and other PDLs are not designed to support embedded multimedia content i.e. motion video audio still images graphics animation text etc which is a common data format for many conventional presentation and entertainment based software packages. The primitive nature of the postscript language does not allow for is use when creating a presentation document particularly ones that contains video audio or animation. Therefore conventional printers are traditionally not capable of interpreting and printing documents containing multimedia content due to the fact that conventional printers are configured to receive documents formatted in the aforementioned standard printer languages that have a format of a single image per page. Also conventional printers and conventional projectors for that matter are designed to support documents formatted only in their particular individual formats i.e. PCL or RGB but not both . Standard printers and projectors have not been combined to form a multifunction output device that is capable of receiving data in a variety of different formats and outputting this data in any particular format requested by a user.

What is needed is a digital projector printer system for receiving a document containing multi formatted data independent of the software application from which the document was created and outputting the multi media document in a variety of formats.

The present invention satisfies the foregoing need by providing a digital projector printer system capable of displaying printing and controlling all multimedia content associated with a multi media document. Associated with the projector printer system are projector printer drivers that can render the document in standard postscript and embed special instructions and codes that the projector printer understands. In one embodiment the embedded instructions and codes are placed inserted as comments in the code for the document. These embedded instructions and codes are instructions on where to fetch the media object over the network and how to display it with respect to the rest of the page image including the resolution and color of a display or other relevant information. Advantageously these embedded instructions and codes are ignored by conventional printers and projectors so the documents if processed by such printers or projectors are unaffected. With the projector printer of the present invention the embedded instructions and codes are parsed interpreted and processed by the system controller inside the digital projector printer to produce the desired result. Furthermore the projection system can render a symbolic document at much higher quality than conventional digital projection systems since the system is not limited by the resolution of a PC or laptop running the application.

Another embodiment for handling multimedia documents discloses a driver located on a computing device that converts portions of presentation documents like Microsoft PowerPoint documents to video data and embeds this video data within a PDL document for display. In this embodiment special features such as animation or full motion are rendered in a different video clip. The document can include individual slides of data for presentation with the video clips inserted between pages. When users move forward or backward through the slides the appropriate video clip is shown. In this embodiment multimedia documents can be rendered and displayed through the claimed digital projector printer without the need for proprietary software.

The present invention is also capable of controlling a multimedia presentation through the use of a page description language. In this case a driver on the user s PC embeds control code within a PDL document and sends the multimedia document to the projector printer for display or printing. The system controller within the projector printer recognizes the control code and retrieves the parameters associated with the code to provide control over the multimedia document when it is displayed.

A digital projector DP system for displaying a multi media document in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is shown in . The digital projector system preferably comprises a personal computer containing at least a projector printer driver and a multimedia driver and a projector coupled to the personal computer . The projector preferably comprises an I O controller coupled to the personal computer a multimedia image generator a conventional display controller a system controller coupled to the I O controller the multimedia image generator by way of signal line and the display controller and conventional optics coupled to the display controller .

The digital projector system is capable of receiving data in a variety of formats including multimedia documents that contain embedded instructions or codes in a special markup language indicating the presence of multi media content. Digital projector provides print to display action for projecting multimedia documents on a digital projector by printing the documents similar to how a document is printed over a standard printer. Such functionality is fully disclosed in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 094 887 entitled A Projector Printer For Displaying Or Printing Of Documents by Dar Shyang Lee Jonathan J. Hull Bema Erol and Jamey Graham filed Mar. 30 2005 which is incorporated herein by reference.

The two drivers are coupled to each other and located on a computing device such as a personal computer . These drivers initiate rendering of a document in a PDL and embed special tags for displaying multi media components.

According to one embodiment the projector printer driver takes data renders the data in standard page description language like postscript or PCL to generate a standard document and sends the document to multimedia driver for embedding multimedia content into and creating the multimedia document . When a particular presentation requires multi media components to be displayed in conjunction with the PDL file the multimedia driver embeds special tags in the rendered PDL document containing instructions for fetching formatting and displaying multi media components like video audio or animation data to form multimedia document . At this point multimedia document is ready to be transmitted through a local area network LAN or a parallel port connection to digital projector .

The I O controller preferably has a variety of connectors not shown such that multimedia document can be sent to the digital projector as parallel port data from a direct parallel connection with computing device as network data received over a local area network LAN coupled by a network connection wired or wireless or as video data through a display connector like most conventional projector systems. Furthermore a user can print a file to the digital projector system over Bluetooth in yet another embodiment where the digital projector includes a Bluetooth transceiver not shown . I O controller supports a variety of data input formats through connection between a video input port LAN input port parallel input port or any particular data port configured to accept any particular data format that a user chooses for display.

Once the particular multi media document is input to digital projector by way of I O controller the document is sent to the system controller where the system controller determines whether the incoming document is in a compatible format for display by projector . In an embodiment the system controller is adapted to control the flow of data within digital projector by receiving input data in a variety of formats including video print data or embedded multimedia and outputting data to the appropriate modules of the multimedia image generator for processing conversion or storage. In this embodiment the system controller also determines whether the incoming document contains standard printer language with embedded multimedia that requires conversion to a data format suitable for projection. The system controller unpacks the incoming multimedia document and parses the content of multimedia document into a PDL portion and a multimedia portion. The PDL portion of document is sent to multi media image generator for data conversion to a format such as pixel and color data that can be provided to the display controller to produce an image. Multi media image generator receives the PDL file and converts the file to a projectable format like RGB or CYN data that can be displayed through display controller and optics onto screen . The system controller then interprets the remaining embedded instructions and codes such as in a special markup language within multimedia document and these interpreted instructions and codes are delivered to the multi media image generator for processing. Multimedia data is fetched using the network received and formatted into a projectable format by multimedia image generator and directed to display controller and optics for display onto screen .

The multimedia image generator that renders multi media documents for display is shown in more detail in . Multimedia image generator preferably receives PDL content and non PDL content for conversion fetching processing and or storage. Multimedia image generator preferably includes an image processing unit a codec a storage controller coupled to a digital storage an application controller and a multimedia unit coupled to a database . Depending on the type and format of the incoming data the system controller determines which of these components within the multimedia image generator receives the incoming data. System controller communicates with each component by way of signal line . The multimedia image generator of the present invention is advantageously able to receive an input file in a variety of different formats and convert that input file into pixel and color data that can be sent to the display controller to generate a displayable image.

In one embodiment the image processing unit receives video data and converts that data to pixel and color data. The image processing unit is coupled to the signal line and is capable of receiving data from the codec the digital storage via storage controller or database via multimedia unit . The image processing unit also provides the pixel and color data to the display controller via the system controller .

The storage controller and digital storage handle storage of input data partially converted data or processed pixel and color data. The storage controller orchestrates storage of multiple multi media files based on the order in which the I O controller receives the incoming data. The storage controller accesses the temporary digital storage to allow the digital projector to receive data faster than it can be rendered thus allowing the digital projector to perform other tasks while the display of images continues.

The codec has an input and an output coupled to line to receive input data and output data. The codec is configurable and capable of performing compression decompression encoding and decoding. The codec is responsive to the application controller and the system controller as will be described in more detail below.

The application controller is also coupled to line for communication with the system controller the codec the image processing unit and the storage controller . The application controller controls the storage and conversion of files in a print format into video data format. As will be described in more detail below the application controller controls the codec including identifying what type of coding or decoding to use to convert an input print file to a video data format. Such conversion includes running applications necessary to translate and interpret the print file format.

The multimedia unit receives embedded instructions and codes that have been extracted from the non PDL portion of the file. In one embodiment the non PDL portion of the file is the comments fields part of a conventional PDL file. Within the comments the present invention inserted instructions and codes pertaining to multimedia content associated with a particular data in the file. These embedded instructions and codes are sent from the system controller to the multi media unit over signal line . Depending on the particular instructions and codes received multimedia unit performs the corresponding action such that the specific multi media content can be located over a network coupled to the projector and displayed appropriately with respect to the PDL portion of document . For example multimedia unit can advantageously interpret an Internet address embedded within a comment field associated with the special markup language indicating where multimedia content is remotely stored. Multimedia unit can then establish a communications link between projector and the Internet address such that multimedia content can be imported and stored locally in a database . Multimedia unit sends multimedia content stored in database to codec for conversion or to image processing unit for appropriate display and print formatting.

The system controller identifies the multimedia document as a document in page description language and having special codes or instructions embedded in the comments of the document. For example this identification could be based on the port of the I O controller that received the multimedia document. Alternatively the identification could be from identification of the document format or header information. In this embodiment the system controller receives the multimedia document and parses the document into a PDL portion and a non PDL portion. The system controller sends the PDL data to application controller of the multimedia image generator for appropriate data conversion. The system controller also interprets the embedded codes and instructions for example in a special markup language within the multimedia document and sends the interpreted instructions and codes to multimedia unit for appropriate fetching and storage of multimedia content.

The application controller receives the PDL portion of multimedia document and sends translation instructions to codec such that codec can successfully carry out a PDL to video data conversion. The particular translation instructions sent from the application controller to codec depends on the exact form of the incoming PDL data. Different PDL data formats i.e. postscript or PCL have different translation instructions as will be recognized by those skilled in the art. During the conversion step the incoming PDL data is converted to a data file suitable for further manipulation by the image processing unit to generate an image displayable by digital projector . Typical data display formats include but are not limited to RGB and CYN data. Once the PDL data is converted successfully to a projectable format the converted data is ready for processing and display.

In one embodiment multimedia unit receives interpreted instructions embedded in multimedia document from system controller for fetching multimedia data over the Internet. The multimedia unit establishes a communications link with the interpreted Internet address as described above and retrieves multimedia data by way of a LAN or wireless connection. Once the multimedia data has been retrieved multimedia unit sends the multimedia components to image processing unit for appropriate formatting and then to display controller and optics for display. In some cases certain multi media components are stored in database while other components are fetched by multimedia unit and displayed through optics . Storing fetched multimedia components within temporary storage database allows digital projector to maintain correct timing of the presentation as dictated by the special markup language within document while other tasks are being carried out in the background.

An embodiment of a system for displaying multimedia documents independent of the software that created the document is shown in and with reference to . System preferably includes a personal computer coupled to the projector of the present invention. Personal computer preferably includes a standard projector printer driver as described above coupled to a multimedia conversion codec coupled to a multimedia driver . Personal computer is communicatively coupled to projector by way of a direct parallel port connection or a LAN connection .

The multimedia conversion codec has an input and an output coupled to receive input data and output data. The codec is configurable and capable of performing compression decompression and encoding and decoding signals. The codec is responsive to the projector printer driver . Multimedia conversion codec is capable of receiving a presentation document from projector printer driver converting presentation documents like Microsoft PowerPoint into standard video data i.e. RGB CYN and outputting the video data to the driver .

A method for displaying multimedia documents independent of the software that created the document is shown in . Initially projector is installed as a network or local projector for receiving multimedia documents to be displayed. Projector printer driver creates a document in page description language PDL document and creates multimedia content such as animation live video or audio. Multimedia conversion codec receives the multimedia content and converts the presentation document into video data format usable by the projector . The multimedia driver embeds the video data along with any special display instructions into the PDL document to form the multimedia document and sends the multimedia document to projector for display. I O controller receives the multimedia document and directs the multimedia document to the system controller where the video data is extracted from the multimedia document . System controller sends the PDL portion of multimedia document to multimedia image generator where the PDL portion of the multimedia document is converted to a projectable image format by multimedia image generator . Both the projectable image data and the video data are output to the display controller for display.

A block diagram of an embodiment of a digital projector printer system is shown in . Digital projector printer module is capable of at least five processes 1 projecting a display of an incoming multimedia document 2 printing an incoming multimedia document 3 recording a multimedia presentation 4 storing multimedia document for later use or 5 associating a multimedia document with a presentation. Process 1 is carried out in a similar fashion to the process described above in relation to and . The process for projecting a multimedia file regardless of input format has been described above and similar structure and functionality are provided in the digital projector printer as has been described above for the projector . However the operation processes 2 4 of printing and recording require additional structure and functionality and the processes will be described below.

As shown in the digital projector printer preferably comprises an I O controller a multimedia image generator a system controller coupled to the I O controller and to the multimedia image generator via signal line a display controller coupled to the system controller optics coupled to the display controller a print engine coupled to the system controller and a presentation recorder coupled to the system controller . Some of the components of the digital projector printer have similar function and form as has been described above with reference to so like reference numerals and terminology have been used to indicate similar functionality. For example the I O controller the display controller and the optics are similar to that described above with reference to so they will not be described again at this time.

The system controller is similar to that described above however it includes the added functionality for the operations noted above specifically 1 projecting a display of an incoming multimedia file embedded with special markup language 2 projecting a display of an incoming multimedia file embedded with video data 3 printing an incoming multimedia file embedded with special markup language 4 printing an incoming multimedia file embedded with video data and 5 recording a presentation. The system controller is adapted to control the flow of data within digital projector printer by receiving input data in a variety of formats including multimedia video or print data from I O controller and outputting data to the appropriate modules for processing conversion display printing recording or storage. The system controller is coupled to send and receive data and control signals to the multimedia image generator and the presentation recorder . The system controller is coupled to send data and control signals to the print engine and the display controller .

The multimedia image generator is similar to that described above however the multimedia image generator for the projector printer embodiment of the present invention also includes functionality to output the file in print format to the print engine for printing or a format suitable for the presentation recorder . The multimedia image generator includes the image processing module the codec the storage controller the digital storage the application controller multimedia unit and database coupled by signal line as has been described above. Depending on the type and format of the incoming data the system controller determines which of these components of the multimedia image generator receive the incoming data. The multimedia image generator of the present invention is advantageously able to receive an input file in a variety of different formats and convert that input file into pixel and color data that can be sent to the display controller to generate a displayable image or convert the input file into control and print data that can be provided to the print engine for generating a document. Different modules of the multimedia image generator are used to manipulate the input file depending on its input format and the desired output. Multimedia image generator preferably receives PDL files non PDL files and interpreted comments embedded within a PDL file for conversion fetching processing and or storage.

In one mode the image processing module receives video data and converts that data to pixel and color data. In another mode the image processing module receives print data i.e. PDL or PDL data and converts it to data and control signals understood by the print engine . The image processing module is coupled to the signal line and is capable of receiving data from the codec or the digital storage via the storage controller or the database via the multimedia unit . The image processing unit is also coupled to the system controller .

The codec of multimedia image generator is capable of additional functionality. The codec has an input and an output coupled to line to receive input data and output data. The codec is configurable and capable of performing compression decompression and encoding and decoding signals. In an embodiment the codec is responsive to application controller and multimedia unit such that codec is advantageously adapted to receive data of any particular format and convert the data to a variety of output formats. In particular codec is adapted to perform at least the following conversions 1 a page description language to video data conversion and 2 a video data to page description language conversion.

The storage controller and digital storage handle storage of input data partially converted data or processed pixel and color data or processed print and control data. The storage controller is capable of storing multiple files based on the order in which the I O controller receives the incoming data. Storage controller accesses the temporary digital storage to allow the projector printer to receive data faster than it can be rendered thus allowing it and other devices coupled to it to perform other tasks while the display or printing of images continues.

The application controller is also coupled to line for communication with the system controller the codec the image processing module and the storage controller . The application controller controls 1 the storage and conversion of files from a print format into video data format 2 the storage and conversion of files from a video format into print format and 3 conversion to and from a meeting recorder format. As will be described in more detail below the application controller controls the codec including identifying what type of coding or decoding to use to convert an input file to a output data format whether it be print or video format. Such conversion includes running applications necessary to translate and interpret the print and video file formats.

The multimedia unit receives embedded portion of a multimedia document pertaining to multimedia content associated with the multimedia file from system controller by way of signal line . Depending on the particular comment received multimedia unit performs the corresponding action such that the particular multi media content can be located over the network and displayed appropriately with respect to the PDL portion of document . For example multimedia unit advantageously interprets an Internet address where multimedia content is stored remotely embedded within a comment associated with the special markup language. Multimedia unit then establishes a communications link between projector and the Internet address such that multimedia content can be imported and stored locally in database . Multimedia unit sends multimedia content stored in database to codec for conversion or to image processing unit for appropriate display and print formatting.

The print engine can be any one of a conventional type and using input and control signals from the system controller generates a document that may be printed text drawings or images. The print engine has an input coupled to the system controller to receive data and commands. The system controller preferably provides the information and data in a format understood by the print engine such as PDL PCL postscript or other similar printer language.

In an embodiment the system controller determines whether the incoming document contains standard printer language that requires conversion to a data format suitable for projection. System controller unpacks the incoming multimedia document and parses the content of multimedia document such that the PDL portion of document is sent to multimedia image generator for data conversion to a format such as pixel and color data that can be provided to the display controller to produce an image.

In an embodiment projector printer system is capable of receiving multimedia documents in the form of network data or parallel port data through PC at the corresponding input port of I O controller and printing them. The output port of I O controller directs the multimedia document to system controller where the system controller parses the incoming multimedia document and sends the PDL portion of document to image processing unit and or storage controller . If the system controller encounters special tags corresponding to multimedia components embedded within document system controller interprets the embedded comment and directs the interpreted comment to multimedia unit located within multimedia image generator for retrieval of the multimedia components. Once the multi media components have been retrieved as described above multimedia unit determines the sequence of when the components are to be sent to print engine for printing such that the original sequence of PDL elements and non PDL elements within multimedia document are retained in printed document .

In yet an embodiment the projector printer is equipped with a presentation recorder for capturing presentation data . The presentation recorder is part of a larger system for recording meeting and presentations. Presentation data such as from cameras microphones and other capture devices as well as from a server not shown may be input to the presentation recorder of the projector printer . This data under direction and control of the system controller and input from the user may be displayed printed or later recalled by the projector printer . The system controller may store a displayed image to the presentation recorder as well for recording a meeting that previously used the projector printer . An exemplary presentation recorder that could be incorporated as part of the present invention is disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 728 560 filed Nov. 30 2000 titled Techniques for Capturing Information During Multimedia Presentations by Jonathan Hull Michael Baxter Pamela Gage Jamey Graham Dar Shyang Lee and Peter Hart which is incorporated by reference herein. The format of presentation data can include at least video audio or print media. Presentation recorder allows a user to simultaneously project a presentation and also record the presentation for later use or editing. The video recording portion of presentation recorder also allows for recording of a completely interactive presentation through capture of audience reaction feedback or questioning. Also in an embodiment presentation recorder is equipped with a digital scanner to receive incoming print media for editing and printing the print media.

A method for processing the multimedia document by digital projector printer system is described in flow diagrams A G. Initially multimedia document is received at the I O controller and the I O controller directs the incoming multimedia document to system controller to determine whether the incoming multimedia document contains an embedded portion such as in a special markup language. If the multimedia data contains an embedded portion the process continues in step as shown in . If the multimedia document does not contain special markup language it is presumed the document contains only print data and the process continues in step of as will be described with reference to .

FIGS. A and B D are flow diagrams that describe modes of operating the present invention for the case when incoming data is determined to contain only PDL data and no embedded portion. If the system controller determines the command associated with the input data is the display command the method transitions to step of . In step the system controller sends the PDL data to the multimedia image generator to convert the PDL data from standard printer language to a projectable image data format. The system controller then provides the projectable image data to the display controller and optics for display onto screen .

If the system controller determines the command associated with the input data is not the display command the method continues in step to determine whether the command associated with the data is the store for later use command. If so the method stores the data in system memory and the process is complete and ends. For example the system controller sends the PDL data to storage controller and digital storage such that the PDL data is stored for later use. Once the storage is complete the process ends.

If the system controller determines the command associated with the input data is not the store for later use command the method continues in step to determine whether the command associated with the data is the print PDL data command. If so the method transitions to and provides the PDL data to the print engine prints the data and the process is complete and ends. For example the system controller provides PDL data to the print engine and the print engine prints the PDL data as document .

If the system controller determines the command associated with the input data is not the print PDL data command the method continues in step to determine whether the command associated with the data is the associate PDL data with presentation command. If so the method transitions to step of to associate the PDL data with a presentation. For example the system controller determines which presentation is being presented. The system controller then determines the particular PDL data currently being referenced and copies the PDL data currently being referenced such that a copy of the PDL data is stored in a data structure associated with the presentation. To insure proper association between the PDL data and the presentation the system controller stores a time and context index to the presentation in the data structure in digital storage . Once the association is complete the process ends.

If the system controller determines the command associated with the input data is not to associate the PDL data with a presentation command the process is complete.

If in step of the multimedia document was determined to contain an embedded portion the process continues to step of . are flow diagrams that describe modes of operating the present invention for the case when incoming multimedia document contains special markup language indicating an embedded portion with multimedia content or control instructions. Initially the system controller receives the incoming document and extracts the embedded portion from the document and interprets the markup language in the embedded portion. System controller then sends the interpreted instructions to multimedia image generator to perform the particular actions required by the special markup language. Special markup language embedded within a PDL document can relate to at least the following actions fetching multimedia data controlling the display of multimedia presentations generating an image from graphics primitives e.g. where the system controller includes a video game engine and graphic instructions can be converted into an image or adjusting the display parameters associated with a multimedia presentation.

In step the system controller determines if a print command is associated with the embedded portion of the multimedia document . If so the method continues to step of . In step the system controller provides the extracted media content to the multimedia image generator to convert the extracted media content to a data format suitable for interpretation by print engine . The system controller then provides the converted media content and the PDL portion of multimedia document to the print engine where the print engine prints the converted data and PDL data onto document before the process ends.

If in step the system controller determines the print command is not associated with the input data the method continues to step of to determine if the display command was associated with the multimedia document. If so the method continues to step of . In step the system controller directs the PDL portion of document to multimedia image generator for conversion to a projectable image format. System controller then provides the projectable image data and extracted media content to display controller and optics for display onto screen before the process ends.

If in step the system controller determines the display command was not associated with the multimedia document the method continues to step where the system controller determines whether the command associated with the input data was to store the multimedia document for later use. If so the system controller provides the multimedia document to storage controller and digital storage such that the multimedia document can be stored in system memory for later use before the process ends. As an optional extension multimedia document can be associated with a presentation in a similar fashion described in steps and of .

If in step the system controller determines the command associated with the input data was not to store the image for later use and the multimedia document is not to be associated with a presentation the process ends.

Referring now to yet another embodiment of a method for displaying or printing images on the multimedia projector printer of the present invention will be described. In this embodiment the computing device and projector printer driver convert a conventional presentation or document using an application running on the computing device to a multimedia document. The multimedia document is sent to the multimedia projector printer and along with input from the user can be displayed or printed. The process begins by selecting a presentation for conversion. For example this could be a presentation in an application program such as PowerPoint by Microsoft Corporation. While the present invention will now be described using a PowerPoint by presentation as an example the present invention may be used with any application program for display creating or editing images presentation video clips or other multimedia data such as MacroMedia Flash Adobe FrameMaker Adobe Acrobat etc. Once a presentation has been selected it is converted to one or more segmented videos. For example the PowerPoint application can be invoked on the selected presentation Enter commands can be transmitted to the application and the video and audio that are generated by PowerPoint between each Enter can be captured and saved as a set of video segments one for each time the enter key is pressed. This can be done with a software application on the personal computer that runs PowerPoint and simultaneously records video shown on the PC screen and audio output on the PC s speaker. This software application would transmit Enter key presses to PowerPoint determine when PowerPoint was finished rendering the result of that key press and record the video and audio produced between the Enter key press and the time when PowerPoint completed rendering the data. Exemplary software applications that record video and audio on the PC include Camtasia Pro sold by TechSmith of Okemos Mich. and Adobe Cool Edit sold by Adobe Systems Incorporated of San Jose Calif. Typical formats for video segments include avi wmv Windows Media mpeg mp2 mp4 flash etc. This technique guarantees that every animation audio video and special effect in the selected presentation will be completely represented in the multimedia document sent to the multimedia projector printer . Each slide in the selected presentation will be converted to at least one video segment. If a slide contains no animations or other multimedia content the video segment would contain a single video frame. If a slide requires two Enter key presses to reveal all its content because the first Enter renders an animation and the second Enter displays a line of text two video segments would be produced one for the animation and one for the display of the line of text. Thus a presentation file is converted to N video segments where N is the total number of Enter key presses required to display the complete presentation file. The minimum length of each video segment is the time required to render the presentation file after the Enter key is pressed. Next the segmented videos are embedded into a multimedia document. For example the video segments could be added to a PDL file with other information about the order of the video segments. Alternatively the multimedia document could be concatenated video segments e.g. mp4 clips . This multimedia document is then sent to the multimedia projector printer . At the multimedia projector printer the multimedia document is received . The multimedia projector printer then parses the multimedia document into segmented video s and stores them. Next the multimedia projector printer converts each of the segmented video s to a projectable image data. This can be done using the codec and the other component of the multimedia image generator . In this embodiment the multimedia projector printer is also adapted to receive input from a user either via a keypad on the multimedia projector printer or via the I O controller . The input is recognized by the multimedia projector printer and is used to select which of the converted video segments to output for display. In step the multimedia projector printer receives input on which segment to display from the user. The multimedia document preferably has order or sequence information about the video segment such that a user can indicate next video previous video or jump to a particular video segment and the multimedia projector printer can retrieve and display the corresponding segment. Once a segment has been identified the multimedia projector printer outputs projectable image data for selected the video segment. Then the method determines whether there are more segments to display. If so the method loops back to step to receive more input from the user. Otherwise the method is complete and ends.

While the present invention has been described with reference to certain preferred embodiments those skilled in the art will recognize that various modifications may be provided. For example certain embodiments employ multiple application servers acting in cooperation to perform a function or request. Any of the above functions or requests can be sent across a network or using local cables such as IEEE1394 Universal Serial Bus or wireless networks such as IEEE 802.11 or IEEE 802.15 networks in any combination. Variations upon and modifications to the preferred embodiments are provided for by the present invention which is limited only by the following claims.

