---

title: Modulating phosphatase activity in cardiac cells
abstract: Expression of a phosphatase inhibitor in heart cells can be used to treat cardiac disorders, e.g., heart failure. Decreasing phosphatase activity can improve β-adrenergic responsiveness.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09114148&OS=09114148&RS=09114148
owner: The General Hospital Corporation
number: 09114148
owner_city: Boston
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050908
---
This application is the U.S. national phase application pursuant to 35 U.S.C. 371 of International Patent Application No. PCT US2005 032162 filed Sep. 8 2005 designating the United States and published in English on Mar. 16 2006 as International Publication No. WO 2006 029319 A2 which claims priority to U.S. Application Ser. No. 60 608 214 filed on Sep. 9 2004 the contents of all of which are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference.

The United States government has certain rights in this invention by virtue of grant numbers HL64018 HL52318 HL 57623 HL26057 DK36569 and HL07382 27 from the National Institutes of Health.

This application contains a Sequence Listing which has been submitted in ASCII format via EFS Web and is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Said ASCII copy created on Oct. 13 2010 is named 63653588.txt and is 4 333 bytes in size.

Each of the applications and patents cited in this text as well as each document or reference cited in each of the applications and patents including during the prosecution of each issued patent application cited documents and each of the PCT and foreign applications or patents corresponding to and or claiming priority from any of these applications and patents and each of the documents cited or referenced in each of the application cited documents are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and may be employed in the practice of the invention. More generally documents or references are cited in this text either in a Reference List before the claims or in the text itself and each of these documents or references herein cited references as well as each document or reference cited in each of the herein cited references including any manufacturer s specifications instructions etc. is hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference.

Reversible protein phosphorylation represents the cellular basis for integration of key signaling pathways mediating a fine crosstalk between external effector molecules and intracellular events. In the heart Ca2 cycling and contractility are controlled by a fine balance of protein kinase and phosphatase activities in response to various second messenger signals.

Demands on the heart s pumping action during fight or flight situations can increase human cardiac output by nearly 5 fold and this is linked to adrenergic activation of the camp dependent protein kinase PKA . PKA then phosphorylates a set of key regulatory Ca2 handling proteins that control excitation contraction coupling cycle such as phospholamban the ryanodine receptor the L type channel Ca2 and troponin I Bers D. M. 2002 415 198 205 .

Although the protein kinases and their phospho protein substrates underlying augmentation of the heart s pumping action have been well characterized similar studies on the protein phosphatases reversing the increased cardiac contractility are less well developed. Stemming from a common gene family the major Ser Thr phosphatases type 1 type 2A and type 2B calcineurin are highly homologous proteins 40 50 Cohen P. 1990 Phosphoprotein Res 24 230 5 that play critical roles in the control of cardiac contractility and hypertrophy. Overexpression of the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 2A has been shown to decrease cardiac function and lead to a pathologic cardiac hypertrophy Brewis N. et al. 2000 279 H1307 18 Gergs U. et al. 2004 . . Furthermore calcineurin a calcium dependent phosphatase induces hypertrophy by its regulation of the NFAT transcription factor activity. 5 Interestingly inhibition of this phosphatase blocks cardiac hypertrophy in vivo and in vitro Brewis N. et al. 2000 Molkentin J. D. 1998 93 215 28 .

In human and experimental heart failure the activity of the type 1 phosphatase associated with the sarcoplasmic reticulum SR is significantly increased suggesting that this may be a contributing factor to depressed function dilated cardiomyopathy and premature death Huang B. et al. 1999 85 848 55 Sande J. B. et al. 2002 53 382 91 Boknik P. et al. 2000 362 222 31 Gupta R. C. et al. 1997 96 Suppl 1 I 361 Neumann J. 1997 29 265 72 Carr A. N. et al. 2002 22 4124 35 . However the role of phosphatase inhibition in adrenergic responsiveness was not previously known.

It has now been discovered inter alia that expression of a phosphatase inhibitor in heart cells can be used to treat cardiac disorders e.g. heart failure. Decreasing phosphatase activity can improve adrenergic responsiveness.

Accordingly in one aspect this disclosure features a method that includes administering into heart cells e.g. cardiomyocytes an agent that modulates phosphatase activity e.g. type 1 phosphatase activity in the cells. The heart cells can be in vitro or in vivo. For example the heart cells can be in a heart of a subject. The method can be used to treat a subject e.g. a subject having a cardiac disorder e.g. heart failure. Typically the subject is a mammal e.g. a human or non human mammal.

In one embodiment the agent is a nucleic acid that comprises a sequence encoding a protein that inhibits phosphatase activity e.g. type 1 phosphatase activity. The agent can be administered in an amount effective to decrease phosphatase activity and or increase adrenergic responsiveness in the treated cells.

In another embodiment the agent is a nucleic acid that increases expression of an endogenous nucleic acid that encodes a protein that inhibits phosphatase activity. For example the nucleic acid can include a sequence that encodes a transcription factor e.g. an engineered transcription factor such as a chimeric zinc finger protein. In still another example the nucleic acid is a regulatory sequence that integrates in or near the endogenous nucleic acid that encodes a protein that inhibits phosphatase activity e.g. in or near a gene encoding phosphatase inhibitor 1 I 1 .

In still another embodiment the agent is a nucleic acid that can provide a nucleic acid modulator of gene expression. For example the nucleic acid can be a nucleic acid that can express such a nucleic acid modulator e.g. a dsRNA e.g. siRNA an anti sense RNA or a ribozyme.

The agent can be delivered using a viral particle e.g. a virus or a virus like particle. The viral particle can be derived from an adeno associated virus an adenovirus or a lentivirus.

In one embodiment the viral particle is introduced by an injection e.g. a direct injection into the heart e.g. a direct injection into the left ventricle surface. In another embodiment the viral particle is introduced into a lumen of the circulatory system e.g. into a chamber or the lumen of the heart or a blood vessel of the heart of a subject. For example the pericardium can be opened and the compound can be injected into the heart e.g. using a syringe and a catheter. The compound can be introduced into the lumen of the aorta e.g. the aortic root introduced into the coronary ostia or introduced into the lumen of the heart. The viral particle can be introduced into a coronary artery. It is also possible to restrict blood flow to increase resident time in the blood vessel e.g. in the coronary artery e.g. using an antegrade or retrograde blockade.

In one embodiment the viral particle is introduced by a percutaneous injection e.g. retrograde from the femoral artery retrograde to the coronary arteries. In still another embodiment the viral particle is introduced e.g. using a stent. For example the viral particle is coated on the stent and the stent is inserted into a blood vessel such as a coronary artery peripheral blood vessel or cerebral artery.

In one embodiment introducing the viral particle includes restricting blood flow through coronary vessels e.g. partially or completely introducing the viral delivery system into the lumen of the coronary artery and allowing the heart to pump while the coronary vein outflow of blood is restricted. Restricting blood flow through coronary vessels can be performed e.g. by inflation of at least one two or three angioplasty balloons. Restricting blood flow through coronary vessels can last e.g. for at least one two three or four minutes. Introduction of the viral particle into the coronary artery can be performed e.g. by an antegrade injection through the lumen of an angioplasty balloon. The restricted coronary vessels can be the left anterior descending artery LAD the distal circumflex artery LCX the great coronary vein GCV the middle cardiac vein MCV or the anterior interventricular vein AIV . Introduction of the viral particle can be performed after ischemic preconditioning of the coronary vessels e.g. by restricting blood flow by e.g. inflating at least one two or three angioplasty balloons. Ischemic preconditioning of the coronary vessels can last for at least one two three or four minutes.

In one embodiment introducing the viral particle includes restricting the aortic flow of blood out of the heart e.g. partially or completely introducing the viral delivery system into the lumen of the circulatory system and allowing the heart to pump e.g. against a closed system isovolumically while the aortic outflow of blood is restricted. Restricting the aortic flow of blood out of the heart can be performed by redirecting blood flow to the coronary arteries e.g. to the pulmonary artery. Restricting the aortic flow of blood can be accomplished by clamping e.g. clamping a pulmonary artery. Introducing the viral particle can be performed e.g. with the use of a catheter or e.g. by direct injection. Introducing the viral particle can be performed by a delivery into the aortic root.

In one embodiment the number of viral particles that are administered are e.g. at least 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 or 1 10units e.g. genomes or plaque forming units or for example between 1 10to 1 10or 1 10to 1 10.

The agent can also be delivered using means other than a viral particle e.g. a liposome or other non viral delivery vehicle.

In another aspect the disclosure features a viral particle that can enter cells. The particle includes a nucleic acid encoding a non viral protein e.g. a protein that decreases phosphatase activity or a protein that modulates cardiac activity. The viral particle can be a virus or virus like particle. In one embodiment the viral particle is derived from an adeno associated virus. The adeno associated virus can be of serotype 1 AAV1 serotype 2 AAV2 serotype 3 AAV3 serotype 4 AAV4 serotype 5 AAV5 serotype 6 AAV6 serotype 7 AAV7 serotype 8 AAV8 or serotype 9 AAV9 . For example the viral particle is a modified adeno associated virus or a reconstituted virus or virus like particle e.g. that can infect cells e.g. a myocytes e.g. a cardiomyocyte.

Examples of proteins that modulate cardiac activity include a protein that modulates phosphatase activity e.g. a phosphatase type 1 inhibitor e.g. I 1 or a sacroplasmic reticulum Ca ATPase SERCA e.g. SERCA1 e.g. 1a or 1b SERCA2 e.g. 2a or 2b or SERCA3.

The disclosure also features a preparation that includes one or more doses of a viral delivery system described herein. A dose can include e.g. at least 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 or 1 10units e.g. genomes or plaque forming units of the viral delivery system. In one embodiment at most 1 10units of the viral delivery system are in a dose. The preparation can be a cell free preparation e.g. a pharmaceutical preparation e.g. one that is suitable for introduction into a subject. The preparation can also contain less than 10 5 1 0.1 or 0.001 pfu of wild type virus i.e. virus that can replicate and that does not include a non viral nucleic acid sequence . In one embodiment the preparation is free of wild type virus.

The disclosure also features a stent that includes an agent that decreases phosphatase activity e.g. in a cardiomyocyte. For example the agent can be coated on the stent. For example the agent can be within a viral particle and the viral particle is coated on one or more surfaces of the stent e.g. a surface that contacts the blood vessel. A stent is a medical device configured for implantation in a body lumen to prevent or inhibit the closing of the lumen. A stent can be configured to be implanted in e.g. a blood vessel such as an artery or other body cavity orifice or duct such as a urethra. A stent is typically made of biocompatible metal or plastic. As used herein a stent coated with or containing an agent means a stent having the agent either affixed to its surface or contained within it so as to permit release of the agent from the stent and hence delivery of the agent to tissue in proximity with the stent.

A subject can be treated by implanting a stent in an afflicted blood vessel of the subject. The blood vessel is for example a coronary artery and can also be for example a peripheral artery or a cerebral artery.

The term treating refers to administering an agent in amount manner and or mode effective to improve a condition symptom or parameter associated with a disorder or to prevent progression of a disorder to either a statistically significant degree or to a degree detectable to one skilled in the art. An effective amount manner or mode can vary depending on the subject and may be tailored to the subject. For example the mode of administration can include delivery by a virus or virus like particle. By preventing progression of a disorder a treatment can prevent deterioration of a disorder in an affected or diagnosed subject or a subject suspected of having the disorder but also a treatment may prevent the onset of the disorder or a symptom of the disorder in a subject at risk for the disorder or suspected of having the disorder.

As used herein the term heart disorder refers to a structural or functional abnormality of the heart that impairs its normal functioning. For example the heart disorder can be heart failure ischemia myocardial infarction congestive heart failure arrhythmia transplant rejection and the like. The term includes disorders characterized by abnormalities of contraction abnormalities in Ca metabolism and disorders characterized by arrhythmia.

The term heart failure refers to any of a number of disorders in which the heart has a defect in its ability to pump adequately to meet the body s needs. In many cases heart failure is the result of one or more abnormalities at the cellular level in the various steps of excitation contraction coupling of the cardiac cells. One such abnormality is a defect in SR function.

As used herein the term heart cell refers to a cell which can be a part of a heart present in a subject b part of a heart which is maintained in vitro c part of a heart tissue or d a cell which is isolated from the heart of a subject. For example the cell can be a cardiac myocyte.

As used herein the term heart refers to a heart present in a subject or to a heart which is maintained outside a subject.

As used herein the term somatic gene transfer refers to the transfer of genes into a somatic cell as opposed to transferring genes into the germ line.

As used herein the term compound refers to a compound which can be delivered effectively to the heart of a subject using the methods of the invention. Such compounds can include for example a gene a drug an antibiotic an enzyme a chemical compound a mixture of chemical compounds or a biological macromolecule.

As used herein the term restricting blood flow refers to substantially blocking the flow of blood through a vessel e.g. flow of blood into the distal aorta and its branches. For example at least 50 of the blood flowing out of the heart is restricted preferably 75 and more preferably 80 90 or 100 of the blood is restricted from flowing out of the heart. The blood flow can be restricted by obstructing the aorta and the pulmonary artery e.g. with clamps.

A viral delivery system refers to a viral particle e.g. virus or virus like particle that can introduce a nucleic acid that includes a non viral sequence into a mammalian cell. The viral delivery system itself may or may not be competent for viral replication.

These and other objects of the invention will be described in further detail in connection with the detailed description of the invention.

Phosphatase activity is increased in heart failure. Reducing phosphatase activity e.g. phosphatase 1 activity in cardiomyocytes can relieve one or more symptoms of associated with heart failure. Reduced phosphatase activity is associated with attenuated adrenergic responsiveness.

In one embodiment phosphatase activity can be decreased by inhibiting type 1 phosphatases. Type 1 phosphatases include but are not limited to PP1c PP1c PP1c and PP1c . See Sasaki et. al. 1990 Jpn J Cancer Res. 81 1272 1280 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. The phosphatase inhibitor 1 or I 1 protein is an endogenous inhibitor of type 1 phosphatase. Increasing I 1 levels or activity can restore adrenergic responsiveness in failing human cardiomyocytes.

In specific embodiments a constitutively active I 1 protein can be administered. One such construct exemplified herein I 1 entails truncation of the I 1 cDNA to encode for the first 65 amino acids and introduction of nucleotide changes to replace the PKA phosphorylation site ACC Thr with aspartic acid GAC Asp resulting in a constitutively active inhibitor. Another way to make a constitutively active inhibitor is to substitute threonine 35 with glutamic acid instead of aspartic acid. These substitutions can also be made in a full length inhibitor molecule. Failing human cardiomyocytes expressing I 1exhibit normal contractile function under basal conditions and their beta adrenergic function is restored to normal. Thus delivery of inhibitor 1 completely restores function and reverses remodeling in the setting of pre existing heart failure.

Other phosphatase inhibitors and other variants of I 1 can also be used. Examples of such other inhibitors include phosphatase inhibitor 2 okadaic acid or caliculin and nipp1 which is an endogenous nuclear inhibitor of protein phosphatase 1. In one embodiment the phosphatase inhibitor is specific for protein phosphatase 1.

Other methods for decreasing phosphatase activity include administering small molecules that enhance the activity of a phosphatase inhibitor e.g. I 1 administering small molecules that decrease the activity of type 1 phosphatases administering nucleic acids that decrease the activity or expression of type 1 phosphatases or administering nucleic acids that increase the activity or expression of a phosphatase inhibitor.

Cardiac muscle function on a beat to beat basis is a highly regulated process through the body s sympathetic tone. In seconds the heart may respond to increases in workload by increasing cardiac output to support the demands of peripheral metabolizing tissues. This adaptive mechanism enhancing the inotropic state of the heart is controlled in large part by the catecholamine dependent activation of myocardial receptors. These receptors are found on the cardiac cells that enhance the strength of contraction when stimulated or activated. At the cellular level stimulation of the receptors Koch W. J. et al. 2000 Annu Rev Physiol 62 237 60 results in increases in cAMP levels activation of the cAMP dependent protein kinase PKA and phosphorylation of enzymes involved in energy metabolism as well as key regulator proteins recruited to modulate contractility and increase stroke volume. The major regulatory phosphoproteins include phospholamban PLB the ryanodine receptor the L type Ca channel troponin I and C protein.

PLB is the major regulator of basal myocardial contractility and a key mediator of the inotropic and lusitropic effects of agonists which bind to the beta receptors and increase the strength of contraction of the cardiac cells in the mammalian heart Brittsan A. G. et al. 2003 92 769 76 . Phosphorylation of PLB relieves its inhibition of SERCA which greatly stimulates the rate and amount of cytosolic calcium re sequestered into the sacroplasmic reticulum SR enhancing myocardial relaxation. This increased calcium cycling profile is associated with enhanced SR calcium content allowing for increased quantal calcium release during subsequent contractions. Collectively these events result in enhanced systolic and diastolic function.

Increases in protein phosphorylation and enhanced cardiac function are reversed by protein phosphatases in an efficient and highly regulated process. Two main classes of serine threonine phosphatases referred to as phosphatase types 1 and 2 regulate cardiac muscle contractile performance Neumann J. et al. 1997 29 1 265 72 . Protein phosphatase 1 PP1 accounts for a significant amount of the cardiac enzymatic activity and has been implicated as the key class of regulatory phosphatase enzymes. PP1 is largely associated with the membrane fraction as well as glycogen particles and is important in glycogenolysis and glycogen synthesis. It is anchored to these locales by large non catalytic targeting subunits which serve to enhance substrate availability and specificity. Furthermore this enzyme is regulated by two heat and acid stable proteins inhibitors 1 and 2. Phosphatase Inhibitor 1 I 1 is the main physiological modulator and is an effective inhibitor when phosphorylated on threonine 35 by PKA Endo S. et al. 1996 35 16 5220 8 . Inhibition of PP1 removes its opposition to the actions of PKA protein phosphorylation leading to amplification of the agonist responses in the heart Ahmad Z. J. 1989 264 3859 63 Gupta R. C. et al. 1996 Suppl 1 I 361 .

This fine tuning regulation of cardiac regulatory protein phosphorylation by protein kinases and phosphatases becomes even more important in heart failure since decreases in cAMP levels by desensitization of receptors Koch Lefkowitz et al. 2000 would be expected to lead to inactivation of PKA while the levels and activity of protein phosphatase 1 are increased.

A therapeutic nucleic acid e.g. a nucleic acid that decreases phosphatase activity or a nucleic acid that provides a nucleic acid modulator of expression e.g. dsRNA an anti sense RNA or a ribozyme e.g. as described herein can be incorporated into a gene construct to be used as a part of a gene transfer protocol. Approaches include insertion of the subject gene in viral vectors e.g. recombinant vectors derived from retroviruses e.g. replication defective retroviruses adenovirus e.g. replication deficient first generation or gutted second generation adenovirus adeno associated virus e.g. any of types 1 6 lentivirus and herpes simplex virus 1 or recombinant bacterial or eukaryotic plasmids. Viral vectors can also be used to transfect cells directly. Viral particles that delivery a therapeutic nucleic acid can be made from modified viruses. Modified viruses can include an alteration to at least one viral sequence e.g. replacement deletion or inactivation of one or more viral genes.

Exemplary adenoviral vectors include Ad.RSV.lacZ which includes the Rous sarcoma virus promoter and the lacZ reporter gene as well as Ad.CMV.lacZ which includes the cytomegalovirus promoter and the lacZ reporter gene. See e.g. U.S. Ser. No. 10 914 829. The lacZ sequence can be replaced with the sequence that encodes the protein or nucleic acid modulator of expression. Methods for the preparation and use of viral vectors are described e.g. in WO 96 13597 WO 96 33281 WO 97 15679 Miyamoto et al. 2000 97 2 793 8 and Trapnell et al. 5 6 617 625 1994.

Adeno associated virus is a nonpathogenic human parvovirus capable of site specific integration into chromosome 19. Fisher et al. 3 3 306 312 1997. Replication of the virus however requires a helper virus such as an adenovirus. Fisher et al. 3 3 306 312 1997. An AAV coding region can be replaced with nonviral genes and the modified virus can be used to infect both dividing and non dividing cells. Xiao et al. 70 11 8098 8108 1996 Kaplitt et al. 62 1669 1676 1996. Exemplary methods for the preparation and use of AAVs are described in Fisher et al. 3 3 306 312 1997 Xiao et al. 70 11 8098 8108 1996 Kaplitt et al. 62 1669 1676 1996.

AAV6 is specific and confers fast expression in the heart. For example U.S. Ser. No. 10 914 829 demonstrates that gene transfer with AAV6 in the heart of a large animal is efficient and can lead to long lasting gene expression.

Methods for producing modified AAV particles have been developed. For example cells are grown in culture are caused to produce modified AAV particles. The particles are harvested from the cells and purified. Exemplary production methods for AAV particles involve delivery of three elements to the producer cells 1 a gene of interest e.g. a sequence the modulates phosphatase activity flanked by AAV ITR sequences 2 AAV rep and cap genes and 3 helper virus proteins helper functions . The conventional protocol for delivering the first two is by transfection of the cells with plasmid DNA containing the appropriate recombinant gene cassettes. The helper functions have traditionally been supplied by infecting the cells with a helper virus such as adenovirus Ad . Samulski et al. 1998 Hauswirth et al. 2000 .

Lentiviruses are a subgroup of retroviruses that are capable of infecting non dividing cells. L. Naldini et al. report a lentiviral vector system based on the human immunodeficiency virus HIV that is capable of transducing heterologous gene sequences into non proliferative HeLa cells and rat fibroblasts as well as into human primary macrophages and terminally differentiated neurons. Science 272 263 267 1996 . U.S. Pat. No. 6 521 457 describes a lentiviral vector based on Equine Infectious Anemia Virus. U.S. Pat. No. 6 428 953 describes additional lentiviral vectors and methods for producing lentiviral particles.

To produce a lentiviral particle and other viral particles the nucleic acid that encodes the agent of interest e.g. an agent that decreases phosphatase activity is operably linked to a packaging signal. The nucleic acid is packaged in cells that express viral structural proteins. For example the cells can include nucleic acids that encode the viral structural proteins but that lack a packaging signal.

Non viral methods are also available. For example plasmid DNA can be delivered e.g. using cationic liposomes lipofectin or derivatized e.g. antibody conjugated polylysine conjugates gramacidin S artificial viral envelopes or other such intracellular carriers as well as direct injection of the gene construct or CaPOprecipitation carried out in vivo.

Gene transfer into cardiovascular tissue has been successful using adenovirus Ad vectors with strong non tissue specific gene expression cassettes driven by cytomegalovirus CMV or Rous sarcoma virus RSV promoters. Clinical trials involving transduction of cardiac cells with viral vectors to deliver angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial cell growth factor VEGF fibroblast growth factor FGF and hepatocyte growth factor HGF have been ongoing. Intra aorta or intracoronary injection of virus has been used in vivo in animal models. In one study intracardiac injection of an Ad SERCA2a viral vector in rats was sufficient to induce physiological improvement in calcium handling. See Miyamoto et al. 2000 . USA 97 793 98. Adenoviral vectors have also been used in vivo to express 2 adrenergic receptor AR see Maurice et al. 1999 104 21 9 and Shah et al. 2001 103 1311 . As is known from studies on cystic fibrosis transduction of all cells in a tissue is not required for improved function. For example expression of the wild type sodium channel in as few as 6 10 of cells within an epithelial sheet lacking a functional sodium channel is sufficient for normal sodium ion transport Johnson et al 1992 2 21 5 . This is known as the bystander effect.

The promoter can be e.g. a smooth muscle specific promoter such as a smooth muscle alpha actin promoter SM22a promoter cardiac specific promoter such as a cardiac myosin promoter e.g. a cardiac myosin light chain 2v promoter troponin T promoter or BNP promoter. The promoter can also be e.g. a viral promoter such as CMV promoter. Tissue specific promoters have been used to increase specificity of myocardial gene expression Rothmann et al. 1996 3 919 26 .

The efficiency of cardiomyocyte gene delivery by an adeno associated virus AAV vector was documented in vitro using cultured rat neonatal cells as well as in an ex vivo system using rat papillary muscle immersion Maeda et al. 1998 30 1341 8 . Ex vivo AAV vector transfer followed by syngeneic heart transplantation was reported to achieve high efficiency marker gene expression Svensson et al. 1999 99 201 5 .

Methods of achieving a high level of in vivo cardiotopic gene transfer with high consistency average 60 70 of cardiac myocytes are described e.g. in US Published Application 2002 0032167. Other methods for the preparation and use of viral vectors are described in WO 96 13597 WO 96 33281 WO 97 15679 and Trapnell et al. 1994 5 6 617 625 Ardehali et al. 1995 109 716 720 Dalesandro et al. 1996 111 416 422 Sawa et al. 1995 Circ 92 II479 11482 Lee et al. 1996 111 246 252 Yap et al. 19996 Circ. 94 I 53 and Pellegrini et al. 1998 11 373 377.

A subject polynucleotide can also be administered using a non viral delivery vehicle. Non viral delivery vehicle also referred to herein as non viral vector as used herein is meant to include chemical formulations containing naked or condensed polynucleotides e.g. a formulation of polynucleotides and cationic compounds e.g. dextran sulfate and naked or condensed polynucleotides mixed with an adjuvant such as a viral particle i.e. the polynucleotide of interest is not contained within the viral particle but the transforming formulation is composed of both naked polynucleotides and viral particles e.g. adenovirus particles see e.g. Curiel et al. 1992 6 247 52 . Thus a non viral delivery vehicle can include vectors composed of polynucleotides plus viral particles where the viral particles do not contain the polynucleotide of interest. Exemplary non viral delivery vehicles include bacterial plasmids viral genomes or portions thereof wherein the polynucleotide to be delivered is not encapsidated or contained within a viral particle and constructs comprising portions of viral genomes and portions of bacterial plasmids and or bacteriophages. The term also encompasses natural and synthetic polymers and co polymers. The term further encompasses lipid based vehicles.

Lipid based vehicles include cationic liposomes such as disclosed by Feigner et al U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 264 618 and 5 459 127 PNAS 84 7413 7417 1987 772 126 139 1995 they may also consist of neutral or negatively charged phospholipids or mixtures thereof including artificial viral envelopes as disclosed by Schreier et al. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 252 348 and 5 766 625 .

Non viral delivery vehicles include polymer based carriers. Polymer based carriers may include natural and synthetic polymers and co polymers. For example the polymers are biodegradable or can be readily eliminated from the subject. Naturally occurring polymers include polypeptides and polysaccharides. Synthetic polymers include but are not limited to polylysines and polyethyleneimines PEI Boussif et al. PNAS 92 7297 7301 1995 which molecules can also serve as condensing agents. These carriers may be dissolved dispersed or suspended in a dispersion liquid such as water ethanol saline solutions and mixtures thereof. A wide variety of synthetic polymers are known in the art and can be used.

The pharmaceutical preparation of the gene therapy construct can include the gene delivery system and an acceptable diluent or can include a slow release matrix in which the gene delivery vehicle is imbedded. Alternatively where the complete gene delivery system can be produced intact from recombinant cells e.g. retroviral vectors the pharmaceutical preparation can comprise one or more cells which produce the gene delivery system. However typically the preparation is cell free. The preparation generally includes materials that do not interrupt ability of viral particles to delivery nucleic acid into cells.

The nucleic acid to be delivered can also be formulated as a DNA or RNA liposome complex formulation. Such complexes comprise a mixture of lipids which bind to genetic material DNA or RNA by means of cationic charge electrostatic interaction . Cationic liposomes which may be used in the present invention include 3 N N N dimethyl aminoethane carbamoyl cholesterol DC Chol 1 2 bis oleoyloxy 3 trimethylammonio pr opane DOTAP see for example WO 98 07408 lysinylphosphatidylethanola mine L PE lipopolyarrines such as lipospermine N 2 hydroxyethyl N N d imethyl 2 3 bis dodecyloxy 1 propanaminium bromide dimethyl dioctadecyl ammonium bromide DDAB dioleoylphosphatidyl ethanolamine DOPE dioleoylphosphatidyl choline DOPC N 1 2 3 dioleyloxy propyl N N N triethylanunonium DOTMA DOSPA DMRIE GL 67 GL 89 Lipofectin and Lipofectamine Thiery et al. 1997 4 226 237 Felgner et al. 772 126 139 1995 Eastman et al. 8 765 7.73 1997 . Polynucleotide lipid formulations described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 858 784 can also be used in the methods described herein. Many of these lipids are commercially available from for example Boehringer Mannheim and Avanti Polar Lipids Birmingham Ala. . Also encompassed are the cationic phospholipids found in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 264 618 5 223 263 and 5 459 127. Other suitable phospholipids which may be used include phosphatidylcholine phosphatidylserine phosphatidylethanolamine sphingomyelin phosphatidylinositol and the like. Cholesterol may also be included.

A preparation that includes units of a viral delivery system can be delivered to heart cells of a subject by any of a variety of methods.

For instance a pharmaceutical preparation of the viral delivery system can be introduced systemically e.g. by intravenous injection and specific transduction of the protein in the target cells occurs predominantly from specificity of transfection provided by the gene delivery vehicle cell type or tissue type expression due to the transcriptional regulatory sequences controlling expression of the receptor gene or a combination thereof. In other embodiments initial delivery of the recombinant gene is more limited with introduction into the animal being quite localized. For example the gene delivery vehicle can be introduced by catheter see U.S. Pat. No. 5 328 470 or by stereotactic injection e.g. Chen et al. 1994 91 3054 3057 .

In one exemplary implementation the preparation is directly injected into heart tissue. U.S. Ser. No. 10 914 829 describes a protocol for direct injection. Direct injection or application of a viral vector into the myocardium can restrict expression of the transferred genes to the heart Gutzman et al 1993 73 1202 7 French et al. 1994 90 2414 24 .

In another exemplary implementation the preparation is introduced into the lumen of one or more coronary arteries. Passage of blood out of the coronary arteries can be restricted. The preparation can be delivered antegrade and allowed to reside in the arteries for between one to five minutes e.g. between one to three minutes.

A stent can be coated with or can contain an agent that decreases phosphatase activity e.g. an agent described herein. Methods for preparing stents both biodegradable and non biodegradable for delivering a therapeutic agent are well known see e.g. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 163 952 5 304 121 6 391 052 6 387 124 6 379 382 and 6 358 556 6 605 110 6 605 114 6 572 645 6 569 194 6 545 748 6 541 116 6 527 801 6 506 437 . In one embodiment a stent is coated with a therapeutic agent e.g. an agent described herein such as a nucleic acid that decreases phosphatase activity using techniques known in the art.

In one embodiment the stent is a stainless steel stent or nytinol mesh like devices. For example a stent can be delivered into the coronary artery on a catheter during a PCI procedure percutaneous coronary intervention . A stent can be deployed in the artery by either expansion by a balloon or by a self expanding delivery design. Exemplary commercially available stents include Gianturco Roubin Stents e.g. from Cook Cardiology Multilink Duet Tetra Penta Zeta Stents e.g. from Guidant Nir Wall Stents Taxus e.g. from SCIMED Boston Scientific GFX S series Stents e.g. from Medtronic AVE velocity and Cypher stents e.g. from Johnson Johnson Cordis .

For example a stent can be coated with a polymeric cation that can mediate nucleic acid condensation or compaction e.g. as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 596 699. Linear polycations such as poly L lysine polyornithine polyarginine and the like can be used. The polymers may be homopolymers such as polylysine polyomithine or polyarginine or may be heteropolymers including random polymers formed of lysine omithine arginine and the like. More complex molecules may also be employed as polycations such as branched or linear polyethylenimine and the like. Any of a variety of naturally occurring nucleic acid binding agents may be employed such as spermine or spermidine and are including within the definition of polycation. Protamine can similarly be employed as can any of a variety of histones. Polyamidoamine dendrimers may similarly be employed wherein terminal amino groups bind the nucleic acid by electrostatic means resulting in positively charged condensates. The polycation may be specifically modified to provide optimal characteristics to form the desired condensate. For example a repeating lysine chain of 18 residues followed by a tryptophan and an alkylated cysteine residue has been reported to form condensates with properties at least equal to polylysine McKenzie et al. 54 311 318 1999 . In general the polycation is positively charged and has a net positive charge at about pH 6 to about 8 or has more than about five positively charged residues. The polycation has a higher number of positive charges compared to the number of negative charges. A polycation includes natural nucleic acid binding proteins and recombinant nucleic acid binding protein such as homo or hetero polymers of amino acids or synthetic compounds that bind to one or more nucleic acid sequences found within natural or recombinant nucleic acid molecules and results in nucleic acid condensation.

An additional method of coating a therapeutic agent such as a nucleic acid onto a medical device such as a stent involves coating the medical device with a swellable hydrogel polymer as described e.g. in U.S. Pat. No. 5 674 192 or 6 409 716. The hydrogel coating is characterized by the ability to incorporate a substantial amount of the nucleic acid typically in aqueous solution form and is swellable such that the aqueous solution can be effectively squeezed out of the coating when pressure is applied e.g. by inflation or expansion of the stent. Administration of the drug in this way enables the drug to be site specific such that release of high concentrations can be limited to direct application to the affected tissue. The stent may also be coated with a viral particle that contains the nucleic acid.

Other methods of coupling a therapeutic agent such as a nucleic acid to a stent or other medical device are known in the art see for example U.S. Pat. No. 6 024 918 U.S. Pat. No. 6 506 408 U.S. Pat. No. 5 932 299.

In some embodiments a stent described herein in addition to being coated with or containing an agent that decreases phosphatase activity can also be coated with a second therapeutic agent. For example the stent can also contain one or more of rapamycin taxol and actinomycin D a thrombin inhibitor an anti thrombogenic agent a thrombolytic agent a fibrinolytic agent a vasospasm inhibitor a calcium channel blocker a vasodilator an antihypertensive agent an antimicrobial agent an antibiotic an inhibitor of surface glycoprotein receptors an anti platelet agent an anti mitotic a microtubule inhibitor an anti secretory agent an actin inhibitor a remodeling inhibitor an antisense nucleotide an anti metabolite an anti proliferative an anticancer chemotherapeutic agent an anti inflammatory steroid or non steroidal anti inflammatory agent an immunosuppressive agent a growth hormone antagonist a growth factor a dopamine agonist a radiotherapeutic agent a peptide a protein an enzyme an extracellular matrix component a free radical scavenger a chelator an antioxidant an anti polymerase an antiviral agent a photodynamic therapy agent and a gene therapy agent.

A treatment can be evaluated by assessing the effect of the treatment on a parameter related to cardiac function or cardiac cellular function e.g. contractility. For example SR Ca ATPase activity or intracellular Ca concentration can be measured using the methods described above. Furthermore force generation by hearts or heart tissue can be measured using methods described in Strauss et al. 262 1437 45 1992.

A treatment can also be evaluated by its effect on a subject e.g. according to parameters that one skilled in the art of treatment would recognize as relevant for the particular treatment. For example in treating heart failure exemplary parameters may relate to cardiac and or pulmonary function. Cardiac parameters include pulse EKG signals lumen loss heart rate heart contractility ventricular function e.g. left ventricular end diastolic pressure LVEDP left ventricular systolic pressure LVSP Ca metabolism e.g. intracellular Ca concentration or peak or resting Ca force generation relaxation and pressure of the heart a force frequency relationship cardiocyte survival or apoptosis or ion channel activity e.g. sodium calcium exchange sodium channel activity calcium channel activity sodium potassium ATPase pump activity activity of myosin heavy chain troponin I troponin C troponin T tropomyosin actin myosin light chain kinase myosin light chain 1 myosin light chain 2 or myosin light chain 3 IGF 1 receptor PI3 kinase AKT kinase sodium calcium exchanger calcium channel L and T calsequestrin or calreticulin. The evaluation can include performing angiography e.g. quantitative angiography and or intravascular ultrasound IVUS e.g. before after or during the treatment.

A heart cell culture can be obtained by allowing heart cells to migrate out of fragments of heart tissue adhering to a suitable substrate e.g. a culture dish or by disaggregating the tissue e.g. mechanically or enzymatically to produce a suspension of heart cells. For example the enzymes trypsin collage nase elastase hyaluronidase DNase pronase dispase or various combinations thereof can be used. Trypsin and pronase give the most complete disaggregation but may damage the cells. Collagenase and dispase give a less complete disagregation but are less harmful. Methods for isolating tissue e.g. heart tissue and the disaggregation of tissue to obtain cells e.g. heart cells are described in Freshney R. I. Culture of Animal Cells A Manual of Basic Technique Third Edition 1994.

A modulator of phosphatase activity can be a nucleic acid such as a siRNA anti sense RNA triple helix forming nucleic acid or a ribozyme which can decreases the expression of a phosphatase e.g. a type 1 phosphatase.

For example gene expression can be modified by gene silencing using double strand RNA Sharp 1999 13 139 141 . RNAi otherwise known as double stranded RNA interference dsRNAi or small interfering RNA siRNA has been extensively documented in a number of organisms including mammalian cells the nematode Fire A. et al 391 806 811 1998 .

dsRNA can be delivered to cells or to an organism to antagonize a phosphatase. For example a dsRNA that is complementary to a phosphatase coding nucleic acid can silence protein expression of the phosphatase e.g. a type 1 phosphatase. The dsRNA can include a region that is complementary to a coding region of a phosphatase e.g. a 5 coding region a region encoding a phosphatase core domain a 3 coding region or a non coding region e.g. a 5 or 3 untranslated region. dsRNA can be produced e.g. by transcribing a cassette in vitro or in vivo in both directions for example by including a T7 promoter on either side of the cassette. The insert in the cassette is selected so that it includes a sequence complementary to the phosphatase coding nucleic acid. The sequence need not be full length for example an exon or between 19 50 nucleotides or 50 200 nucleotides. The sequence can be from the 5 half of the transcript e.g. within 1000 600 400 or 300 nucleotides of the ATG. See also the HISCRIBE RNAi Transcription Kit New England Biolabs Massachusetts and Fire A. 1999 15 358 363. dsRNA can be digested into smaller fragments. See e.g. US Patent Application 2002 0086356 and 2003 0084471.

In one embodiment an siRNA is used. siRNAs are small double stranded RNAs dsRNAs that optionally include overhangs. For example the duplex region is about 18 to 25 nucleotides in length e.g. about 19 20 21 22 23 or 24 nucleotides in length. Typically the siRNA sequences are exactly complementary to the target mRNA.

 Ribozymes are enzymatic RNA molecules which cleave at specific sites in RNA. Ribozymes that can specifically cleave nucleic acids that encode or that are required for the expression of phosphatase e.g. type 1 phosphatases may be designed according to well known methods.

Artificial transcription factors such as chimeric zinc finger proteins can be engineered to interact with a sequence in or near a gene encoding a phosphatase inhibitor or a phosphatase e.g. at a site in the a promoter or enhancer of the gene e.g. within 1000 700 500 or 200 nucleotides of the mRNA start site or within 50 20 10 nucleotides of a chromatin accessible site in the gene. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 785 613. The artificial transcription factor can be designed to activate expression of the gene in the case where the gene encodes a phosphatase inhibitor e.g. I 1 or to repression expression of the gene e.g. in the case where the gene encodes a phosphatase.

The artificial transcription factor can be designed or selected from a library. For example the artificial transcription factor can be prepared by selection in vitro e.g. using phage display U.S. Pat. No. 6 534 261 or in vivo or by design based on a recognition code see e.g. WO 00 42219 and U.S. Pat. No. 6 511 808 . See e.g. Rebar et al. 1996 267 129 Greisman and Pabo 1997 275 657 Isalan et al. 2001 19 656 and Wu et al. 1995 . USA 92 344 for among other things methods for creating libraries of varied zinc finger domains.

Optionally the zinc finger protein can be fused to a transcriptional regulatory domain e.g. an activation domain to activate transcription or a repression domain to repress transcription. The zinc finger protein can itself be encoded by a heterologous nucleic acid that is delivered to a cell or the protein itself can be delivered to a cell see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 534 261. The heterologous nucleic acid that includes a sequence encoding the zinc finger protein can be operably linked to an inducible promoter e.g. to enable fine control of the level of the zinc finger protein in the cell.

An agent that modulates phosphatase activity e.g. an agent described herein can be administered to a subject by standard methods. For example the agent can be administered by any of a number of different routes including intravenous intradermal subcutaneous oral e.g. inhalation or ingestion transdermal topical and transmucosal. In one embodiment the agent is administered by injection e.g. intra arterially intramuscularly or intravenously.

The agent e.g. a nucleic acid molecule encoding a phosphatase inhibitor polypeptide fragments or analog modulators e.g. organic compounds and antibodies also referred to herein as active compounds can be incorporated into pharmaceutical compositions suitable for administration to a subject e.g. a human. Such compositions typically include the polypeptide nucleic acid molecule modulator or antibody and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. As used herein the language pharmaceutically acceptable carrier is intended to include any and all solvents dispersion media coatings antibacterial and antifungal agents isotonic and absorption delaying agents and the like compatible with pharmaceutical administration. The use of such media and agents for pharmaceutically active substances are known. Except insofar as any conventional media or agent is incompatible with the active compound such media can be used in the compositions of the invention. Supplementary active compounds can also be incorporated into the compositions.

A pharmaceutical composition can be formulated to be compatible with its intended route of administration. Solutions or suspensions used for parenteral intradermal or subcutaneous application can include the following components a sterile diluent such as water for injection saline solution fixed oils polyethylene glycols glycerine propylene glycol or other synthetic solvents antibacterial agents such as benzyl alcohol or methyl parabens antioxidants such as ascorbic acid or sodium bisulfite chelating agents such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid buffers such as acetates citrates or phosphates and agents for the adjustment of tonicity such as sodium chloride or dextrose. pH can be adjusted with acids or bases such as hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide. The parenteral preparation can be enclosed in ampoules disposable syringes or multiple dose vials made of glass or plastic.

Pharmaceutical compositions suitable for injectable use include sterile aqueous solutions where water soluble or dispersions and sterile powders for the extemporaneous preparation of sterile injectable solutions or dispersion. For intravenous administration suitable carriers include physiological saline bacteriostatic water Cremophor EL BASF Parsippany N.J. or phosphate buffered saline PBS . In all cases the composition must be sterile and should be fluid to the extent that easy syringability exists. It must be stable under the conditions of manufacture and storage and must be preserved against the contaminating action of microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi. The carrier can be a solvent or dispersion medium containing for example water ethanol polyol for example glycerol propylene glycol and liquid polyethylene glycol and the like and suitable mixtures thereof. The proper fluidity can be maintained for example by the use of a coating such as lecithin by the maintenance of the required particle size in the case of dispersion and by the use of surfactants. Prevention of the action of microorganisms can be achieved by various antibacterial and anti fungal agents for example parabens chlorobutanol phenol ascorbic acid thimerosal and the like. In many cases it will be preferable to include isotonic agents for example sugars polyalcohols such as mannitol sorbitol sodium chloride in the composition. Prolonged absorption of the injectable compositions can be brought about by including in the composition an agent which delays absorption for example aluminum monostearate and gelatin.

Sterile injectable solutions can be prepared by incorporating the active compound e.g. an agent described herein in the required amount in an appropriate solvent with one or a combination of ingredients enumerated above as required followed by filtered sterilization. Generally dispersions are prepared by incorporating the active compound into a sterile vehicle which contains a basic dispersion medium and the required other ingredients from those enumerated above. In the case of sterile powders for the preparation of sterile injectable solutions the preferred methods of preparation are vacuum drying and freeze drying which yields a powder of the active ingredient plus any additional desired ingredient from a previously sterile filtered solution thereof.

Oral compositions generally include an inert diluent or an edible carrier. They can be enclosed in gelatin capsules or compressed into tablets. For the purpose of oral therapeutic administration the active compound can be incorporated with excipients and used in the form of tablets troches or capsules. Oral compositions can also be prepared using a fluid carrier for use as a mouthwash wherein the compound in the fluid carrier is applied orally and swished and expectorated or swallowed. Pharmaceutically compatible binding agents and or adjuvant materials can be included as part of the composition. The tablets pills capsules troches and the like can contain any of the following ingredients or compounds of a similar nature a binder such as microcrystalline cellulose gum tragacanth or gelatin an excipient such as starch or lactose a disintegrating agent such as alginic acid Primogel or corn starch a lubricant such as magnesium stearate or Sterotes a glidant such as colloidal silicon dioxide a sweetening agent such as sucrose or saccharin or a flavoring agent such as peppermint methyl salicylate or orange flavoring.

Systemic administration can also be by transmucosal or transdermal means. For transmucosal or transdermal administration penetrants appropriate to the barrier to be permeated are used in the formulation. Such penetrants are generally known and include for example for transmucosal administration detergents bile salts and fusidic acid derivatives. Transmucosal administration can be accomplished through the use of nasal sprays or suppositories. For transdermal administration the active compounds are formulated into ointments salves gels or creams as generally known in the art.

In one embodiment the active compounds are prepared with carriers that will protect the compound against rapid elimination from the body such as a controlled release formulation including implants and microencapsulated delivery systems. Biodegradable biocompatible polymers can be used such as ethylene vinyl acetate polyanhydrides polyglycolic acid collagen polyorthoesters and polylactic acid. Methods for preparation of such formulations will be apparent to those skilled in the art. The materials can also be obtained commercially from Alza Corporation and Nova Pharmaceuticals Inc. Liposomal suspensions including liposomes targeted to infected cells with monoclonal antibodies to viral antigens can also be used as pharmaceutically acceptable carriers. These can be prepared according to methods known to those skilled in the art for example as described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 522 811.

The pharmaceutical compositions can be included in a container pack or dispenser together with instructions for administration.

In a preferred embodiment the pharmaceutical composition is injected into an affected vessel e.g. an artery or an organ e.g. the heart.

Small molecule agents that modulate phosphatase activity e.g. inhibit phosphatase activity can be identified by a small molecule screen. One or more candidate molecules can be contacted to a phosphatase and evaluated to determine if the candidate molecule interacts with the phosphatase or modulates enzymatic activity of the phosphatase. The contacting can be effected in vitro or in vivo. In vitro assays for example can use highly purified components e.g. using a recombinant protein that has phosphatase activity e.g. at least a catalytic fragment of a human phosphatase. Phosphatase enzymatic activity can be evaluated in vitro.

For example protein phosphatase 1 activity can be assayed as described Endo S. et al. 1996 35 5220 5228 in a 30 l reaction mixture containing 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4 1 mM DTT 0.5 mM MnCl 10 M P phosphorylase a and 0.5 g ml PP1. The reaction is initiated by the addition of 1 l of PP1 to 20 l of assay mixture containing the rest of the assay components. After 20 min at 30 C. the reaction is terminated by adding 10 l of 50 trichloroacetic acid to the assay mixture. The assay mixture is then cooled on ice and centrifuged. A 20 l aliquot from the supernatant was spotted onto filter paper and placed in a scintillation counter to determine the amount of released P P. P Phosphorylase a used for PP1 assays was prepared at 30 C. for 30 min as described. P Phosphorylase a was dialyzed in 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4 1 mM EDTA 1 mM DTT and stored frozen at 80 C. until used see also Huang et al. USA. 2000 May 23 97 11 5824 9 .

In many drug screening programs which test libraries of therapeutic compounds and natural extracts high throughput assays are desirable in order to maximize the number of test compounds surveyed in a given period of time.

The efficacy of a test compound can be assessed by generating dose response curves from data obtained using various concentrations of the test compounds. Moreover a control assay can also be performed to provide a baseline for comparison. In the control assay the heart cell is incubated in the absence of a test compounds.

A compound or test compound can be any chemical compound for example a macromolecule e.g. a polypeptide a protein complex or a nucleic acid or a small molecule e.g. an amino acid a nucleotide an organic or inorganic compound . The test compound can have a formula weight of less than about 10 000 grams per mole less than 5 000 grams per mole less than 1 000 grams per mole or less than about 500 grams per mole. The test compound can be naturally occurring e.g. a herb or a nature product synthetic or both. Examples of macromolecules are proteins protein complexes and glycoproteins nucleic acids e.g. DNA RNA and PNA peptide nucleic acid . Examples of small molecules are peptides peptidomimetics e.g. peptoids amino acids amino acid analogs polynucleotides polynucleotide analogs nucleotides nucleotide analogs organic or inorganic compounds e.g. heteroorganic or organometallic compounds. A test compound can be the only substance assayed by the method described herein. Alternatively a collection of test compounds can be assayed either consecutively or concurrently

The test compounds can be obtained for example as described above e.g. based on information about an agonist or using any of the numerous combinatorial library method. Some exemplary libraries include biological libraries peptoid libraries libraries of molecules having the functionalities of peptides but with a novel non peptide backbone which are resistant to enzymatic degradation but which nevertheless remain bioactive see e.g. Zuckermann R. N. et al. 1994 37 2678 85 spatially addressable parallel solid phase or solution phase libraries synthetic library methods requiring deconvolution the one bead one compound library method and synthetic library methods using affinity chromatography selection. These approaches can be used for example to produce peptide non peptide oligomer or small molecule libraries of compounds see e.g. Lam 1997 12 145 .

Preparation and screening of combinatorial chemical libraries is well known to those of skill in the art. Such combinatorial chemical libraries include but are not limited to peptide libraries see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 010 175 Furka 37 487 493 1991 and Houghton et al. 354 84 88 1991 . Other chemistries for generating chemical diversity libraries can also be used. Such chemistries include but are not limited to peptoids e.g. PCT Publication No. WO 91 19735 encoded peptides e.g. PCT Publication No. WO 93 20242 random bio oligomers e.g. PCT Publication No. WO 92 00091 benzodiazepines e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 288 514 diversomers such as hydantoins benzodiazepines and dipeptides Hobbs et al. 90 6909 6913 1993 vinylogous polypeptides Hagihara et al. 114 6568 1992 nonpeptidal peptidomimetics with glucose scaffolding Hirschmann et al. 114 9217 9218 1992 analogous organic syntheses of small compound libraries Chen et al. 116 2661 1994 oligocarbamates Cho et al. 261 1303 1993 and or peptidyl phosphonates Campbell et al. 59 658 1994 nucleic acid libraries see Ausubel Berger and Sambrook all supra peptide nucleic acid libraries see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 539 083 antibody libraries see e.g. Vaughn et al. 14 3 309 314 1996 and PCT US96 10287 carbohydrate libraries see e.g. Liang et al. 274 1520 1522 1996 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 593 853 small organic molecule libraries see e.g. benzodiazepines Baum C EN January 18 page 33 1993 isoprenoids U.S. Pat. No. 5 569 588 thiazolidinones and metathiazanones U.S. Pat. No. 5 549 974 pyrrolidines U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 525 735 and 5 519 134 morpholino compounds U.S. Pat. No. 5 506 337 benzodiazepines U.S. Pat. No. 5 288 514 and the like . Additional examples of methods for the synthesis of molecular libraries can be found in the art for example in DeWitt et al. 1993 90 6909 Erb et al. 1994 91 11422 Zuckermann et al. 1994 . 37 2678 Cho et al. 1993 261 1303 Carrell et al. 1994 33 2059 Carell et al. 1994 33 2061 and Gallop et al. 1994 37 1233.

A biological library can includes polymer that can be encoded by nucleic acid. Such encoded polymers include polypeptides and functional nucleic acids such as nucleic acid aptamers DNA RNA double stranded RNAs e.g. RNAi ribozymes and so forth . The biological libraries and non biological libraries can be used to generate peptide libraries. Another example of a biological library is a library of dsRNAs e.g. siRNAs or precursors thereof. A library of nucleic acids that can be processed or transcribed to produce double stranded RNAs e.g. siRNAs is also featured.

Examples of methods for the synthesis of molecular libraries can be found in the art for example in DeWitt et al. 1993 90 6909 Erb et al. 1994 91 11422 Zuckermann et al. 1994 . 37 2678 Cho et al. 1993 261 1303 Carrell et al. 1994 33 2059 Carell et al. 1994 33 2061 and Gallop et al. 1994 37 1233.

Libraries of compounds may be presented in solution e.g. Houghten 1992 13 412 421 or on beads Lam 1991 354 82 84 chips Fodor 1993 364 555 556 bacteria Ladner U.S. Pat. No. 5 223 409 spores Ladner U.S. Pat. No. 5 223 409 plasmids Cull et al 1992 89 1865 1869 or on phage Scott and Smith 1990 249 386 390 Devlin 1990 249 404 406 Cwirla et al. 1990 87 6378 6382 Felici 1991 222 301 310 Ladner supra. . In many cases a high throughput screening approach to a library of test compounds includes one or more assays e.g. a combination of assays. Information from each assay can be stored in a database e.g. to identify candidate compounds that can serve as leads for optimized or improved compounds and to identify SARs.

The following examples are provided as a further description of the invention and to illustrate but not limit the invention.

To examine the levels and the phosphorylation state of I 1 in failing human hearts the levels of I 1 were compared in biopsies from nine non failing and ten failing human hearts in which the primary diagnosis was dilated cardiomyopathy IDC . To control for equal loading of protein the data were normalized to calsequestrin protein levels as the levels of this SR protein were similar between failing and non failing samples . Total I 1 protein levels were not different between donor and failing hearts but its degree of phosphorylation was significantly reduced 60 in failing hearts indicating that I 1 was predominantly inactive and thus incapable of inhibiting PP1 activity in the failing human heart. The decreased I 1 phosphorylation may reflect impaired adrenergic signaling and decreased PKA activation due to reduced cAMP levels in failing 5.8 0.7 pmol mg n 9 compared to donor 10.9 1.3 pmol mg n 10 p

I 1 deficient mouse hearts show decreased contractile parameters. Further in some cases of human heart failure PP1 activity is increased. This increase may at least partly be due to inactivation or dephosphorylation of I 1 leading to depressed function. Thus increasing I 1 s activity can be beneficial in restoring the attenuated adrenergic responsiveness in failing human cardiomyocytes.

Adenoviral mediated expression of a constitutively active I 1 protein I 1 was used in myocytes isolated from human failing hearts del Monte F et al. 1999 100 2308 11 . The design of the I 1construct entailed truncation of the I 1 cDNA to encode for the first 65 amino acids and introduction of nucleotide changes to replace the PKA phosphorylation site ACC Thr with aspartic acid GAC D resulting in a constitutively active inhibitor Endo S. et al. 1996 35 5220 8 . In parallel studies cardiomyocytes were infected with an adenovirus encoding for galactosidase to serve as controls. Both constructs also contained sequences encoding for the green fluorescent protein GFP which served as a marker of transfection D .

Failing human cardiomyocytes infected with either gal or I 1constructs exhibited similar contractile function under basal conditions. However in response to isoproterenol 100 nM myocytes infected with I 1displayed significantly increased myocyte shortening F rates of cell shortening and re lengthening and a lower time constant for relaxation tau I 1 0.16 0.05 n 8 vs. GFP 0.37 0.09 n 10 p

Accordingly expression of a protein that inhibits phosphatase is effective for decreasing PP1 activity an activity which is reported to be elevated in human heart failure. In addition these results indicate that inhibition of PP1 activity by I 1significantly improves the adrenergic responsiveness in the failing human heart.

Different serotypes of AAV were tested for their ability to deliver an exogenous gene to the heart. AAV6 has found to have some surprising and unexpected properties relative to other AAVs. AAV6 conferred the fastest gene expression as well as the most specific and efficient expression in the heart data not shown . Other AAVs however may be useful for other applications e.g. ones in which a different course of expression is desired in heart tissue.

Percutaneous antegrade intracoronary gene transfer with concomitant coronary vein blockade CVB was performed in both sheep and swine models. The left anterior descending artery LAD or the left circumflex artery LCX was cannulated and occluded with a standard angioplasty balloon. One minute ischemic preconditioning in both the LAD and the LCX distribution by blockade of the LAD and the LCX was performed to allow increased viral dwell time. Following the preconditioning protocol the great coronary vein GCV or one of its branches was cannulated and temporarily occluded with a standard wedge balloon catheter. CVB was performed globally implying occlusion of the proximal GCV and thus occluding venous drainage in both the LAD and LCX distribution or selectively in which case the anterior interventricular vein AIV was occluded during LAD delivery and similarly the ostium of the middle cardiac vein MCV was occluded during LCX delivery. With both the arterial and the venous balloons inflated percutaneous antegrade intracoronary gene transfer was performed by injection through the center lumen of the inflated angioplasty balloon with an adeno associated virus carrying galactosidase AAV6. gal n 5 .

Twelve weeks following gene transfer with AAV6.CMV. gal myocardial sections of 10 m were obtained from the septal anterior left lateral posterior and right ventricular walls. These sections were fixed with a phosphate buffered solution PBS containing 0.5 glutaraldehyde for 30 minutes and then in PBS with 30 sucrose for 30 minutes. The sections were then incubated overnight in a solution containing 5 bromo 4 chloro 3 indolyl D galactopyranoside X gal . The results indicated an extensive transfer of galactosidase throughout the myocardium data not shown . Therefore antegrade transduction of AAV6.CMV. gal at a concentration of 5 10genomes ml with the global CVB resulted in a significant gene expression in the targeted myocardium demonstrating feasibility and safety in a large animal model.

Gene transfer using coronary venous occlusion was further confirmed. In brief a reporter gene and a gene encoding SERC2A was successfully transferred in pigs relying upon the AAV6.CMV construct data not shown .

To determine the long term in vivo effects of decreased protein phosphatase 1 activity a constitutively active truncated inhibitor 1 I T35D AA 1 65 was expressed in a cardiomyocyte restricted manner. This form of inhibitor 1 was chosen because it specifically inhibits protein phosphatase 1 albeit at higher concentration than the native phosphorylated inhibitor Endo S. et al. 1996 35 5220 8 and more saliently it remains active in heart failure where the adrenergic receptor signaling axis is down regulated Bristow M. R. et al. 1982 307 205 11 .

A 5.6 kb transgene consisting of the a MHC promoter followed by the mouse I T35D AA 1 65 cDNA and the simian virus 40 polyadenylation site was constructed restricted gel purified and then microinjected into the pronuclei of one cell inbred FVB N embryos. The TG mice were handled according to protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at the University of Cincinnati.

Three transgenic lines were obtained with similar levels of I T35D expression 25 fold compared to WTs . In vivo cardiac function was assessed by non invasive echocardiography as previously described Hoit B. D. et al. 1995 77 632 7 . Transgenic and wild type mice were anesthetized with Avertin 2.5 10 gram body weight for each experiment and cardiac function was assessed under blinded conditions. The student s t test and ANOVA followed by the Neuman Keuls t test were used to determine the statistical difference between groups. Data was presented as mean standard error. For each experiment statistical significance was established at a P value 

The three lines along with age and gender matched wild types WT were examined by M mode and Doppler echocardiography. At months of age an enhancement in the velocity of circumferential fiber shortening Vcf was observed TG 7.91 0.31 vs. WT 6.28 0.54 circ sec P

PP1 activity was examined using P labeled glycogen phosphorylase a as a substrate Carr A. N. et al. 2002 22 4124 35 Suzuki Y. et al. 2001 21 2683 94 in the presence of 4 nM okadaic acid at concentrations that selectively inhibit type 2A phosphatase and EDTA 0.5 mM an inhibitor of type 2B phosphatase. The assays were conducted under conditions where no more than 15 of the substrate was utilized to assure linearity of the reaction.

In vivo cardiac function was examined using the Langendorff perfusion system as previously described Sato Y. et al. 1998 273 28470 7 . The heart rate and the maximal first derivatives of intraventricular pressure dP dt were continuously calculated. For cell function calcium tolerant cardiomyocytes were isolated and a subset was loaded with Fura 2 AM Zhao W. et al. 2003 57 71 81 . Basal and isoproterenol stimulated contractile parameters and Ca transients were determined using a video edged detection system. Cells were paced at 0.5 Hz Data were analyzed by Felix computer software Photon Technology International Lawrenceville N.J. USA .

The Langendorff perfused hearts which represent a system free from neurohormonal or hemodynamic influences also indicated enhanced intrinsic cardiac contractility. In active inhibitor 1 expressing hearts the maximal left ventricular pressure was increased 23 and the dP dt and dP dt were augmented by 39 and 36 respectively relative to wild type cohorts . Furthermore isolated calcium tolerant cardiomyocytes exhibited increases 56 in fractional shortening . Under basal conditions the dL dt and dL dt as well as the degree of fractional shortening FS were enhanced in the active inhibitor 1 expressing cardiomyocytes. Also under isoproterenol stimulation ISO the dL dt and dL dt were enhanced. Rates of myocyte shortening dL dt and re lengthening dL dt were also enhanced over 2 fold by active inhibitor 1 expression . The times to 50 peak and 50 relaxation were also significantly decreased. Furthermore when cardiomyocytes were maximally stimulated with isoproterenol 100 nM the rates of myocyte shortening dL dt and relengthening dL dt continued to be enhanced .

The alterations in mechanical parameters reflected similar enhancement in calcium cycling. Under basal conditions both the amplitude and time to 50 decay T of the calcium transient were enhanced in active inhibitor 1 cardiomyocytes. Under isoproterenol 100 nM stimulation Twas also abbreviated. In effect the amplitude of calcium transients was increased by 71 reflecting enhanced SR calcium uptake and SR calcium load and the time to 50 decay of the Ca signal T was reduced by 37 indicating enhanced SERCA2 function.

Of note even under isoproterenol stimulation the active inhibitor 1 cardiomyocytes continued to exhibit an abbreviated T while the amplitude of the calcium transient was not different from wild type cardiomyocytes consistent with the mechanical parameters. These findings on enhanced basal contractility and augmented adrenergic responsiveness support the role of inhibitor 1 as a molecular inotrope. The example thus shows that mice with cardiac specific expression of the active inhibitor 1 I 1 exhibit a decrease in cardiac type 1 phosphatase activity and an increase in cardiac contractility.

As described above adrenergic receptor dependent protein phosphorylation of key regulatory phosphoproteins such as phospholamban the ryanodine receptor troponin I and the L type calcium channel constitutes a critical regulatory mechanism that governs Ca cycling and cardiac contractility. Thus the expression and phosphorylation levels of these key substrates were investigated in the transgenic model described herein.

Quantitative immunoblotting was performed on cardiac homogenates as previously described. Immunoprecipitation experiments were performed using protein G dynabeads Dynal Bioctechnology Incorporated Lake Success N.Y. . Briefly 50 l of PP1a antibody Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc 6104 was conjugated to the magnetic protein G beads using 0.2 M triethanoalamine and 20 mM dimethylpimedilate as described by the manufacturer. 500 l of cardiac homogenate was incubated with the beads overnight with constant rotational motion. The beads were washed with 5 with PBS plus 0.1 Tween20. Finally the proteins bound to the PP1 antibody were eluted using 0.1 M citric acid pH 2.8 and then separated on SDS PAGE blotted and probed as described above.

It was first determined that there were no differences in adrenergic receptor density in radioligand binding studies with I iodocyanopindolol data not shown . Radioligand binding studies were performed as described previously McGraw D W and Liggett S B 1997 272 7338 44 . Briefly mouse hearts were homogenized in buffer containing 5 mM Tris 2 mM EDTA pH 7.4 benzamidine 5 g ml and soybean typsin inhibitor 5 g ml . The homogenate was centrifuged at 40 000 g for 10 minutes at 4 C. The resulting pellets were resuspended in 10 volumes of homogenization buffer and centrifuged again. The pellet was resuspended in assay buffer 75 mM Tris 12.5 mM MgCl 2 mM EDTA pH 7.4 and aliquots were then incubated in a total volume of 250 l at room temperature for 2 hours with 400 pM I labeled iodocyanopindolol. Non specific binding was determined in the presence of 1 M propranolol. To stop the reaction cold wash buffer 10 mM Tris pH 7.4 was added and vacuum filtration was performed through Whatman GF C glass fiber filters.

However there was a prominent increase 1.8 fold in the phosphorylation level of phospholamban at both its cAMP dependent Ser16 and Ca calmodulin dependent Thr17 protein kinase sites compared to wild type hearts . Interestingly the cardiac ryanodine receptor protein levels were decreased by 30 but there was no difference in the relative mol Pi mol RyR2 phosphorylation of this channel . This finding on ryanodine receptor phosphorylation was surprising since both protein phosphatase 1 and protein phosphatase 2A have been shown to coimmunoprecipitate with the ryanodine receptor macromolecular complex. Marx S O et al. 2000 101 365 76 .

Examination of protein or phosphorylation levels of troponin I indicated no alterations in the active inhibitor 1 expressing hearts . Furthermore there were no alterations of the L type Ca channel protein level. Calcium tolerant cardiomyocytes were isolated and cells with clear cross striations and without spontaneous contractions were used for the measurement of L type Ca current. Current recordings were obtained at constant voltage and cell capacitance and Ca channel inactivation was determined Bodi I. et al. 2003 41 1611 22 . The mean peak Ca current I and the steady state inactivation of the current voltage relationship I V were similar between active inhibitor 1 expressing and wild type myocytes. However inactivation of Iwas faster in the active inhibitor 1 transgenic cells than in wild type cells similar to previous observations in the phospholamban knock out mice Masak H. et al. 1997 272 H606 12 .

Importantly glycogen metabolism was investigated and no significant difference was observed in glycogen synthase and glycogen phosphorylase activities between active inhibitor 1 expressing and wild type hearts. Moreover there was no difference in the overall glycogen accumulation in these hearts. Thus expression of the active inhibitor 1 in the myocardium does not have significant effects on glycogen metabolism consistent with previous findings on inhibitor 1 ablation which did not alter glycogen metabolism in skeletal muscle Scrimgeour A G et al. 1999 274 20949 52 .

To examine the hypothesis that the active inhibitor 1 expression associated with enhanced Ca cycling may be protective against cardiac remodeling induced by hemodynamic stress we subjected the transgenic mice and isogenic wild type cohorts were subjected to banding of the transverse aorta followed by serial echocardiographic assessment at 6 and 12 weeks post banding Kiriazis H. et al. 2002 53 372 81 . Transverse aortic constriction on mice was performed as previously described. Kiriazis H. et al. 2002 53 372 81 . Briefly 10 week old FVBN male wild type and transgenic mice underwent banding of the transverse aorta using a 27 gauge needle. Echocardiography was performed prior to banding and at various time points post banding. At the termination point trans aortic gradients as well as lung liver heart and body weight were measured and cardiac tissue was stored for subsequent histopathological analysis and biochemical studies.

While trans aortic gradients were similar between these two groups WT 47.4 2.50 TG 46.75 2.69 mmHg active inhibitor 1 mice exhibited no decline in Vcfc and an increase in the h r wall thickness radius ratio suggesting maintained function and reduced wall tension or stress as determined by La Place s law. In contrast WTs experienced a 30 decline in Vcfand significant increases in left ventricular end diastolic and end systolic dimensions P

Pressure measurements were performed as previously described. del Monte F. et al. 2001 104 1424 9 . The time course of isovolumic relaxation was calculated using the equation P Pe P where P is the left ventricular isovolumic pressure Pis pressure at the time of peak dP dt and Pis residual pressure. For the pacing studies an epicardial lead was placed at on atrial appendage connected to a stimulator Grass Instruments MA . In a subset of animals multiple 0.7 mm piezoelectric crystals Sonometrics Co. Canada were placed over the surface of the left ventricle along the short axis of the ventricle at the level of the mitral valve to measure the inter crystal distance. Left ventricular pressure dimension loops were generated under different loading conditions by clamping the inferior vena cava. The end systolic pressure dimension relationship was obtained by producing a series of pressure dimension loops over a range of loading conditions and connecting the upper left hand corners of the individual pressure dimension loops to generate the maximal slope.

At the termination point of the study 12 weeks the heart to body weight ratio was increased by 78 in wild types and 52 in the active inhibitor 1 mice relative to sham controls . The frequency of lung congestion was also much higher in wild types 80 compared to active inhibitor banded mice 20 . Lung congestion was defined as a lung weight 2 standard deviations greater than the sham controls.

Further examination of the hearts at the microscopic level revealed increased interstitial and perivascular fibrosis in banded WT hearts FIG. C with moderate to severe multifocal and perivascular fibrosis in the wild type mice and moderate to mild fibrosis in the active inhibitor 1 hearts. Thus Example 6 indicates that active inhibitor 1 expression protects mice subjected to aortic banding from cardiac functional deterioration and morphological deterioration. Histopathological studies with H E trichrome PAS and TRITC labeled wheat germ agglutinin Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. USA for cardiomyocyte cross sectional area were performed as previously described Cohen P. 1990 24 230 5 . Specifically for wheat germ agglutinin labeling of the cell wall 40 or more cell cross sectional areas from multiple sections were determined for each heart n 3 hearts per group . Wheat germ agglutinin staining indicated that the cardiomyocyte cross sectional area in banded WTs was substantially increased compared to banded inhibitor 1 hearts n 120 myocytes from 3 mice per group . Given the anti hypertrophic effects of inhibitor 1 PKC calcineurin CREB and MAP kinase hypertrophic pathways were examined. There was a significant decrease in p38 and ERK1 2 activation in the banded TGs compared to WT cohorts .

The protective effects of inhibitor 1 were not associated with any alterations in the levels of phospholamban SERCA and calsequestrin but the phosphorylation of phospholamban at Ser16 was markedly increased . Of note no differences were observed in phospholamban phosphorylation at Thr17 or in the Ser2809 phosphorylation of the ryanodine receptor. Accordingly the example likewise shows that active inhibitor 1 expression protects mice subjected to aortic banding from cardiac hypertrophy at the cellular level attenuates activation of MAP kinase pathways and has beneficial effects on phospholamban phosphorylation.

To investigate whether short term expression of the active inhibitor 1 by adenoviral gene transfer could improve hemodynamic parameters in the setting of pre existing heart failure a rat model of pressure overload induced cardiomyopathy was utilized which exhibits increased left ventricular diastolic dimensions and decreased fractional shortening by 22 weeks post banding del Monte F. et al. 2001 104 1424 9 Four week old Wistar rats 70 80 g were obtained from Charles River Laboratories Wilmington Mass. and aortic constriction was performed as previously described. del Monte F. et al. 2001 104 1424 9 . The animals were initially randomized in two groups one group of 30 animals with aortic banding and a second group of 32 animals which were sham operated. All animals survived the initial operation.

When decreases of more than 25 in left ventricular fractional shortening were observed gene transfer was performed. The group of 30 animals with aortic banding was subdivided in two groups of fifteen with each group receiving either Ad.I 1T35D or Ad.GFP. The group of 24 sham operated animals did not receive any gene transfer and were studied in an age matched fashion. One animal in the I 1T35D group and one animal in the GFP group died during the gene transfer surgery. The adenoviral delivery system has been described previously Beeri R. et al. 2002 106 1756 9 . In the sham operated rats no gene delivery was performed. Previous studies have shown that the sham operated rats injected with Ad.GFP behaved in a similar way as non infected sham operated rats. Adenoviral gene delivery of active inhibitor 1 or the reporter gene GFP with a catheter based approach induced an expression pattern that was grossly homogenous throughout the ventricles in failing and non failing hearts Del Monte F. et al. 2002 9 49 56 .

Adenoviral vectors were generated Del Monte F. et al. 1999 100 2308 11 and delivered Beeri R. et al. 2002 106 1756 9 in the rat heart failure model Beeri R. et al. 2002 106 1756 9 Del Monte et al. 2001 104 1424 9 . Pressure measurements and biochemical assays upon termination were performed as previously described Beeri R. et al. 2002 106 1756 9 Del Monte et al. 2001 104 1424 9 .

Immunoblotting studies also confirmed the expression of active inhibitor 1 and protein phosphatase 1 activity was significantly reduced 60 upon infection with Ad.I 1 data not shown . The left ventricular function was decreased in the failing control group but gene transfer of the active inhibitor 1 significantly increased the rate of pressure rise dP dt . Diastolic parameters were also normalized by active inhibitor 1 expression as evidenced by restoration of the maximal rate of decline of left ventricular systolic pressure dP dt as well as the time course for pressure decline measured by tau the isovolumic relaxation constant .

To further define ventricular function in a load independent fashion pressure dimension analysis was performed in a subset of animals . Pressure measurements were performed as previously described Del Monte F. et al. 2001 104 1424 9 . The time course of isovolumic relaxation was calculated using the equation P Pe P where P is the left ventricular isovolumic pressure Pis pressure at the time of peak dP dt and Pis residual pressure. For the pacing studies an epicardial lead was placed at on atrial appendage connected to a stimulator Grass Instruments MA . In a subset of animals multiple 0.7 mm piezoelectric crystals Sonometrics Co. Canada were placed over the surface of the left ventricle along the short axis of the ventricle at the level of the mitral valve to measure the inter crystal distance. Left ventricular pressure dimension loops were generated under different loading conditions by clamping the inferior vena cava. The end systolic pressure dimension relationship was obtained by producing a series of pressure dimension loops over a range of loading conditions and connecting the upper left hand corners of the individual pressure dimension loops to generate the maximal slope.

To alter loading conditions the inferior vena cava was clamped in the open chested animals thereby reducing ventricular volume. This allowed the calculation of the end systolic pressure dimension relationship using a series of measurements under varying pre load conditions . The maximal slope of the end systolic pressure dimension relationship E or Maximal Elastance was lower in control failing hearts infected with control virus Ad.GFP compared to non failing indicating a diminished state of intrinsic myocardial contractility and contractile reserve. Expression of the active inhibitor 1 completely restored the slope of the end systolic pressure dimension relationship to non failing levels indicating that the heart s ability to enhance contractility in the face of increasing preload was restored. Thus acute adenoviral expression of the active inhibitor 1 halts the progression of cardiac dysfunction and decompensation in a rat model of pressure overload induced heart failure as per the above delineated results.

Additional determination of phosphatase activities were also performed using Schwinger R. H. 1995 92 3220 8 P labeled Myelin Basic Protein NEB Catalog P0780S using okadaic acid to differentiate PP1 and PP2A activity as described previously Margolis S. S. 2003 22 5734 45 . Glycogen synthase GS and glycogen phosphorylase GP activities were determined in cardiac muscle homogenates Suzuki Y. et al. 2001 21 2683 94 . GS activity was determined by the transfer of C glucose from UDP C glucose into glycogen in the presence or absence of 7.2 mM glucose 6 phosphate an allosteric effector of glycogen synthase activity. Glycogen phosphorylase activity was assayed by measuring incorporation of C glucose from C glucose 1 phosphate into glycogen in the absence or presence of 2 mM AMP an allosteric activator of glycogen phosphorylase.

The biochemical characterization revealed that the SERCA2a levels were significantly decreased in the failing hearts consistent with previous reports Del Monte F. et al. 2001 104 1424 9 and these levels remained depressed upon control Ad.GFP or active inhibitor 1 gene transfer. The levels of phospholamban or the ryanodine receptor were not different . Phosphorylation of phospholamban at serine 16 the cAMP dependent site was significantly depressed in failing hearts but adenoviral gene transfer of the active inhibitor 1 was associated with a substantial increase in phosphorylation of serine 16 . Interestingly both failing groups infected with either control or active inhibitor 1 virus exhibited increases in the Thr 17 phosphorylation in phospholamban .

Further examination revealed that the CAM kinase activity was significantly increased in these hearts and Table 1 below .

The activity of CaM Kinase is increased in failing F rat hearts and in failing rat hearts infected with Ad.I 1 or Ad.GFP compared to the non failing NF control group. Interestingly the phosphorylation level of serine 2809 in the ryanodine receptor was increased in all failing groups. Infection with the active inhibitor 1 had no effect on ryanodine receptor phosphorylation .

Examination of the effects of active inhibitor 1 gene transfer on MAP kinase activation indicated a substantial decrease in activated p38 MAP kinase with no alteration in the activation of ERK or JNK .

The findings above indicated that inhibitor 1 expression is associated with increased phospholamban phosphorylation. Accordingly inhibitor 1 can selectively affect protein phosphatase 1 substrates in vivo. To further substantiate this observation immunoprecipitation experiments were performed with an antibody to the protein phosphatase 1 a isoform catalytic subunit. For the inhibitor 1 competition binding assays immunoprecipitations were performed as described earlier. After the removal of the unbound cardiac homogenates the beads were washed 5 PBS plus 0.1 Tween20 and then incubated with 500 l of purified and phosphorylated inhibitor 1 at varying final concentrations 10 nM to 1000 nM . The beads were then washed 3 and bound proteins were eluted with 0.1 M citric acid pH 2.8 . Of note inhibitor 1 the SR glycogen targeting subunit of protein phosphatase 1 R Tang P. M. et al. 1991 266 15782 9 and phospholamban were co immunoprecipitated with protein phosphatase 1 . Incubation of this complex with increasing concentrations 10 nM to 1000 nM of purified and phosphorylated inhibitor 1 revealed reduced binding of phospholamban in a dose dependent manner .

