---

title: Water reclamation in a micropower generator
abstract: A waterless power generator, particularly a waterless electrical power generator and a passively controlled process for producing electricity with a fuel cell using stoichiometric amounts of a solid hydrogen fuel and byproduct water vapor produced by the fuel cell to generate hydrogen gas. A fuel cell reaction of hydrogen and oxygen produces electrical energy as well as by-product water which diffuses back into the power generator as water vapor to react with the hydrogen fuel, producing more hydrogen gas. This generated hydrogen gas is then used as a fuel which allows the fuel cell to generate additional electrical power and additional water. The process runs without any attached water source or water supply other than the water which is produced by the fuel cells themselves.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07901816&OS=07901816&RS=07901816
owner: Honeywell International Inc.
number: 07901816
owner_city: Morristown
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051109
---
The U.S. Government has a paid up license in this invention and the right in limited circumstances to require the patent owner to license others on reasonable terms as provided for by the terms of Contract No. F33615 01 C 2171 awarded by AFRL Wright Research Lab.

The invention relates to a waterless power generator. More particularly the invention pertains to an electrical power generator and process for producing electrical power with a fuel cell. The reaction of oxygen and hydrogen gases in a fuel cell produces electricity and by product water which by product water is reclaimed and used to produce additional hydrogen gas through its reaction with a solid hydrogen producing fuel.

Similar to batteries fuel cells function to produce electricity through chemical reactions. Rather than storing reactants as batteries do fuel cells are operated by continuously supplying reactants to the cell. In a typical fuel cell hydrogen gas acts as one reactant and oxygen as the other with the two reacting at electrodes to form water molecules and releasing energy in the form of direct current electricity. This direct current electricity may then be converted into an alternating current. The apparatus and process may produce electricity continuously as long as hydrogen and oxygen are provided. While oxygen may either be stored or provided from the air it is generally necessary to generate hydrogen gas from other compounds through controlled chemical reactions rather than storing hydrogen because storing hydrogen gas requires that it either be compressed or cryogenically cooled. As fuel cell technology evolves so do the means by which hydrogen gas is generated for application with fuel cells.

Currently there are various methods which are known and employed for generating hydrogen gas. One method is by a process known as reformation in which fossil fuels are broken down into their hydrogen and carbon products. However this system is undesirable in the long term because it is dependent upon a non renewable resource. Another means of generating hydrogen gas is by reversibly adsorbing and releasing hydrogen gas from metal hydrides or alloys through heating. While this method is useful it is not preferred because the metal hydrides are typically very heavy expensive and only release small quantities of hydrogen. Yet another means by which hydrogen gas is generated is through reactive chemical hydrides. This process involves chemically generating hydrogen gas from dry highly reactive solids by reacting them with liquid water or acids. Chemicals especially suitable for this process are lithium hydride calcium hydride lithium aluminum hydride sodium borohydride and combinations thereof each of which is capable of releasing plentiful quantities of hydrogen. The disadvantages associated with this method is that reaction products from the chemical and liquid water typically form a cake or pasty substance which interferes with further reaction of the reactive chemical with the liquid water or acid. This method is also disadvantageous in that the storage of liquid water fuel consumes additional space and increases the overall weight of the associated power generator.

There is currently a need in the art for lighter weight and smaller sized power sources for applications such as portable electronic devices wireless sensors battlefield applications and unmanned air vehicles. Presently the power source that is most often used for portable applications is the lithium battery which has a limited energy capacity as a function of volume and especially as a function of weight. It is desirable to increase the energy capacity of current power sources so as to decrease the power supply replacement interval and or increase operating life while also reducing the size and weight of the power source.

The present invention provides a solution to these problems. The invention provides an electrical power generator and a process for generating hydrogen gas for fueling a fuel cell. The electrical power generator comprises a waterless generator utilizing only by product water from a fuel cell as a water vapor fuel source and without the need for externally supplied water. More particularly the invention provides an electrical power generator that consumes stoichiometric amounts of water vapor and substantially solid non liquid chemical hydride. The fuel cell is preferably initially loaded with a hydrogen gas to initiate a reaction at a hydrogen oxygen Proton Exchange Membrane PEM fuel cell between the hydrogen gas and oxygen gas. This reaction produces water molecules which are maintained within the generator housing at a water retention zone that deters the diffusion of generated fuel cell water out of the housing. The water molecules then diffuse back into the power generator in the form of water vapor which water vapor is then reacted with the chemical hydride to produce more hydrogen gas. This generated hydrogen gas is then used as a fuel which allows the fuel cell to generate additional electrical power and additional water. By reclaiming and recycling this by product water the need for stored water is eliminated thereby reducing the overall size and weight of the system as well as increasing the energy density specific energy and current capacity of the system. Further by reacting water vapor with the aforementioned solid chemical substance it has been found that the typical problems associated with reactive chemical hydrides are avoided resulting in a more efficient system than those of the prior art that use liquid water.

The electrical power generator of the invention further exemplifies the unique capability of generating electrical power through a passive process without the need for using pumps or other means of active regulation. It has been unexpected found that the solid chemical fuel inside the power generator creates a region of low humidity hydrogen on the anode side of a PEM fuel cell. The air on the cathode side of the fuel cell is of significantly higher humidity due to normal ambient air conditions and due to the water produced at the fuel cell cathode by the electrochemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen. This establishes a concentration gradient which causes water to permeate as water vapor from the more humid cathode side of the fuel cell to the lower humidity hydrogen on the anode side inside the generator cavity to create an equilibrium. Regulation of the hydrogen generation rate is partly self regulating because the reaction between hydrogen gas and oxygen gas at the fuel cell produces the required water corresponding to the electrical power generated. A pneumatically controlled valve may further be used to passively adjust the conductance of the water vapor path to the solid fuel.

b at least one fuel cell mounted within the housing the fuel cell comprising a cathode an anode and a water vapor permeable electrolytic membrane positioned between the cathode and the anode which fuel cell is capable of generating electricity and fuel cell water at the cathode by the reaction of hydrogen gas and oxygen gas c at least one fuel chamber mounted within the housing which fuel chamber contains a fuel substance which reacts with water vapor to generate hydrogen gas d at least one air inlet for admitting atmospheric air into the housing e a water retention zone within the housing extending from the air inlet to the fuel cell cathode which water retention zone deters the diffusion of generated fuel cell water out of the air inlet and f a cavity within the housing extending from the fuel cell to the fuel chamber which admits a flow of hydrogen gas from the fuel chamber to the fuel cell and which admits a flow of water vapor from the fuel cell to the fuel chamber.

b at least one fuel cell mounted within the housing the fuel cell comprising a cathode an anode and a water vapor permeable electrolytic membrane positioned between the cathode and the anode which fuel cell is capable of generating electricity and fuel cell water at the cathode by the reaction of hydrogen gas and oxygen gas c at least one fuel chamber mounted within the housing which fuel chamber contains a fuel substance which reacts with water vapor to generate hydrogen gas d at least one air inlet for admitting atmospheric air into the housing e a water retention zone within the housing extending from the air inlet to the fuel cell cathode which water retention zone deters the diffusion of generated fuel cell water out of the air inlet f a cavity within the housing extending from the fuel cell to the fuel chamber which admits a flow of hydrogen gas from the fuel chamber to the fuel cell and which admits a flow of water vapor from the fuel cell to the fuel chamber g at least one valve positioned within said cavity for regulating the passage of hydrogen gas from the fuel chamber to the fuel cell and for regulating the passage of water vapor from the fuel cell to the fuel chamber h an oxygen permeable water vapor impermeable membrane united with the air inlet which membrane deters the flow of fuel cell water into the atmosphere and i a water permeable hydrogen impermeable membrane within the cavity and juxtaposed with said valve which water permeable hydrogen impermeable membrane allows the diffusion of water vapor to said fuel chamber without passing the water vapor through said electrolytic membrane.

An electrical power generator is provided which generates hydrogen gas internally through the reaction of water vapor with a moisture absorbing solid fuel substance which hydrogen gas is reacted with atmospheric oxygen from the air at a fuel cell to generate electrical energy. The reaction of hydrogen and oxygen also produces water molecules as a byproduct at the fuel cell. This generated water is passively diffused from the fuel cell as water vapor to a fuel chamber that contains the solid fuel substance where it reacts with the fuel substance to generate hydrogen gas. The electrical energy generated may be used to power large or small devices that are connected to the power generator depending on the size of the power generator. The power generator of the invention is particularly useful for powering miniature devices such as wireless sensors cellular phones or other hand held electronic devices that are electrically connected to the anode and cathode of the one or more fuel cells of the power generator.

As seen in a typical PEM fuel cell comprises an electrolytic membrane positioned between a negatively charged electrode or cathode on one side of the membrane and a positively charged electrode or anode on the other side of the membrane. In typical hydrogen oxygen PEM fuel cell behavior a hydrogen fuel e.g. hydrogen gas is channeled through flow field plates to the anode while oxygen is channeled to the cathode of the fuel cell. At the anode the hydrogen is split into positive hydrogen ions protons and negatively charged electrons. The electrolytic membrane allows only the positively charged ions to pass through it to the cathode. The negatively charged electrons must instead travel along an external circuit to the cathode creating an electrical current. At the cathode the electrons and positively charged hydrogen ions combine with oxygen to form water molecules.

Inside the generator on the anode side of the fuel cell an initial flush of hydrogen gas is preferably provided to remove residual air from within the power generator. This initial flush of hydrogen gas serves a dual purpose as it will also react with atmospheric oxygen at the fuel cell generating an initial amount of electrical energy and generating an initial amount of fuel cell water at the fuel cell cathode . This initial amount of fuel cell water is then reclaimed and reacted with the fuel substance . Alternately the process of the invention may be initiated by the permeation of water molecules from the humidity of the atmosphere outside the power generator through the air inlet and into the power generator. Although less preferred it is also possible to add an initial amount of non fuel cell water to the generator in an amount substantially less than the amount of fuel cell water generated by the fuel cell to react with the fuel substance and initiate hydrogen gas generation. Such start up water may be added to the generator for example through an opening in the fuel chamber such as entry or through another suitable means such as through air inlet . However the process and apparatus of the invention are designed to operate without an externally provided water supply i.e. the system is water less except for water that is generated by the fuel cell and water molecules present in the atmosphere outside of the power generator. There is no incorporated or connected water supply such as a water chamber or water reservoir to provide water for reaction with the hydrogen fuel substance. This results in a significant improvement in the energy density and specific energy of the power generator compared to conventional systems. Accordingly the present invention provides a continuous self regulating process since the hydrogen oxygen reaction produces exactly the required water corresponding to the electrical power generated wherein stoichiometric amounts of recycled water and solid fuel are used.

The process of the invention is also preferably passive running without actively controlled valves or pumps. More particularly once water is formed as a by product of the oxygen hydrogen reaction at the fuel cell the produced water passively diffuses back through the fuel cell into the cavity and to the fuel chamber . This passive diffusion is enabled in part due to one or more water retention zones and in part due to the low humidity inside the cavity . Water retention zone is highlighted by which offer corner views of the power generators illustrated in . As used herein and as shown in a water retention zone comprises the channel extending from the air inlet to each the fuel cell cathode . A water retention zone is present at each fuel cell which generates fuel cell water. Due to the geometry of the water retention zone diffusive water loss of fuel cell generated water molecules out of the air inlet is deterred thereby maintaining a high concentration of water vapor at the fuel cell cathode . Instead of losing water molecules to the ambient air water retention zone causes generated water molecules to accumulate at the cathode creating a region of high humidity between the cathode and air inlet . This molar flow rate can be described with more specificity via the equation below with reference to 

The transport of water vapor from the cathode to the ambient air and the transport of oxygen from the ambient air to the cathode are both diffusion controlled processes. The molar flux or molar flow rate of A is J where A is the desired species i.e. either water or oxygen. The molar flux of water or oxygen is a function of the diffusivity D the partial pressure difference between point and point P PA the gas constant R the temperature T in Kelvin and the distance between points and Z Z . Additionally flux is defined as per area with units of

The diffusion coefficient is the proportionality constant between the flux of a species to its concentration gradient. The diffusion coefficient Drefers to the diffusion coefficient of species A in species B. In the present case it refers to the diffusion coefficient of water vapor in air or the diffusion coefficient of oxygen in air. A large diffusion coefficient will yield a large flux value and a small diffusion coefficient will yield a small flux value. The diffusion coefficient for oxygen in air is about 0.21 cm sec at room temperature and normal room humidity while the diffusion coefficient for water vapor in air at room temperature and humidity is about 0.24 cm sec.

Partial pressure is the fraction of the total pressure of a mixture of gases that is due to one component of the mixture. A large partial pressure difference will generate a relatively large flux of the species while a small partial pressure difference will generate a relatively small flux. The water retention zone is designed to give a small partial pressure difference e.g. about 10 to about 20 of atmospheric oxygen partial pressure to obtain the oxygen flux required for the desired power level.

The gas constant is a product of Boltzmann s constant and Avogadro s number. The temperature in Kelvin affects the flux of the species of interest. Higher temperatures tend to reduce flux while lower temperatures tend to increase flux. Thus the diffusion of gases and by extension their partial pressure differences can be controlled by adjusting the channel geometry.

With reference to to control the diffusion of a gas between point and point the geometry of the channel which separates the two points can be changed. For example if the area of the channel which separates point and point is increased diffusion between points and is increased and conversely if the area is decreased diffusion is reduced. The opposite applies to the distance between point and point whereby increasing the distance between points and results in reduced diffusion and decreasing the distance between points and results in greater diffusion out of air inlet .

The power generators of the invention as seen in are designed to allow enough oxygen to diffuse from the ambient air through the air inlet and to the cathode with only a small pressure drop e.g. 10 to 20 of the atmospheric oxygen pressure. The power generator will have high hydrogen permeation losses and thus reduced lifetime if operated at high pressures.

The chemical reaction that converts hydrogen and oxygen to water 2H O 2H0 creates two moles of water for every mole of oxygen it consumes. Further the diffusivity of water vapor in air and the diffusivity of oxygen in air are similar. Accordingly the partial pressure difference of water vapor must be roughly twice that of oxygen to maintain equilibrium. Therefore the power generator of the invention having the above proportions maintains a humidified environment instead of losing the generated water molecules to the atmosphere outside the generator.

Within the cavity on the anode side of the fuel cell a comparatively low humidity region exists due to the moisture absorbing hygroscopic nature of the fuel substance . Accordingly the water generation and retention at the cathode generates a moisture concentration gradient and a gas pressure differential which causes water molecules to diffuse back through the fuel cell into the cavity and to the fuel chamber in the form of water vapor. This water vapor then reacts with fuel substance generating hydrogen gas. The generated hydrogen gas will then pass through cavity and to the fuel cell anode where it will react with oxygen to once again generate water molecules. This cycle may optionally continue until all of the fuel substance is consumed.

During operation of the power generator more generated water vapor will diffuse back into the cavity than is lost out of the air inlet. Furthermore fuel cell output is directly dependent on the flow of oxygen and hydrogen reactants to the fuel cells and hence the flow of water vapor the fuel chamber. Accordingly fuel cell output is proportional to the ratio of the area of the water retention zone to its length. In the preferred embodiment of the invention the ratio of zone area to zone length per unit of power is preferably from about 0.01 cm mW to about 0.05 cm mW of power output for a single fuel cell. If multiple fuel cells are incorporated this ratio of zone area to zone length per unit of power is divided by the number of fuel cells which share the reactants.

The generator will operate at reduced power if the geometry of the water retention zone is too restrictive to allow sufficient oxygen to diffuse to the fuel cells . Particularly at a zone area to length ratio of greater than 0.05 cmarea 1 cm length excess water vapor will diffuse out of the air inlet and at a zone area to length ratio of less than 0.01 cmarea 1 cm length not enough oxygen will reach the fuel cells to operate at a high efficiency. The same is true for the geometry of the cavity within the housing extending from the fuel cell to the fuel chamber which admits a flow of hydrogen gas from the fuel chamber to the fuel cell and which admits a flow of water vapor from the fuel cell to the fuel chamber.

In another embodiment the power generator may further include at least one valve for regulating the flow hydrogen gas from the fuel chamber to the fuel cell and for regulating the passage of water vapor from the fuel cell to the fuel chamber . As shown in valve is positioned within the cavity between fuel chamber and the fuel cell . In the preferred embodiment of the invention valve comprises a pneumatic valve that is controlled by gas pressure within said cavity pneumatically adjusting the conductance of water vapor to the fuel chamber . Valve preferably comprises a pneumatically actuated flexible diaphragm having a periphery that is preferably fixed to the power generator housing at a support a valve disc positioned opposite the diaphragm and a rod connector joins the valve disc and diaphragm . The valve is in a closed position when the valve disc is in contact with a seal preventing water vapor from reaching the fuel chamber . Alternately the valve is in an open position when the valve disc is separated from seal allowing water vapor to reach the fuel chamber and allowing generated hydrogen gas to reach the fuel cells . Preferably seal comprises a portion of housing . Support also preferably comprises part of housing . As seen in the fuel cell or fuel cells are also preferably mounted inside the housing by support .

The dimensions of the component parts of the valve are preferably very small in scale but may vary with respect to the particular application of the valve. The diaphragm thickness and diameter should be within a certain range depending on the desired power output. In the preferred embodiment of the invention the diaphragm is either tensile or non tensile and preferably comprises a thin circular plate preferably having a diameter of from about 1 cm to about 3 cm more preferably from about 1 cm to about 2 cm. The valve disc preferably has a diameter of from about 0.2 to about 1 cm more preferably from about 0.2 cm to about 0.5 cm. In the preferred embodiment of the invention the rod connector may comprise a screw or a bolt but any other means of connecting the diaphragm to the valve disc is suitable such that the valve can alternate between the open and closed positions.

The actuation of the valve is preferably controlled by the internal gas pressure exerted on the diaphragm . As the internal gas pressure of the apparatus rises due to the generation of hydrogen gas the diaphragm will bend or push outward slightly. This causes the connector to pull the valve disc against the seal closing the valve and preventing the flow of additional water vapor to the fuel chamber . With the valve closed hydrogen production ceases. This also prevents the internal gas pressure from rising further. As hydrogen is consumed such as by fuel cells the internal gas pressure drops allowing the valve disc to disengage the seal and opening the valve. Accordingly hydrogen gas is automatically produced at the rate at which it is consumed.

In the preferred embodiment of the invention the power generator operates by maintaining a fixed pressure via the pneumatic valve . The power generator should be able to operate down to low ambient pressures at reduced power output and up to theoretically unlimited ambient pressures at full power output. In the preferred embodiment of the invention the internal Hpressure of the apparatus when in the closed position is from about 0 kPa to about 1000 kPa. The valve will be fully shut when no hydrogen gas is used by the fuel cell and will open the amount required to meet consumption rate of the hydrogen gas. In the most preferred embodiment of the invention the internal pressure of the power generator is maintained at about 100 kPa at all times wherein when the pressure drops below about 10 kPa the valve will open slightly until the internal pressure raises to at or above about 500 kPa causing the valve to close. The most preferred operating pressures are preferably from about 0.5 atm about 50 kPa to about 2 atm about 202 kPa for small scale applications such as portable electronic devices or wireless sensors.

In general the power generator operates by maintaining a fixed pressure usually a few psi over ambient using the pneumatic valve . Preferably generator is able to operate down to low ambient pressures at reduced power output and up to theoretically unlimited ambient pressures at full power output. The power generator is preferably maintained at an operating temperature of from about 40 C. to about 85 C. more preferably from about 20 C. to about 50 C. more preferably from about 0 C. to about 50 C. and most preferably from about 20 C. to about 50 C. while in use.

For the purposes of this invention the term water vapor does not include steam. While water vapor and steam are both forms of water each has very different properties and uses. For example a locomotive can be driven by steam but will not operate on the water vapor present in humid air as does the present invention. In and of itself water vapor is the gas of individual water molecules that may form naturally over a body of water at any temperature including ice or that may be naturally present in ambient air. It has a low partial pressure so it contains relatively few water molecules unless the water that forms it is heated. On the other hand steam is made up of tiny hot water droplets produced by heating water to boiling. Steam contains about 100 more water molecules than does water vapor at 15 C. naturally expands with high force and velocity and large amounts of water can be boiled and transported off as steam. Water vapor is present in everyday air and contains a much smaller number of water molecules than steam or liquid water and moves very slowly by natural diffusion. Only very small amounts of water can be transported in the form of water vapor. To illustrate a single drop of water takes typically one hour to evaporate at room temperature while an entire kettle of water can be boiled into steam in about twenty minutes. Further a steam powered generator would require a water supply or water source from which steam may be generated. In contrast the present invention provides an improvement upon the related art by eliminating such a water source. Accordingly the apparatus and process of the present invention are designed to function at low operating temperatures using water vapor not at high operation temperatures using steam.

As seen in the power generator may further include a restriction united with the air inlet regulating the diffusion of atmospheric oxygen and atmospheric water molecules into the power generator. This restriction also aids in raising the humidity at the fuel cell cathode due to impedance presented to outward diffusion of water vapor produced at the cathode . This increased humidity improves the operation of the fuel cell. The restriction preferably comprises a hydrophobic membrane that is substantially permeable to atmospheric oxygen gas but substantially impermeable to water vapor which membrane substantially obstructs the flow of fuel cell water into the atmosphere. Suitable materials for this oxygen permeable water vapor impermeable membrane having the desired properties include fluoropolymer containing materials such as fluorinated ethylene propylene FEP perfluoroalkoxy and non fluoropolymer containing materials such as oriented polypropylene OPP low density polyethylene LDPE high density polyethylene HDPE and cyclic olefin copolymers COCs . The most preferred oxygen permeable water vapor impermeable membrane material comprises fluorinated ethylene propylene. In addition for some embodiments the membrane alone may not allow sufficient oxygen permeation to the cathode. Accordingly a small opening see in the restriction may be provided to allow the ingress of extra atmospheric oxygen and atmospheric water molecules into the cavity to diffuse to the fuel cell cathode or cathodes. However this opening may also cause some of the water vapor to diffuse out of the power generator . The required opening size is a function of the power level the diffusion path length and the desired partial pressure drop. The size of this opening is preferably very small in size and may preferably comprise from about 0.001 to about 1 of the entire surface area of the membrane.

The substantially non fluid substance within the fuel chamber preferably comprises a material in powder granule or pellet form and is preferably an alkali metal calcium hydride lithium hydride lithium aluminum hydride lithium borohydride sodium borohydride and combinations thereof. Suitable alkali metals non exclusively include lithium sodium and potassium. The preferred material for the non fluid substance is lithium aluminum hydride. The fuel substance is preferably a solid porous material that allows for the diffusion of gases and vapors. Further the non fluid substance is also preferably combined with a hydrogen generation catalyst to catalyze the reaction of the water vapor and the non fluid substance. Suitable catalysts include non exclusively include cobalt nickel ruthenium magnesium and alloys and combinations thereof.

As seen in fuel chamber is preferably bordered by porous vapor membrane . This membrane attached to the housing and juxtaposed with the fuel chamber is necessarily permeable to water vapor so as to allow water vapor to pass into the fuel chamber and react with the solid fuel substance thereby generating hydrogen gas. It is also necessarily permeable to hydrogen gas so as to allow generated hydrogen gas to pass into the cavity and back to the fuel cell . Suitable materials for this vapor membrane having such dual properties non exclusively include porous polymers including fluoropolymers including expanded polytetrafluoroethylene ePTFE laminates such as expanded Teflon . Particularly preferred ePTFE laminates are GORE TEX manufactured by W. L. Gore Associates Inc. of Delaware and eVENT manufactured by BHA technologies of Delaware.

Referring to in particular is a cross sectional schematic representation of an alternate power generator of the invention having an air inlet with a larger surface area compared to the generator of . Similarly in this embodiment a hydrophobic membrane that is substantially permeable to atmospheric oxygen gas but substantially impermeable to water vapor is preferably placed at air inlet . However in order to allow for the intake of water molecules from natural air humidity in the atmosphere a small opening e.g. about 0.008 cm opening is preferably cut into the membrane . This opening will also allow extra oxygen to diffuse to the fuel cell cathodes. In the preferred embodiment of the invention the power generators of the invention will perform best when in an environment having a relative humidity of at least about 5 wherein the performance will improve with increasing humidity.

The embodiment of also preferably includes a pneumatic valve which preferably includes a mesh diaphragm and a water permeable hydrogen impermeable membrane in juxtaposition with the mesh diaphragm of the valve . The mesh diaphragm is preferably permeable to water vapor and is preferably formed from a polymeric material such as polyethylene terephthalate or a metal such as stainless steel. Suitable water permeable materials for this water permeable membrane include perfluorinated polymers such as perfluorosulfonate ionomers. Also suitable are epoxides and chloroprene rubber. Most preferably the water permeable membrane comprises a perfluorosulfonate ionomer membrane commercially available under the trademark Nafion from EI DuPont de Nemours Co. of Delaware. Nafion is preferred because it has a fluorinated backbone that makes it very stable with sulfonic acid side chains to support high ionic conductivity. The water permeable hydrogen impermeable membrane allows the diffusion of water vapor to the fuel chamber without passing the water vapor through the electrolytic membrane . It provides a large area path for water vapor to permeate into the fuel chamber and may allow the fuel cells to operate at higher current densities than if the water is recovered solely though the fuel cells themselves. A similar material forms the electrolytic membrane of the at least one fuel cell .

Accordingly as can from this power generator provides dual avenues for the transport of fuel cell generated water molecules from the fuel cell cathode to the fuel chamber . Specifically in the embodiment of the reaction of hydrogen gas and atmospheric oxygen in the fuel cell results in the generation of fuel cell water at the fuel cell cathode and thereby generates electricity. This generated fuel cell water is retained in the water retention zone and may re enter cavity by either diffusing back through the fuel cell or by diffusing from the water retention zone and permeating through the mesh diaphragm and water permeable membrane .

Illustrated in is a top view of a cylindrical power generator of the invention having a plurality of fuel cells. As seen in in a preferred embodiment a plurality of fuel cells are positioned around a circumference of the power generator . A power generator of the invention may also include an entry through which fuel substance may optionally be replenished. Alternately when fuel substance is consumed the power generator may be disposed similar to a battery. Each of the assembled component parts of the power generator may further be enclosed in a suitable hollow structure such as a tube formed from a suitable material such as polyethylene terephthalate not shown which enclosure may also be capped on the top and or bottom surfaces with a suitable cap not shown which cap may be removable and is preferably formed of a similar or different material as the enclosure. The power generator also further preferably includes at least one electrical connector through which a device may be electrically connected to the power generator . As illustrated in in the preferred embodiment of the invention a device schematically represented not drawn to scale is preferably electrically connected to the power generator through electrical connectors and which electrical connectors and are preferably connected to the cathode s and anode s of the fuel cell s . Electrical connectors and are also illustrated in . In embodiments incorporating a plurality of fuel cells the plurality of fuel cells are preferably connected in series and are preferably connected to a single set of electrical connectors and protruding from the generator housing . In a preferred embodiment of the invention the power generator includes eight interconnected fuel cells.

Each of the parts of the power generator and the valve may be fabricated of a suitable polymeric material a metal or other material as determined by the requirements of the intended use of the generator and valve. A preferred material non exclusively includes polyethylene terephthalate. The preferred dimensions of the component parts of the power generator are preferably very small in scale but may also vary with respect to the use of the power generator . The preferred outer dimensions of such a waterless micro power generator are from about 1 mm to about 100 mm in length from about 1 mm to about 100 mm in width and from about 1 to about 100 mm in depth more preferably from about 1 mm to about 25 mm in length from about 1 mm to about 25 mm in width and from about 1 to about 25 mm in depth. Such a waterless micro power generator is capable of incorporating one or more fuel cells which fuel cells may range in size from about 0.1 mmto about 5 000 mm. A waterless micro power generator of the invention is also preferably capable of containing a volume capacity of from about 0.1 mmto about 15 625 cm. A larger power generator may preferably have dimensions of up to at least about 50 cm or more in length width and depth up to at least about 5000 cmor more in fuel cell area and up to at least about 0.125 mor more in power generator volume. While these dimensions are preferred they may vary widely and are not intended to be limiting. The dimensions of each of the component parts of the power generator may similarly vary as could be determined by one skilled in the art in such a manner that the power generator of the invention will operate as intended.

Each of the embodiments illustrated in have been found to exhibit electrical conductivity in the absence of a provided non fuel cell water source. and Example 1 below offer an example of the power output vs. time plot for a small scale micro power generator of the invention. A micro power generator of the invention preferably produces a power output of from about 1 micro Watt to about 100 milli Watts more preferably from about 1 micro Watt to about 1000 milli Watts and energy densities of from about 0.1 W hr cc to about 10 W hr cc. Larger power generators of the invention may produce power output levels of from about 0.1 W to about 100 W and energy densities of from about 0.1 W hr cc to about 10 W hr cc.

It should be further understood that while the exemplified embodiments of represent preferred power generator apparatuses of the invention such structures are not intended to be limiting. Other design variations that perform in a substantially similar manner i.e. waterless power generators capable of producing useful levels of electricity with hydrogen oxygen fuel cells including a solid fuel substance are incorporated within the scope of the invention.

A power generator as seen in was provided and given an initial flush of hydrogen gas. The initial flush evacuated air from the generator cavity and was thereafter consumed by the fuel cell producing electricity and byproduct water. Following consumption of this initial hydrogen flush hydrogen gas was continuously generated internally as well as electricity. The power output of the generator was measured over time. The results are shown in which is a plot of the power output of the power generator versus time. Power output was initially set at 50 micro Watts but was later increased to 170 and then to 210 micro Watts where it was maintained for the duration of a 30 day test. During the first 20 days of the test ambient laboratory air relative humidity varied between about 10 to 20 percent. Laboratory air temperature was about 23 C. The initial flush of hydrogen was estimated to have been consumed in about the first day of operation. For this waterless operation the required water is back permeating through the fuel cells themselves. Internal gas pressure was stable over a range of operating power levels and the amount of cathodic water was exactly the right amount at any power level. The possible net gains from water recycling are an approximate 2 reduction in system volume and weight reduced cost and complexity and greater safety due to the elimination of liquid water that must be loaded. Better hydration of the PEM is also achieved due to the humidity of the air over the cathodes.

While the present invention has been particularly shown and described with reference to preferred embodiments it will be readily appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that various changes and modifications may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. It is intended that the claims be interpreted to cover the disclosed embodiment those alternatives which have been discussed above and all equivalents thereto.

