---

title: Relationship management in an auction environment
abstract: A system for providing relationship management in an auction environment can include a relationship management system and an auction system. The relationship management system and the auction system are communicatively coupled to one another. The relationship management system is configured to provide a relationship management function in conjunction with access to the auction system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08442883&OS=08442883&RS=08442883
owner: Siebel Systems, Inc.
number: 08442883
owner_city: San Mateo
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050630
---
This application claims the benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 584 407 which was filed on Jun. 30 2004. Portions of this patent application contain materials that are subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

The present invention relates to the relationship management and more particularly to relationship management in an auction environment.

With the increasing popularity of the Internet computer based systems have become an extremely popular method for buying and selling a variety of merchandise. For example there are systems for making purchases over a communication system which may be used in conjunction with a computer based auction system or on line storefront. There are also interfaces for vendor product oriented Internet websites that can be used in conjunction with computer based auction systems or on line storefronts.

For example in the case of on line auction systems bidders obtain products at competitive prices with the additional excitement and requisite skill of the bidding auction process. As is commonly known the bidder who participates in the auction process and is capable of making quick decisions as to whether to participate or to recognize the price has become too high will typically be the most successful in purchasing items goods and or services at the most attractive prices. The standard auction process as is also commonly known involves bidders bidding for a particular product. The product is then sold to the highest bidder.

One type of computer based auction for the sale of products utilizes e mail sent over the internet. In this case bidders send e mail to the auction site with details of their bid and identity. Details of the bid are posted on the auction site and are available to other participants. The auction process typically has a time period of several days or weeks and the product is sold to the highest bidder. One of the advantages of this system is the lack of complexity in running of the auction process over the internet where e mail is used to communicate with the auction computer. Computer based auctions can also be conducted entirely over the Internet. For example computer implemented methods can be used to implement computer based electronic bidding auctioning and sales systems. Such methods can also be used to conduct loan and other auctions over computer networks.

With a typical auction the seller provides information about the item a relatively low initial starting price a time when bidding will be closed and optionally a reserve price that is only disclosed to the auction software and not available to bidders. Bidding proceeds as bidders incrementally raise the bid price as the bidding progresses. At the close of bidding the high bidder obtains the product for the amount bid. However if at the time of putting the product up for auction the seller had included a reserve price that was higher than the high bid the seller has the option of not selling the product to the high bidder. At the time a first bidder submits the incrementally higher bid the first bidder may also provide a maximum bid that is only disclosed to the auction software and not disclosed to other bidders or the seller. As other bids are received the auction software automatically incrementally increases the first bidder s bid as necessary to remain the high bidder. This bid amount will not be increased above the first bidder s maximum bid. In this manner the first bidder will not have to constantly monitor the bidding process. Typically the auction software will then notify the bidder by e mail or some other means when the bidder is no longer the high bidder. Computer based auctions are popular because of the large number of buyers that can participate on an individual auction. Bidding often extends over a period of several days to allow time for a number of buyers to find the item. Typically there is a flurry of activity in the last portion of the auction process.

Another form of computer based auction is the reverse auction in which the price of the product decreases in a set manner during the time period of the auction and each participant is provided with the current price the quantity on hand and the time remaining in the auction. This type of auction typically takes place over a very short period of time and a flurry of activity typically occurs in the last portion of the auction process. The auction terminates when there is no more product to be sold or the time period expires.

Computer based auctions are popular because as are auctions generally if the reserve price is met a seller can be relatively certain of finding a buyer for the product. In addition if a seller finds a high level of interest in an item multiple bidders can produce very good selling prices for the seller. Buyers on the other hand can often obtain a product at a favorable price.

However the potentially grand scale on which a seller can operate in a computer based auction environment and or on line storefront can lead to daunting challenges in managing a potentially large number of items being offered for bid or sale as well as the need to deal with a potentially large number of entities bidders buyers associates and the like . Moreover information regarding the quantitative aspects of such a business are also important to track in order to determine the health of the seller s business and the buying experience of the business s patrons.

Certain dedicated systems have been developed that allow organizations to track forecast and analyze such details in an effort to address the needs of businesses in this regard. These enterprise based solutions assume a highly experienced administrator is available to configure and manage the software as well as the tracking forecasting and other tasks for the organization. For example some enterprise based solutions allow an administrator to define queries that specify how forecasts are to be generated. However a high degree of sophistication is required to correctly define such queries a knowledge of not only the software systems employed but also of quantitative business methods pertinent statistics and the like. In addition these enterprise based solutions typically display forecast information in a format that may not provide an effective overview of the forecast information. Also these enterprise based solutions require that an administrator manually initiate each process which can present problems if the administrator is unavailable or fails to initiate a forecast at the appropriate time. Thus while such functionality is available such systems are inappropriate for use in an auction environment for a variety of reasons. This includes the complexity of such systems and the fact that such systems are not constructed for use by individuals small groups small businesses and the like.

What is therefore needed is a relationship management system for use in an auction environment on line sales environment and similar environments. Such a relationship management system should provide functionality appropriate to an entity conducting business in such an environment in an intuitive and user friendly manner. Preferably such a relationship management system would provide an integrated user interface UI that would allow easy access to the functions provided thereby.

In one embodiment a system for providing relationship management in an auction environment is disclosed. The system includes a relationship management system and an auction system. The relationship management system and the auction system are communicatively coupled to one another. The relationship management system is configured to provide a relationship management function in conjunction with access to the auction system.

The foregoing is a summary and thus contains by necessity simplifications generalizations and omissions of detail consequently those skilled in the art will appreciate that the summary is illustrative only and is not intended to be in any way limiting. Other aspects inventive features and advantages of the present invention as defined solely by the claims will become apparent in the non limiting detailed description set forth below.

The following is intended to provide a detailed description of an example of the invention and should not be taken to be limiting of the invention itself. Rather any number of variations may fall within the scope of the invention which is defined in the claims following the description.

The present invention provides customer relationship management CRM functionality in an on line sales environment such as an on line auction system or on line storefront system. More specifically the present invention provides such CRM functionality to entities offering items for sale as well as those managing such transactions.

For example entities that can avail themselves of such CRM functionalities include entities in an auction environment such as sellers merchandise providers and intermediaries. Sellers are those entities businesses individuals groups or the like who sell their own merchandise to bidders those entities other businesses individuals groups or the like who bid on the merchandise via the auction. Intermediaries are those entities businesses individuals groups or the like who sell merchandise from others merchandise providers to bidders via the auction. As will be apparent merchandise providers are those entities businesses individuals groups or the like who provide merchandise to intermediaries for sale by the intermediaries to bidders. Alternatively such functionality can be used to assist in the efficient effective management of on line retail outlets on line service providers and so on.

The ability to enhance customer experience and satisfaction while minimizing the overhead involved in doing so is particularly important to smaller entities such as sole proprietorships home based businesses and small offices that use auction and on line storefront systems also referred to herein as on line retail web sites to sell items e.g. goods and or services . Such entities need as much support as they are able to draw upon as such entities are typically understaffed due to cost considerations. Support via the automation of tasks is a particularly attractive avenue to obtain such support due to the efficiency and relatively low cost involved.

For example a comparative analysis of such entities suggests that the CRM needs are among others met by a variety of functionalities that a CRM system in an auction or on line sales environment is able to provide. Such functionalities allow the seller to better provide its goods an service to the buyer and include list management product administration management inventory of products with relevant product information determination of real time inventory supply automated notification of inventory levels and graphical representation thereof analysis of inventory profitability using business analytics the ability to compare historical trend analysis by categories or products order management and analytics among other such functionalities.

Such functions can be provided in a centralized manner through the use of one or more modules which can be included on the client side or the server side. If provided on the server side such a module can be included in the CRM system in the on line sales system or auction system or in another server side system. For example the CRM system can include a generic auction web storefront module that provides the requisite functionality including features such auction functionality the ability to manage inventory the ability to track status of auctions analytics for sales inventory by category user and so on web storefront functionality end to end management of the ordering and fulfillment process integrated inventory management and purchasing and vendor management among other such features.

Advantageously the present invention allows these functions and features to be provided within the auction or on line sales environment allowing the user to conduct their on line business while simultaneously having access to important information regarding their on line business. Moreover the present invention allows this information to be presented to the user in an integrated fashion integrated with information from the auction on line storefront system in a single user interface which consequently improves the user s productivity. As noted this is of particular importance to smaller entities such as sole proprietorships home based businesses and small offices that use auction and on line retail web sites to sell items e.g. goods and or services which are typically under staffed due to cost considerations. Support via the automation of tasks is a particularly attractive avenue to obtain such support due to the efficiency and relatively low cost involved.

The improvements in the operation of the user s business and productivity provided by the present invention translate into improved performance of the user and their business. The experience of the buyers availing themselves of the user s on line business is thus enhanced which ultimately translates into increased revenues for the business.

To support these various functions and features a relationship management system according to the present invention employs connectors that support interfaces between the CRM system and relationship management system and the auction on line storefront systems enterprise resource management systems payment systems and other business systems. In doing so the relationship management system serves to interface the CRM system to the auction on line storefront system and user. For example the CRM system and relationship management system can employ specific connectors for specific auction on line storefront providers. In certain cases these providers may offer provider specific application programming interfaces APIs . In that case the connectors can be designed and configured to leverage such provider specific platforms. Thus an advantage of the use of connectors is the ability to decouple the interface presented by the CRM and relationship management systems from the interface presented by the auction on line storefront systems.

Using such an approach for example the designers of the CRM and relationship management systems need only create a single interface or at least fewer such interfaces in order to allow such systems to interface with a wide array of auction on line storefront systems. Such an approach provides several advantages. For example such an approach provides ease of supporting new interfaces either those of the CRM and relationship management systems or those of the auction on line storefront systems because only the connector need be altered to provide such support. In the case of a change to the CRM and relationship management systems the changes to the interface are localized to the connector and no changes to the auction on line storefront systems need be made. This is desirable since there is often no access or ability to make such changes to the auction on line storefront systems as such systems are typically under the control of another party. In the case of a change to the auction on line storefront systems interface such an approach removes the need to alter the CRM and relationship management systems which can be under the control of different parties located apart from one another and so on and localizes the changes to the affected connector. Adding support for additional CRM and relationship management systems and or auction on line storefront systems is likewise simplified.

The typical relationships are shown in solid lines in . The relationship between ones of sellers N and bidders N are represented by relationships N . In a similar fashion the relationship between ones of intermediaries N and to bidders N are represented by relationships N with the relationship between ones of merchandise providers N and intermediaries N represented by relationships N .

However as will be appreciated relationships other than those shown in solid lines in can exist. For example sellers can have relationships with intermediaries as exemplified by a relationship between sellers N and intermediary . Another example is a relationship between a merchandise provider and a seller as exemplified by a relationship between seller and merchandise provider .

Typically sellers N offer items for sale to bidders N via auction system . Similarly intermediaries N offer items for sale to bidders N via auction system as well although intermediaries N typically do so on behalf of the items owners and so are not selling their own items. In other words intermediaries N sell items for example on consignment taking some fee percentage of the sale price or some other consideration for having made or attempting to make the sale on behalf of an item s owner. Conversely merchandise providers N are owners of items that merchandise providers N offer for sale to other entities such as other individuals and or businesses though such sales are not made via auction system . In auction architecture merchandise providers N offer items to sellers N and intermediaries N among other entities potentially for subsequent sale to bidders N with sellers N selling the items as their own and intermediaries N selling the items on behalf of merchandise providers N .

For example merchandise providers N might offer items for sale to one or more of sellers N who buy the items from merchandise providers N and then resell the items via auction system . Sellers N alternatively can secure items for sale by other means. Merchandise providers N can also offer items for sale through intermediaries N who then offer the items for sale to bidders N via auction system . It will be appreciated that however one or more of sellers N intermediaries N and or merchandise providers N can each take on more than one role. For example an entity can act as both a seller and an intermediary. Other combinations are also contemplated by the present invention as will be appreciated. This ability to recognize track and manage such a wide variety of relationships is an advantage is provided by a relationship management RM system according to the present invention.

RM system provides a number of relationship management functions to sellers N intermediaries N and merchandise providers N as well as to auction manager . RM system provides relationship management functions such as analytics contact management customer service functions sales account management functions and other such functions. The sales account management functions can include functions such as account management sales cycle tracking sales opportunity management forecasting and other such sales account management functions. Moreover the specific set of functions presented to a given entity can be tailored to that entity s role e.g. a seller and a merchandise provider could be expected to have different needs in this regard based on the entities with which each deals .

It will be noted that the variable identifiers e.g. N are used in several instances in the figures to more simply designate the final element of a series of related or similar elements. The repeated use of such variable identifiers is not meant to imply a correlation between the sizes of such series of elements although such correlation may exist. The use of such variable identifiers does not require that each series of elements has the same number of elements as another series delimited by the same variable identifier. Rather in each instance of use the variable identified by N or some other such identifier may hold the same or a different value than other instances of the same variable identifier.

Moreover regarding the signals described herein those skilled in the art will recognize that a signal may be directly transmitted from a first block to a second block or a signal may be modified e.g. amplified attenuated delayed latched buffered inverted filtered or otherwise modified between the blocks. Although the signals of the above described embodiment are characterized as transmitted from one block to the next other embodiments of the present invention may include modified signals in place of such directly transmitted signals as long as the informational and or functional aspect of the signal is transmitted between blocks. To some extent a signal input at a second block may be conceptualized as a second signal derived from a first signal output from a first block due to physical limitations of the circuitry involved e.g. there will inevitably be some attenuation and delay . Therefore as used herein a second signal derived from a first signal includes the first signal or any modifications to the first signal whether due to circuit limitations or due to passage through other circuit elements which do not change the informational and or final functional aspect of the first signal.

The foregoing described embodiment wherein the different components are contained within different other components. It is to be understood that such depicted architectures are merely example and that in fact many other architectures can be implemented which achieve the same functionality. In an abstract but still definite sense any arrangement of components to achieve the same functionality is effectively associated such that the desired functionality is achieved. Hence any two components herein combined to achieve a particular functionality can be seen as associated with each other such that the desired functionality is achieved irrespective of architectures or intermediate components. Likewise any two components so associated can also be viewed as being operably connected or operably coupled to each other to achieve the desired functionality.

Functions provided by such a UI include sales lead management calendaring of events sales campaign management sales account management contact management sales opportunity management and report generation. These functions are presented in an intuitive and easy to use manner including list based presentations and graphical presentations. This makes such functions sufficiently simple to be used by an entity such as an individual small business personnel small workgroup and the like. This results in part from the integration of a customer relationship manager via an RM UI which provides access to the relationship management functionality and an auction or on line sales system e.g. via integration with the auction system s UI .

As can be seen however certain of these windows include one or more sub windows. For example views window includes a number of sub windows including a summary sub window a buying sub window a sales initiation sub window an interface management sub window and an account management sub window . Summary sub window can provide for example a link that causes the presentation of an account summary such as that depicted subsequently in when selected. Similarly the selection of sales initiation sub window results in the display of one or more pages that allow an entity to enter information regarding one or more items that are to be auctioned. An example of such a process is given in connection with subsequently.

In turn however certain of these sub windows can include one or more links that allow a user access to various functionality of the auction environment. For example buying sub window interface management sub window and account management sub window all are shown as including a variety of such links. Buying sub window is shown as including an auction watch link a bid entry link a bids won link and a bids lost link . Auction watch link when selected allows a user to identify one or more items i.e. good and or services that are being auctioned via the auction system and by doing so track the progress of each of the auctions in question. Bid entry link when selected by the user allows the user to enter a bid on one or more specific items. Bids won link when selected allows the user to list the items for which the user s bid s is were the winning bid s . Similarly bids lost link when selected by the user allows the user to view a list of bids that were not winning bids for the items in question.

In a fashion similar to that of buying sub window interface management sub window is depicted as including a search link a seller s information link and a categories listing link . Search link when selected allows a user to locate information regarding items bids users and other relevant information by querying one or more of the databases maintained by the auction system. Seller s information link allows the entity to enter and maintain information regarding the entity that is to be presented to other parties accessing the auction system e.g. the entity s business address billing address business telephone facsimile numbers and so on . Categories listing link allows the entity to retrieve information regarding one or more categories of items that can be auctioned using the auction system.

In a fashion similar to that of buying sub window and interface management sub window account management sub window includes a personal information link a preferences link and a payment account link . Personal information link allows the entity to enter and maintain personal information for the entity with regard to the given account. Typically while this may include information such as that made available via seller s information link personal information link provides access to information regarding the entity that is not typically available to other parties accessing the auction system but may be needed by the entity itself the party operating the auction system e.g. to allow access to private avenues of communication and billing and so on. For example such private information might include one or more of the entity s home address home telephone facsimile numbers credit card information bank account information other payment information insurance information emergency contact information and so on. Preferences link when selected allows a user to set preferences for user interface to the user s liking. Payment account link when selected allows a user to enter and maintain information regarding the user s payment and payment receipt accounts within the payment system used for funds transfer in transactions made using the auction system.

Button window includes one or more buttons that allow for easy and quick access to particular functions within the auction environment. As shown in button window includes a browse button a search button a sell button a My UI button and a community button . Browse button allows the user to access various mechanisms to review information regarding items offered for auction. Search button allows a user to search for items offered for auction based on one or more criteria. Sell button is used to begin a process in which the user will offer one or more items for auction to bidders using the auction system. My UI button allows a user to configure user interface to meet the user s needs and desires. Community button allows the user access to one or more on line communities within the auction system.

In a similar fashion account information window includes a number of sub windows that allow for the organization of information that is to be presented to the user. Account information window is depicted as including a set of function tabs depicted in as function tabs and a summary sub window . Function tabs allow for the display of various informational and control pages including in the auction environment example depicted in a home page a calendar page a leads page a sales campaigns page an account information page a contacts page a sales opportunities page a reports page and a dashboard page among other such possibilities. Summary sub window provides a summary of information and activity for the given user account as well as links to other features and functions of the auction architecture employed. To this end summary sub window includes an existing bids sub window an information notices sub window and an item watch sub window . Existing bids sub window displays information regarding bids that the user has placed for various goods and or services offered for bid through the auction architecture including reminders regarding both bids e.g. offers to purchase and items offered for auction e.g. items presented for bidding . Information notices sub window presents information to the user regarding general announcements e.g. from the operator of the auction system other users or other such parties as well as announcements directed at specific groups of users and messages directed to the user in question. Item watch sub window allows a user to easily and quickly view information regarding one or more items being offered for bid including those items on which the user may have already bid.

As will be appreciated calendar information sub window is employed to display calendar information such as appointments events and the like and can do so in increments of a single day a single week a single month or some other convenient format. Task information sub window allows for the entry tracking and maintenance of to do items. Information displayed in calendar information sub window and task information sub window can be ordered based on their date descriptive information or in some other fashion typically by selecting the corresponding heading. Advantageously information from the relationship management system e.g. RM system can be integrated with that from the auction system e.g. auction system in these sub windows. For example appointments ending dates for items auctions delivery dates and so on can be integrated into one calendar allowing the entity to review all date based information for their on line business at once.

Alert information sub window is used to prevent the user with notifications from the auction system and or the relationship management system. These notifications may be informational in nature or may be presented to the user in order for the user to take action thereon. Again events related to the user s on line business can be tracked whether related to the user s business generally or auction specific. Business lead information sub window presents the user with information regarding entities e.g. persons businesses and other such entities that user may wish to contact or may have already contacted with regard to the user s on line business.

Pipeline metric information sub window includes information displayed graphically depicted in as a pipeline graph and in a tabular format depicted in as an opportunity metric table thus allowing a user to view metrics regarding the on line business sales pipeline or more simply pipeline in both a graphical and numerical format. A display by menu is also provided as part of pipeline metric information sub window . Display by menu allows the user to determine the information that will be displayed in one or more of the information displays in pipeline metric information sub window . For example as depicted in display by menu has been set to display revenue by selecting Revenue 000 from the selections presented in the menu of display by menu in this case a drop down menu . Having selected Revenue 000 the information relating to revenues for the on line business in 000 s thus appears in pipeline graph and opportunity metric table . As will be appreciated pipeline metric information sub window serves as the interface to information maintained by and or gathered by the underlying relationship management system. The relationship management system based on input from the user e.g. via display by menu queries its own databases and or those of the auction system in order to provide information to the user in an easily understood and usable format.

As noted earlier an architecture of the present invention is able to provide such information in such an intuitive and integrated fashion as a result of the communications between the relationship management system and the auction or on line store system. For example the relationship management system either internally or by calling upon a separate CRM system retrieves the requisite information from information maintained by the relationship management and CRM systems as well as the auction or on line store system. The present invention then presents that information in a graphical and tabular format thereby allowing the user to readily receive and understand the information and so enjoy the enhanced productivity improved business process and other advantages offered by the present invention.

Also depicted as part of homepage window are a search sub window and an account item creation sub window . Search sub window provides a menu button with a selection of parameters that allows a user to retrieve information regarding the user s account based on the parameters selected. For example as shown in a user might search their contacts for a person with the last name of Smith in order to display the user s contacts having the last name of Smith. Account item creation sub window allows a user to create various objects having to do with the user s on line auction account. Such objects include events business transactions including those that have already occurred those that are to occur and those potential business transactions that may occur and the like. As depicted in account item creation sub window allows for the creation of tasks appointments contacts opportunities accounts leads service requests and solutions.

As will be appreciated such functionality can be provided by the relationship management system for example which allows such information to be stored thereby. Such information can then be made available with information maintained by the auction system in a seamlessly integrated manner. Moreover this information can easily be transferred between systems using communication pathways provided by the present invention such as those depicted in A and . This interoperability is advantageous as it allows for improved workflow as demonstrated in the example provided in connection with .

As to the contents of account homepage window in addition to search sub window and account item creation sub window as described in connection with other sub windows displayed in account homepage window . These sub windows can include for example an account lists sub window a recently modified accounts sub window and an account related tasks sub window as well as an account analysis sub window . Account list sub window allows a user to list accounts selected by one or more criteria. For example a user can select the display of all accounts all competitor accounts all customer accounts all partner accounts all prospect accounts all recently created accounts all recently modified accounts all referenceable accounts all top accounts and my accounts for example. As will also be noted a link that allows for the management of these lists is also provided allowing the user to select both the lists presented for selection and the criteria by which those lists are generated. Recently modified account sub window lists a set of links representing the accounts of the user kept for customers of the user that have been recently modified. As before flexibility is provided in the presentation of this information as exemplified by the show full list link at the bottom of recently modified account sub window . Moreover new accounts can be added and modified and so appear on the listing within recently modified account sub window . As before this information can be maintained by the relationship management system and or the auction system. This flexibility not only supports the integration of such information without regard to the source of the information but allows the designers of such systems greater flexibility in partitioning responsibilities between the relationship management system and the auction system.

Account analysis sub window can include for example a display information menu a display by menu and a graphical display . Display information menu allows the user control over the type of information displayed in graphical display . For example as depicted in display information menu has been set to closed revenue in 000 s denoting that the information presented in graphical display is the review generated by sales which have closed. Display by menu can then be employed to segregate this information by one or more criteria. In the example presented in display by menu has been set to industry denoting that the information presented in graphical display should be segregated by the industry to which the items sold belonged. As will be appreciated the selections presented in display information menu and display by menu can be configured to allow for the selection of any relevant and useful criteria as may be desired by users of such systems.

Summary window in turn includes an alerts sub window a statistics sub window a quick start sub window and a cross promotions sub window . Alerts sub window provides the user information regarding items and actions requiring their attention. Statistics sub window provides the user with information regarding product that the user is or will be offering for sale e.g. a product inventory link which a user can select to display a list of products the user has in inventory an out of stock link which a user can select to display a list of products which are out of stock a scheduled listings link which can be selected to display information regarding the scheduled listing of products that will be offered for bidding including product listings for products that will be open for bid starting within the next hour a starting within the next hour listings link and those starting on the given day a starting today listings link an active listings link which can be used to display a listing of products that are currently offered for bid this includes the ability to list products the bidding for which will close within the next hour a closing within the next hour listings link and a listing of products the bidding for which will close on the given day a closing today listings link and a sold listings link which can be selected to display a listing of products sold by the seller this includes the ability to display a listing of products that are awaiting payment an awaiting payment link .

Quick start sub window includes links that allow a user to perform a variety of often used functions quickly and easily. For example a user may desire quick access to a variety of tasks such as designating a new product for sale by selecting a sell new product link selling a product using saved listing templates already stored in product inventory by selecting a sell using existing template link displaying the current month s sales in a current month s sales report by selecting a current month sales report link customizing their interactions with user interface using pre set preferences by selecting a customize preferences link and automatically updating inventory quantity for one more products by selecting an automatic inventory update link .

As noted earlier information and links presented in statistics sub window and quick start sub window can include or point to information made available from the relationship management system and or the auction system and so integrate the functionality provided by these systems. For example statistics sub window can include information regarding inventory e.g. product inventory link and out of stock link from the relationship management system and items listed for auction e.g. scheduled listings link starting within the next hour listings link starting today listings link active listings link closing within the next hour listings link closing today listings link and sold listings link from the auction system. Moreover information and links that combine the functionality of the relationship management and auction systems are also provided e.g. awaiting payment link .

In a similar fashion quick start sub window is also capable of providing such integrated functionality. For example quick start sub window can include information regarding inventory e.g. sell new product link sell using existing template link and automatic inventory update link from the relationship management system and items listed for auction e.g. sell new product link sell using existing template link and customize preferences link from the auction system. Moreover information and links that combine the functionality of the relationship management and auction systems are also provided e.g. sell new product link sell using existing template link current month sales report link and automatic inventory update link . More particularly sell new product link can be used to transfer an item and information therefor from the relationship management system to the auction system. For example a user can select sell new product link which brings up a page that lists items in the user s inventory in the relationship management system and those available for auction in the auction system. By simply dragging and dropping a given item s listing from the relationship management system s inventory listing to that of the auction system the item can be made available for auction. Another example is sell using existing template link which in certain embodiments can be used to transfer information regarding the presentation of information regarding a given item from the relationship management system to the auction system. This allows for a common look and feel for listings in both systems. Again such uniformity is of benefit to both buyer and seller improving the seller s efficiency and enhancing the buyer s purchasing experience.

Cross promotions sub window as the name implies allows the user to control the cross promotion of one product when information regarding another product is being viewed by a potential buyer. Cross promotion sub window thus includes information regarding items that are linked to one another for cross promotion and can also include links allowing a user to associate products with one another for purposes of cross promotion. For example a user may wish to view information regarding items having had their cross promotions replaced after termination by selecting a link items having had cross promotions specified manually by selecting a link or items having automatic cross promotions set by selecting a link .

As to the contents of homepage window homepage window includes alerts sub window and statistics sub window in the manner of account summary window . However home page window also includes a service request SR window . As in previous examples homepage window demonstrates the integration of information from the relationship management and auction systems given that alerts sub window provides information from the auction system although alerts from the relationship management system could also be displayed therein and statistics sub window is an integrated display in and of itself. The addition of service request window provides yet another integrated display by presenting information regarding service request information maintained by the relationship management system for items sold via the auction system.

Service request window includes a listing of open service requests depicted in as an open service request listing and also allows a user to create a new service request SR using a new service request button . Open service request listing includes information regarding open service requests which in this example are requests for service by purchasers which are to be serviced by the seller e.g. equipment repair informational inquiries documentation requests and the like . The ability to quickly and easily organize and track such requests allows a seller to better serve the needs of those purchasing items and services from that seller. This in turn results in an improved purchase experience for buyers thereby improving the probabilities of additional future sales to that buyer. As depicted in open service request listing includes identifying information e.g. a service request SR number a short description of the request e.g. a subject description the status of the request e.g. a status description for example one of open closed open escalated or other such status information and the service request s priority e.g. a priority level .

In certain embodiments service request number is a unique number that identifies each service request to allow for the ready look up and identification of each service request notwithstanding the type of service request in question. As will be appreciated service request number can be generating using a scheme that results in not only a unique identifier but an identifier that carries with it information regarding various characteristics of the service request. To this end subject description can be used to further identify the service request using a plain language description. Status description is used to convey the status of a given service request. status description can take on values for example of open closed open escalated or other appropriate status values as mandated or made advisable by the possible situations that are to be expected in the given circumstance e.g. received for maintenance would be inappropriate status for a service provided to a buyer . Status description can take on values for example of open closed open escalated or other appropriate status values as mandated or made advisable by the possible situations that are to be expected in the given circumstance e.g. received for maintenance would be inappropriate status for a service provided to a buyer . In a similar fashion priority level can take on any number of values as is expedient for the ready identification and prioritization of service requests. In the example depicted in priority level can take on values of 1 ASAP 2 HIGH 3 MEDIUM or 4 LOW the last value not shown in although implied thereby . Again the service requests displayed in service request window can be ordered using any one of the criteria listed as headings therein in order to provide the information in the most useable format for the given situation.

As will be appreciated other schemes for prioritizing service requests can be used e.g. more or fewer priority levels a different rating scale and so on . Moreover service requests listed in open service request listing can be displayed in an order prioritized by any one of the fields just described other fields that might be used to display information regarding the service requests therein or some combination thereof. Primarily open service request listing acts as a quick reference to the service requests that are currently open. Though typically not a complete listing of all existing service requests open service request listing presents the user with a list of service requests that presently require attention since those are the most likely to need the most immediate attention. Again such functionality improves the buyer s experience which is of direct benefit to the entity s on line business.

Service request listing window provides information similar to that displayed in open service request listing albeit with greater detail and a wider array of possible requests types. In a manner similar to that described in connection with new service request button a new service request button is provided to allow the user to add a new service request to the user s service request list displayed in service request listing window . Additionally a service request listing filter menu is provided to allow the user to more effectively control the service requests listed in service request listing window . For example a user may choose to list all open service requests as is provided in the example depicted in however the user may desire to limit the service requests displayed based on one or more of the characteristics shown in the service request listing depicted in service request listing window of . For example a user might choose to display only those service requests having an open status. Alternatively the user may desire to show all status requests having a priority level of 1 ASAP or may choose some other characteristic and value thereof in order to allow the display of only those service requests which are of interest.

A create new list button is also provided to allow the user control over the creation of a new service request list. In a manner similar to that of open service request listing the listing of service requests in service request listing window can be ordered based on any one of the characteristics listed for each of the service requests. For example a service request listing is shown in as being ordered based on the time at which each service request was opened. In one embodiment the user can determine which characteristic is used to order the listing of service requests by selecting the link that is displayed as the heading of the relevant characteristic. As will be appreciated service request listings may be longer than a single page. Thus controls are provided to allow for the presentation and display of multi page lists. To this end an alphanumeric page selector is provided as well as a previous next page selector . Service request listing as depicted in the example in includes information regarding each status request such as a status request number e.g. a status request number information regarding the subject of the status request e.g. a subject description information regarding the status of the service request e.g. status information and the priority level of the status request e.g. a priority level . These fields provide information that is comparable to their counterparts in open service request listing of .

As depicted in however service request listing provides additional information not displayed in open service request listing . This information can include for example the time at which the service request was opened e.g. opened time and information regarding the party requesting the service e.g. a last name field and a first name field as well as other information e.g. an account name and an owner name . Opened time provides information as to the time the service request was entered as its name implies. The party making the service request is identified in the example depicted in by their last and first names as displayed in last name field and first name field . Account name allows for the display of information regarding for example the company of which the service requester is an employee.

As will be appreciated this information can include ratings of the entity s sales presentations e.g. the web pages and information presented therein quality of the follow up service provided pricing quality of the goods or services provided and the like. Similarly allows the user to quickly ascertain the efficiency of their auctioning process. As will also be appreciated the information presented in bidding pipeline gauge can include ratings of the entity s sales effectiveness items sold versus items offered for sale days in inventory days of inventory remaining dollar volume. Moreover each of these metrics and or other metrics can be presented in a graphical format either alone or in some combination with one another. As such each metric or combination of metrics can be presented a graphical format to allow the user quick intuitive access to measures that are vital to the performance and success of the user s business.

Resource management system also is capable of communicating with on line storefront system depicted in as on line storefront systems N via a number of corresponding connectors depicted in as on line storefront system OLSS connectors N . In this context on line storefront systems N can be any online vendor providing a web storefront platform with an API to allow programmatic interaction with the given on line storefront system. Such an API similar to the auction platform API discussed subsequently in connection with allows common functionality across auction related tasks and processes.

As noted earlier the use of connectors provides a number of advantages to the designers of the CRM and relationship management systems as well as to the users of such systems. For example the designers of such systems need only create a single interface or at least fewer such interfaces in order to allow such systems to interface with a wide array of auction on line storefront systems. Such an approach provides several advantages. For example such an approach provides ease of supporting new interfaces either those of the CRM and relationship management systems or those of the auction on line storefront systems because only the connector need be altered to provide such support. In the case of a change to the CRM and relationship management systems the changes to the interface are localized to the connector and no changes to the auction on line storefront systems need be made. This is desirable since there is often no access or ability to make such changes to the auction on line storefront systems as such systems are typically under the control of another party. In the case of a change to the auction on line storefront systems interface such an approach removes the need to alter the CRM and relationship management systems which can be under the control of different parties located apart from one another and so on and localizes the changes to the affected connector. Adding support for additional CRM and relationship management systems and or auction on line storefront systems is likewise simplified.

Resource management system provides information to and receives information from auction systems N and on line storefront systems N in order to support a customer relationship management CRM application service provider ASP system . CRM ASP system provides the customer relationship management functionality to edit these such as entities N via relationship management system . CRM ASP system also supports payment functionality in order to allow purchasers to transfer finds to sellers when purchasing goods and services from sellers e.g. winning bidders paying sellers in one of auction systems N or buyers paying for goods or services purchased from seller s storefronts in on line storefront system N .

Auction system connectors N and OLSS connectors N and auction systems N and on line storefront systems N can communicate with one another using a web services architecture for example. Such a web services architecture can employ for example an extensible markup language e.g. XML and an access protocol e.g. simple object access protocol SOAP . An example of such a web services architecture is given in connection with and its description subsequently.

Auction system connectors N provide an integration mechanism between relationship management system and auction systems N using web services e.g. via a SOAP mechanism . Auction system connectors N map relationship management system functionality to functionality within auction systems N via an application programming interface API provided by both systems. Auction system connectors N facilitate the transfer of data between the systems and ties directly to the Auction Module interface providing a direct mapping between relationship management system and auction systems N .

OLSS connectors N provide an integration mechanism between relationship management system and on line storefront systems N using web services e.g. via a SOAP mechanism . OLSS connectors N map functionality provided by relationship management system to OLSS functionality via an application programming interface API provided by both systems. OLSS connectors N facilitate the transfer of data between the systems and ties directly to the OLSS Module interface providing a direct mapping between relationship management system and OLSS connectors N .

In one embodiment CRM ASP system communicates with a payment system via a payment system connector in order to effect the requisite finds transfer. In this context payment system can be any online vendor providing a payment platform with an API to allow programmatic interaction with the given payment system. The API discussed subsequently in connection with allows common functionality across payment related tasks and processes.

Payment system connector provides an integration mechanism between relationship management system and payment system using web services e.g. via a SOAP mechanism . While relationship management system can have its own captive e.g. built in payment system relationship management system can leverage an enterprise resource planning ERP system to handle payment. Alternatively and as depicted herein payment system connector facilitates transactions between online payment systems with online payment options such as payment system . Payment system connector ties directly to the OLSS Module interface of relationship management system providing a direct mapping between relationship management system and payment system

As will be appreciated CRM ASP system need not be any particular ASP hosted CRM application. CRM ASP system can be any ASP hosted CRM application that is capable of providing the requisite functionality to resource management system providing the CRM functionality needed to support the user s on line business. Within this CRM application an Auction Module and or OLSS Module will be provided that serves as the user interface front end system for the auction on line storefront and payment systems connector. In an auction context the Auction Module provides coupled functionality deriving information from both the RM and auction on line storefront systems. Such coupled functionality can include for example the ability to submit listings from the relationship management system s product catalog to the auction system as described earlier view listings both the relationship management system s product inventory and the auction system s listings retrieve bidder information from the auction system to create an account within the relationship management system and view sold unsold listings among other such functions.

As noted in certain embodiments of the present invention the connectors depicted in auction system connectors N in OLSS connectors N employ web service technology. A web service can be for example a collection of protocols that allow for the exchange of data between applications over a network. These protocols can be proprietary or standards based. In the latter case the use of a standards based approach typically simplifies the interfacing of various elements of the architecture as well as their creation e.g. coding either manually or automatically test and so on . An example of such an architecture is given in .

Using any customer facing application whether proprietary open source or custom built as a central application domain specific infrastructures can be leveraged from other systems. In essence using web services allows for the convergence of distinctly operated disparate and yet fully functional communities. The CRM community can seamlessly leverage auction functionality and also interact with the auction site s community. Conversely the auction community can leverage analytical capability offered by CRM to provide value added information for the auction site s sellers.

In this context a web service is a collection of protocols which are preferably but not strictly standards based that are used for the exchange of data between applications. Software applications written in various programming languages and running on various platforms can use such web services to exchange data over computer networks e.g. the Internet in a manner similar to inter process communication on a single computer. The use of standard protocols enhances interoperability and so is preferable to proprietary solutions although the latter can certainly be employed either in part or totally.

As depicted in web services architecture includes a service requester a service provider and a service broker . Web services architecture employs the following elements to provide the requisite information transfer between service requester and service provider . This includes a web services protocol stack which in turn includes standards based protocols used to implement a web service and is typically considered as a protocol stack. An extensible markup language such as XML allows data to be exchanged that is formatted in accordance e.g. with XML and tags therefor . This encoding can be performed using an object access protocol such as SOAP or a remote procedure call in the extensible markup language e.g. extensible markup language remote procedure call XML RPC . One advantage to using an extensible markup language such as XML is that such standard protocols allow data to be transported between applications using other common standard such as hypertext transfer protocol HTTP file transport protocol FTP simple mail transfer protocol SMTP and Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol XMPP .

Web services architecture can also employ service broker which serves as a repository of information regarding what services are available from which systems and other related information. Service requester and service provider can communicate with service broker using for example a protocol such as web services description language WSDL . WSDL is used to described the public interface of the web services available via service broker . WSDL is an XML based service description that relates the manner in which service requester and service provider should communicate using the web service. Service broker can employ for example the universal description discovery and integration UDDI protocol to publish the requisite web service information. UDDI enables applications to look up web services information in order to determine whether or not to use those web services.

As will be appreciated by those of skill in the art while the web services architecture described herein web services architecture provides functionality that supports a relationship management architecture of the present invention other architectures and protocols can be used to provide such support. Moreover such architectures and protocols can be standards based proprietary or a mixture thereof. These alternatives can be used with equal success and the claims appended hereto envision such alternatives as being within their scope.

In the example depicted in relationship management system communicates with auction system via an auction system connector . Access to auction system by auction system connector is supported by an application programming interface API that can employ for example a web services architecture such as that depicted in . As such auction system connector and API allow relationship management system and CRM ASP system to access auction system quickly and efficiently. Functions provided thereby include the ability to submit listings to auction system view listings on auction system retrieve bidder information from auction system view sold unsold item listings and the like. To support such functionality auction system provides a number of modules among them a search module and a listing module . Search module allows an entity auctioning goods or services via auction system to search personal and business information payment information service information and so on. For example search module can be called on to identify outstanding service requests such as those displayed in user interface of as service request listing or open service request listing in . Similarly listing module allows the user to display information regarding the items e.g. those currently being offered for auction in a usable intuitive format. While the information that is accessible to the user is seller centric from this perspective these modules and their functionality are available to bidders as well as is discussed subsequently.

Auction system is a more specific example of one or more of auction systems N depicted in . Auction system includes an auction platform which supports the functionalities that allow an entity to auction goods and services on line. Information regarding the auctioning of the goods and services being offered for auction as well as other information e.g. personal and business information of sellers and bidders payment information service request information and so on is maintained in auction databases N .

As noted relationship management system is able to access this information as well as the functionalities offered by auction system via auction system connector . Auction system supports such communications by providing an application programming interface that can be used by auction system connector and so relationship management system and CRM ASP system to communicate with auction platform and so to gain access to information stored in auction databases N . It will be appreciated that the communications between these modules can also be supported in the manner discussed in connection with for example.

Auction system also provides various useful functionalities that allow a user to access the information stored in one or more of auction databases N . Such operations are supported for example by search module and listing module as well as an internet server application programming interface API . Search module allows a user via auction platform to search the information stored in auction databases N for desired information. For example such information might include contact information for sellers the buyer s personal information e.g. address telephone number and so on and the like. Information regarding items being auction can also be gathered using listing module which can be used to present this information in the manner depicted in the preceding figures showing such screen shots. These functionalities are supported by internet server API which allows web access to these modules as well as other modules supporting the auction process.

In one scenario the process begins with entity identifying goods or services to be auctioned using relationship management system and CRM ASP system step . These items are then listed on by the auction system step . The operation of identifying selecting and listing an item for auction can be effected for example using the drag and drop paradigm described earlier in connection with . The auction system then presents the selected items on a web site supported by the auction system as being available for bid step . The communications to effect the listing of the items on the auction system s web site can proceed for example as follows. Once entity has identified the goods or services inventoried in CRM ASP system that are to be auctioned entity selects the items to be auctioned from a list presented via relationship management system in the manner described earlier. management and CRM ASP system communicate this information to auction system via auction system connector . Auction system connector then calls API to communicate this information to auction platform . By these communications information in or more auction databases N is updated.

Entity can now use auction system to review information regarding the items that entity has presented for auction. Next the items having been listed for auction in auction system bidder is now able to access and view information regarding the items and bid on the items by accessing auction system . These communications are effected via internet server API and its access to auction platform via internet server API . If bidder so chooses bidder can then bid on one or more of the items presented for auction by entity via auction system . This process repeats for all interested bidders until bidding phase of the process is complete step . The bidding phase comes to an end typically by a predetermined time being reached a predetermined period of time elapsing or some other comparable criteria. As will be appreciated other criteria such as a maximum number of bids without reaching a reserve limit a minimum acceptable bid a threshold bid limit being reached or some other comparable criteria can easily be employed.

Once the bidding phase of the process has completed and a winning bid is submitted e.g. at least one bid is submitted that meets any reserve that might be set for the item entity is notified by auction system via resource management and CRM ASP system of the winning bid. In this example bidder has submitted the winning bid step . Either under the control of entity or automatically resource management and CRM ASP system send a request to payment system via payment system connector to retrieve payment from the account of bidder step . As will be appreciated the payment process can also integrate enterprise resource planning ERP functionality which can further integrate the auction and on line sales process with one or more of the computerized management of the manufacturing logistics distribution inventory shipping invoicing accounting and other business functions of entity .

Auction system notifies bidder of the fact of the winning bid and the fact of the payment for the item being deducted from the account of bidder in payment system step . Payment system then deducts the requisite funds from the winning bidder s payment account step and transfers these funds to the account of entity updating CRM ASP system with this information and so making this information available to entity via relationship management system step . In this process CRM ASP system makes a call to payment system via payment system connector to perform the actual transaction. Once the transfer of funds is complete and both entity and bidder have been notified the transaction is complete.

It will be apparent to one of skill in the art that the processes described in as well as in other processes and the descriptions of the operation of block diagrams provided herein can be implemented in software or hardware and can generally be described by a flow diagram such as . Thus it is appreciated that the operations and processes according to embodiments of the present invention discussed herein may consist of directly entered commands by a computer system user or by steps executed by application specific hardware modules but the preferred embodiment includes steps executed by software modules. The functionality of steps referred to herein may correspond to the functionality of modules or portions of modules.

The operations referred to herein may be modules or portions of modules e.g. software firmware or hardware modules . For example although the described embodiment includes software modules and or includes manually entered user commands the various example modules may be application specific hardware modules. The software modules discussed herein may include script batch or other executable files or combinations and or portions of such files. The software modules may include a computer program or subroutines thereof encoded on computer readable media.

Additionally those skilled in the art will recognize that the boundaries between modules are merely illustrative and alternative embodiments may merge modules or impose an alternative decomposition of functionality of modules. For example the modules discussed herein may be decomposed into submodules to be executed as multiple computer processes and optionally on multiple computers. Moreover alternative embodiments may combine multiple instances of a particular module or submodule. Furthermore those skilled in the art will recognize that the operations described in example embodiment are for illustration only. Operations may be combined or the functionality of the operations may be distributed in additional operations in accordance with the invention.

Alternatively such actions may be embodied in the structure of circuitry that implements such functionality such as the micro code of a complex instruction set computer CISC firmware programmed into programmable or erasable programmable devices the configuration of a field programmable gate array FPGA the design of a gate array or full custom application specific integrated circuit ASIC or the like.

Each of the blocks of such flow diagrams may be executed by a module e.g. a software module or a portion of a module or a computer system user using for example a computer system such as the storage router previously mentioned or a similar network element as well as a computer system such as computer system . Thus the above described method the operations thereof and modules therefor may be executed on a computer system configured to execute the operations of the method and or may be executed from computer readable media. The method may be embodied in a machine readable and or computer readable medium for configuring a computer system to execute the method. Thus the software modules may be stored within and or transmitted to a computer system memory to configure the computer system to perform the functions of the module.

Such a computer system normally processes information according to a program a list of internally stored instructions such as a particular application program and or an operating system and produces resultant output information via I O devices. A computer process typically includes an executing running program or portion of a program current program values and state information and the resources used by the operating system to manage the execution of the process. A parent process may spawn other child processes to help perform the overall functionality of the parent process. Because the parent process specifically spawns the child processes to perform a portion of the overall functionality of the parent process the functions performed by child processes and grandchild processes etc. may sometimes be described as being performed by the parent process.

Such a computer system typically includes multiple computer processes executing concurrently. Often a computer system includes a single processing unit which is capable of supporting many active processes alternately. Although multiple processes may appear to be executing concurrently at any given point in time only one process is actually executed by the single processing unit. By rapidly changing the process executing a computer system gives the appearance of concurrent process execution. The ability of a computer system to multiplex the computer system s resources among multiple processes in various stages of execution is called multitasking. Systems with multiple processing units which by definition can support true concurrent processing are called multiprocessing systems. Active processes are often referred to as executing concurrently when such processes are executed in a multitasking and or a multiprocessing environment.

The software modules described herein may be received by such a computer system for example from computer readable media. The computer readable media may be permanently removably or remotely coupled to the computer system. The computer readable media may non exclusively include for example any number of the following magnetic storage media including disk and tape storage media. optical storage media such as compact disk media e.g. CD ROM CD R etc. and digital video disk storage media. nonvolatile memory storage memory including semiconductor based memory units such as FLASH memory EEPROM EPROM ROM or application specific integrated circuits. volatile storage media including registers buffers or caches main memory RAM etc. and data transmission media including computer network point to point telecommunication and carrier wave transmission media. In a UNIX based embodiment the software modules may be embodied in a file which may be a device a terminal a local or remote file a socket a network connection a signal or other expedient of communication or state change. Other new and various types of computer readable media may be used to store and or transmit the software modules discussed herein.

Although the present invention has been described in connection with several embodiments the invention is not intended to be limited to the specific forms set forth herein. On the contrary it is intended to cover such alternatives modifications and equivalents as can be reasonably included within the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims.

While particular embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it will be obvious to those skilled in the art that based upon the teachings herein changes and modifications may be made without departing from this invention and its broader aspects and therefore the appended claims are to encompass within their scope all such changes and modifications as are within the true spirit and scope of this invention. Moreover while the invention has been particularly shown and described with reference to these specific embodiments it will be understood by those skilled in the art that the foregoing and other changes in the form and details may be made therein without departing from the spirit or scope of the invention.

