---

title: Pallet adapter and detonation barrier for ammunition
abstract: An apparatus for packing containers includes a generally rectangular pallet adapter comprising rows and columns of cups, the rows and columns of cups being substantially orthogonal to each other, each cup comprising a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular, the pallet adapter including side walls located on its perimeter, the side walls extending upward beyond the cups; and a detonation barrier disposed on the pallet adapter, the detonation barrier the detonation barrier comprising internal row partitions, internal column partitions, two end row partitions and two end column partitions, the internal row partitions and end row partitions being substantially orthogonal to the internal column partitions and end column partitions thereby defining rows and columns of rectangular openings.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07546917&OS=07546917&RS=07546917
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07546917
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050804
---
The inventions described herein may be manufactured used and licensed by or for the U.S. Government for U.S. Government purposes.

The invention relates in general to apparatus for palletizing ammunition and more particularly to apparatus for palletizing ammunition and preventing sympathetic detonation.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 722 877 was issued on Aug. 10 2004 and is hereby expressly incorporated by reference. The 877 patent discloses a cylindrical MONOPAQ container for ammunition such as mortar ammunition. Prior to the MONOPAQ container mortar ammunition was packaged in pairs in PA154 metal cans. Palletization of the PA154 cans comprised a wood pallet often with another sheet of wood nailed on top of it. Twenty four PA154 metal cans were placed on the pallet allowing 48 cartridges to be palletized. However this method of palletization does not work for the cylindrical MONOPAQ container. Further this method is not able to ensure proper spacing of mortar cartridges for improved sympathetic detonation results. Due to the slender shape of the cylindrical MONOPAQ container stabilizing devices for palletization are required for a steady load for transportation and storage.

One object of the invention is to provide an apparatus for palletization of MONOPAQ containers for ammunition such as 120 mm mortars.

Another object of the invention is to provide an apparatus for palletization of MONOPAQ containers that provides for a secure palletized load as well as easy accessibility to ammunition by the soldier.

A further object of the invention is to provide a lightweight detonation barrier for palletized MONOPAQ containers that meets the sympathetic detonation SD requirement for a palletized load.

A first feature of the invention is a generally rectangular pallet adapter comprising rows and columns of cups the rows and columns of cups being substantially orthogonal to each other each cup comprising a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular the pallet adapter including side walls located on its perimeter the side walls extending upward beyond the cups.

A second feature of the invention is a generally rectangular pallet adapter comprising rows and columns of cups the rows and columns of cups being substantially orthogonal to each other each cup comprising a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular the pallet adapter including side walls located on its perimeter the side walls extending upward beyond the cups and a detonation barrier disposed on the pallet adapter.

A third feature of the invention is a detonation barrier comprising internal row partitions internal column partitions two end row partitions and two end column partitions the internal row partitions and end row partitions being substantially orthogonal to the internal column partitions and end column partitions thereby defining rows and columns of rectangular openings the internal row partitions end row partitions end column partitions and internal column partitions each having vertical slots formed therein a number of vertical slots in the internal row partitions and end row partitions being one less than a number of columns of rectangular openings and a number of vertical slots in the internal column partitions and end column partitions being one less than a number of rows of rectangular openings a vertical slot in each of the internal column partitions mating with a corresponding vertical slot in each of the internal row partitions each end row partition including at least one tab opening adjacent each side edge and each end column partition including at least one tab formed on each side edge for insertion in the at least one tab opening each side edge of the internal column partitions and each side edge of the internal row partitions including a stepped portion for receiving an end row partition and an end column partition respectively the stepped portion including a hook.

A fourth feature of the invention is a generally rectangular pallet adapter comprising rows and columns of cups the rows and columns of cups being substantially orthogonal to each other each cup comprising a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular the pallet adapter including side walls located on its perimeter the side walls extending upward beyond the cups and a plurality of containers one end of each container disposed in each cup each container including a generally rectangular stacking index.

A fifth feature of the invention is a generally rectangular pallet adapter comprising rows and columns of cups the rows and columns of cups being substantially orthogonal to each other each cup comprising a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular the pallet adapter including side walls located on its perimeter the side walls extending upward beyond the cups a plurality of containers one end of each container disposed in each cup each container including a generally rectangular stacking index and a detonation barrier disposed on the pallet adapter.

A sixth feature of the invention is a first generally rectangular pallet adapter comprising rows and columns of cups the rows and columns of cups being substantially orthogonal to each other each cup comprising a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular the first pallet adapter including side walls located on its perimeter the side walls extending upward beyond the cups a plurality of containers one end of each container disposed in each cup each container including a generally rectangular stacking index a detonation barrier disposed on the first pallet adapter and a second generally rectangular pallet adapter comprising rows and columns of cups the rows and columns of cups being substantially orthogonal to each other each cup comprising a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular the second pallet adapter including side walls located on its perimeter the side walls extending upward beyond the cups wherein the second pallet adapter is disposed in an inverted position with respect to the first pallet adapter another end of each container disposed in each of the cups of the second pallet adapter and further wherein the generally rectangular stacking index of each container mates with the generally rectangular upper portion of each cup of one of the first and second pallet adapters.

A seventh feature of the invention is a first generally rectangular pallet adapter comprising rows and columns of cups the rows and columns of cups being substantially orthogonal to each other each cup comprising a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular the first pallet adapter including side walls located on its perimeter the side walls extending upward beyond the cups a plurality of containers one end of each container disposed in each cup each container including a generally rectangular stacking index a detonation barrier disposed on the first pallet adapter wherein the detonation barrier comprises internal row partitions internal column partitions two end row partitions and two end column partitions the internal row partitions and end row partitions being substantially orthogonal to the internal column partitions and end column partitions thereby defining rows and columns of rectangular openings wherein a number of rectangular openings in the detonation barrier is equal to a number of cups in the first pallet adapter and further wherein each container is disposed in a rectangular opening of the detonation barrier and at least one cartridge disposed in at least one of the plurality of containers the cartridge having a body with an area of maximum diameter a rectangular opening of the detonation barrier being located radially outward from the area of maximum diameter of the cartridge body.

The invention will be better understood and further objects features and advantages thereof will become more apparent from the following description of the preferred embodiments taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

Pallet adapter has a generally rectangular shape and includes a plurality of cups formed therein. Cups are preferably formed in rows and columns . The rows and columns of cups are substantially orthogonal to each other. Each cup includes a lower portion that is generally circular and an upper portion that is generally rectangular . Circular lower portion preferably includes a drain opening formed in a bottom surface thereof. Either the cap end or body end of container is disposed in the circular lower portion . If the body end of the container is disposed in the circular lower portion then the generally rectangular stacking index of the body will mate with the generally rectangular upper portion of cup to restrain movement of the container .

Pallet adapter includes side walls located on its perimeter. The side walls extend upward beyond the cups . As best seen in cups in adjacent columns may be connected by channels . Channels are features that facilitate the molding process of adapter . The pallet adapter shown in allows forty eight 48 cylindrical MONOPAQ containers to be unitized stably in a 6 row by 8 column palletization configuration. Of course pallet adapters with different number of rows and columns may be used for example 6 6 5 4 4 4 etc.

One method of making pallet adapter is vacuum forming using 0.2 thick high density polyethylene material. The adapters cup the MONOPAQ containers to provide significant load stability. Two adapters are used per pallet load one under the bottom of the containers resting on a wood pallet and the second inverted on the top of the containers . If the containers are placed with the cap down then the rectangular portions on the top adapter will engage the stacking indices of the containers . On the other hand if the containers are placed with the cap up then the rectangular portions on the bottom adapter will engage the stacking indices of the containers . This method allows the identical adapter to be used on both the top and bottom for minimized cost. Use of the adapters minimizes the use of extra wood dunnage and spare parts. Removal of the top adapter allows easy and immediate access to packaged ammunition.

Another aspect of the invention is a detonation barrier shown in a perspective view in and in a top view in . Before containers are placed in the cups of bottom pallet adapter detonation barrier is placed on top of the bottom pallet adapter . Detonation barrier is made of for example high density polyethylene. The detonation barrier is an important element in assuring that containers containing high explosive cartridges pass the sympathetic detonation testing. The detonation barrier successfully dampens and absorbs shock waves created by explosion of a cartridge in a container . When a cartridge in a palletized container explodes either accidentally or due to hostile action detonation barrier prevents adjacent palletized high explosive cartridges from detonating.

Sympathetic detonation tests were conducted on high explosive cartridges separated with the detonation barrier . The detonation barrier effectively blockaded and absorbed the shock waves generated by the exploded donor cartridges and successfully prevented any of the adjacent cartridges from a chain detonation due to the explosion of the donor cartridge. The test results were exceptional. The detonation barrier assures that the cartridges in palletized containers are fully in compliance with the sympathetic detonation requirements for a palletized load configuration.

The detonation barrier comprises a set of high density polyethylene generally flat partitions assembled to form a grid around each MONOPAQ container . In the embodiment shown the detonation barrier may contain up to forty eight containers in 6 rows and 8 columns on a 45 inch 53 inch pallet configuration. However detonation barriers with different number of rows and columns may be used for example 6 6 5 4 4 4 etc. on other sizes of pallets e.g. 40 inches 48 inches. The partitions are slotted to lock together and the outside partitions have interlocks to keep a secure palletized load. To minimize the weight of the partitions the design of the partitions is focused on providing maximum protection to the sympathetic detonation critical areas of the cartridges.

In particular with the cartridges disposed in containers that are placed with cap down in an adapter the partitions surround the Borlette diameter at x of the cartridges . That is the rectangular openings of the detonation barrier are located radially outward from the area of maximum diameter of the body sections of cartridges . The partitions are designed to be lightweight and easily assembled disassembled without using special tools.

Referring now in more detail to the detonation barrier comprises internal row partitions internal column partitions two end row partitions and two end column partitions . The number of internal row and column partitions will vary depending on the quantity of containers to be protected. The internal row partitions and end row partitions are substantially orthogonal to the internal column partitions and end column partitions thereby defining rows and columns of rectangular openings . When used in conjunction with a particular pallet adapter the number of rectangular openings in the detonation barrier is equal to a number of cups in the pallet adapter .

The internal row partitions end row partitions end column partitions and internal column partitions each have vertical slots formed therein. The number of vertical slots in the internal row partitions and end row partitions is one less than the number of columns of rectangular openings . The number of vertical slots in the internal column partitions and end column partitions is one less than the number of rows of rectangular openings . The vertical slots in each of the internal column partitions mates with a corresponding vertical slot in each of the internal row partitions . The end row partitions end column partitions and internal column partitions are substantially rectangular in shape.

The bottom edges and the lower side edges of the internal row partitions provide the contact surface with the pallet adapter . To reduce the weight of the internal row partitions two semicircular openings are formed therein. To prevent the side walls of the pallet adapter from bulging outward the lower side edges of the internal row partitions include a stepped portion that is inserted inside the side walls . The thickness of the end row partitions end column partitions internal column partitions and internal row partitions is a minimum of about 0.37 inches and preferably about 0.375 inches.

Each upper side edge of the internal column partitions and each upper side edge of the internal row partitions includes a stepped portion for receiving an end row partition and an end column partition respectively. Each stepped portion includes a hook to help retain the end row and end column partitions .

Each end row partition includes at least one tab opening adjacent each side edge. Each end column partition includes at least one tab formed on each side edge for insertion in the tab opening . Preferably the number of tab openings adjacent each side edge of each end row partition is two and the number of tabs formed on each side edge of each column partition is two. In a preferred embodiment each end row partition and each end column partition include a strap opening formed adjacent each side edge. The strap openings allow a strap that is wrapped around the detonation barrier to avoid the ninety degree corners by passing through the strap openings .

While the invention has been described with reference to certain preferred embodiments numerous changes alterations and modifications to the described embodiments are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

