---

title: Polymer composite photonic particles
abstract: A method for forming photonic particles, where the method includes the steps of preparing a porous photonic material layer, patterning a soluble polymer on the porous photonic material layer, leaving dividing portions of the material layer untreated, infusing the polymer into the material layer, and removing the dividing portions of the material to obtain the photonic particles.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08206780&OS=08206780&RS=08206780
owner: The Regents of the University of California
number: 08206780
owner_city: Oakland
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051214
---
Applicants claim priority benefits under 35 U.S.C. 119 on the basis of Patent Application No. 60 635 759 Dec. 14 2004.

This invention was made with Government assistance under Grant F49620 02 1 0288 awarded by AFOSR. The Government has certain rights in this invention.

Photonic crystals constructed from porous Si and other materials may be achieved by a computer controlled electrochemical etch process. Films of porous Si photonic crystals and other materials may be converted into coded small particles so called smart dust and the smart dust particles may in turn provide for a host of applications such as chemical and biological sensing high throughput screening controlled release drug delivery and many other uses. In vivo applications are possible with benign materials such as silicon and other materials including semiconductors and insulators may be used for encoding. In addition to the coded smart dust other types of photonic crystals have applications in sensing detection and other uses.

A method to construct photonic particles consisting of a porous Si one dimensional photonic crystal infused with a polymer is described. A preferred embodiment method includes steps of preparing a porous photonic material layer patterning a soluble polymer on the porous photonic material layer leaving dividing portions of the material layer untreated infusing the polymer into the material layer and removing the dividing portions of the material to obtain the photonic particles. The patterning in preferred embodiments is accomplished by depositing a fine mist of polymer solution onto a photonic crystal layer and then removing the uncoated material by chemical dissolution.

Complex coding of porous materials with computer controlled etching conditions has been demonstrated and division of a porous film including one or more codes in the porous structure or more generally any photonic crystal into particles may be accomplished by numerous methods such as for example ultrasonic fragmentation photolithography or soft lithography. However these methods of division are not without problems.

Ultrasonication of the porous film produces fragments with sharp edges and poorly controlled sizes an undesirable feature for in vivo applications. While photolithography offers greater control over fragment shape it is also more expensive and time consuming. Dry removal soft lithography in which an elastic stamp is pressed into a heated porous Si film offers a rapid method to produce micron sized porous Si features with well controlled shapes. However dry removal soft lithography requires a pre patterned master and while it is possible to obtain particles having rounded edges using this process it is difficult to obtain such rounded particles nor is the process reliable for obtaining same. Additionally the particles resulting from dry removal soft lithography are typically open pore structures that suffer from chemical and optical instability

The present invention provides a method for forming coded particles as well as a method for dividing a coded porous film into small particles. A preferred method of the invention is similar in nature to soft lithography but advantageously does not require a pre patterned master. In embodiments of the invention spray deposition is used to deposit small polymer drops onto a porous film having a coded porous structure such as a porous Si film a porous SiOfilm or a porous alumina film but which is also applicable more generally to photonic films.

The polymer drops deposited on the porous film act as etch masks and also serve to stabilize the resulting microscopic porous photonic crystals. This microdroplet patterning method represents a simple and inexpensive technique to produce large quantities of uniform and stable photonic crystal particles. Well established techniques known to those skilled in the art such as ink jet printing or nozzle spraying provide an exemplary basis that may be used to control the size of micron sized and smaller particles. In addition commercially available polymer beads may be melted into the pores to obtain particles having highly uniform sizes on the order of 10 microns .

It should be noted that the preferred embodiments will be discussed along with some exemplary experimental results and the experimental results should not be construed as limiting the scope of the preferred embodiments.

While the invention anticipates use of a wide array of molecules and pharmaceutical candidates for purposes of illustration only some particular candidates include polyesters poly lactic acid PLGA collagen polypeptides such as zein a natural polymer derived from maize and hydrogels.

Exemplary experimental values will be discussed in connection with to illustrate one preferred embodiment more particularly. The porous silicon template is preferably a rugate filter which exhibits a sinusoidal variation in porosity with depth and is prepared in porous Si. The resulting structure is a 1 dimensional photonic crystal that displays a sharp resonance in the reflectivity spectrum. The solution is a fine mist of polystyrene solution in toluene for exemplary purposes only such as 16 by mass solution which is then impinged on the surface by spray coating using a commercial artist s air brush. Many other patterning techniques are also possible. Inkjet printing and other droplet patterning and spray techniques may be used for example. Areas not having polymer deposited thereon may be considered dividing portions as the dividing portions will be removed and the portions with polymer deposits will eventually form the particles .

While it is contemplated that the temperature and pH at which infusion is carried out may differ to suit individual applications in one exemplary experiment the sample is heated in an oven at 250 C. for 30 min to infuse the polymer into the porous matrix. The uncoated porous Si is then removed such as by treatment with an aqueous base. In the exemplary embodiment the aqueous base is provided as a pH 10 buffer. Treatment with aqueous base is a common means to remove sacrificial porous Si layers surrounding structures that have been chemically modified or masked using conventional lithography. The resulting particles are polymer composite materials having superior physical characteristics such as having smooth features and being both mechanically and optically stable. The polymer does not interfere with the optical properties of the silicon template and embodiments of the invention include for example composite polymer Rugate filters and composite polymer smart dust particles.

To illustrate the efficiency of one exemplary method for dissolving the dividing portions reflectivity spectra obtained from the microdroplet patterned porous Si film upon immersion in a buffer solution such as a pH 10 buffer solution provide a convenient means to monitor dissolution of the unmasked regions. For example spectra obtained from an area on the film of 1 mm in diameter initially display two main peaks . The polymer domains are much smaller than the 1 mm spot size of the spectrometer and the two peaks correspond to a superposition of the solution filled bare and the polymer filled with polymer porous Si photonic crystal. The highest energy peak at 520 nm in is associated with regions that contain the base solution and the peak at 550 nm corresponds to the polymer infused domains. The spectrum from the polymer infused photonic crystal is red shifted due to the larger refractive index of polystyrene relative to the aqueous base solution.

Thus as illustrated in the exemplary results of as the uncoated dividing regions of the porous Si layer dissolve in the aqueous base solution the resonance from the photonic crystal initially at 520 nm blue shifts and decreases in intensity. After several hours the unprotected porous Si layer has completely dissolved and only the resonance associated with the polymer infused material at 550 nm remains. Base treatment does not significantly shift or diminish this peak indicating that polystyrene is effective at protecting porous Si from corrosion by aqueous base. A broad background signal corresponding to reflection of the illumination source from the bare silicon substrate grows in as the unprotected porous Si layer is removed. This white light background reduces the fidelity of the signal coming from the polymer infused photonic crystal domains remaining on the substrate. Side bands of the fundamental resonance from the photonic crystal are also apparent in the spectra at longer wavelengths. After treatment with base the composite particles can be removed from the substrate by mechanical scraping or by ultrasonication.

Microdroplet patterning provides disc shaped particles without sharp edges as revealed by scanning electron microscopy. A porous filter or screen placed between the sprayer and the sample provides additional control over the shape and size distribution of the nanocomposite particles. Micron sized photonic crystals are generated when a Poretics polycarbonate membrane filter containing 20 m diameter pores is placed between the spray nozzle and the porous Si film 2 mm from the wafer. Regularly spaced photonic crystal squares measuring from 50 to 200 m on an edge result if a copper transmission electron microscopy grid of the appropriate dimensions is placed on the surface of the film prior to spraying. The structures retain their photonic features after base treatment and appear uniform under an optical microscope.

The microdroplet patterning provides a general means to fabricate composite photonic crystal particles from a porous Si multilayer and a polymer or other soluble material. The nanocomposites possess stable spectral features and increased resistance towards corrosion.

In another preferred embodiment small polymer beads such as polystyrene beads were melted into the pores of a porous template. Polystyrene beads for example are commercially available and include very tight size distributions which when used with methods of the invention result in disk shaped particles having highly uniform sizes on the order of 10 microns . This method is especially advantageous in the fields of biological and chemical screening and drug delivery to name a few. In biological and chemical screening applications optically encoded porous silicon substrates can be used as the substrate of predetermined porosity thus transferring the optical code from the electrochemically programmed porous silicon to the polymer microbead replicate.

More particularly commercially available polymeric microbead precursors which preferably exhibit monodisperse size distributions are obtained. Monodisparity of the polymeric microbead precursors is preferred insofar as it provides for batches of replicate microbeads having a similar monodisparity to the precursors. Monodisparity of the polymeric microbead precursors is especially preferred in applications such as biological screening because it ensures that each microbead replicate includes a similar number of chemical probes which in turn contributes to more precise assay results.

Next the precursor polymeric microbeads are softened by heating and allowed to infiltrate into the porous matrix of the silicon template to obtain microbead infiltrated template generally at . A solvent vapor or a solvent vapor in combination with temperature may also be used to achieve softening and infiltration of the template . Where temperature alone is used a relatively low temperature such as 100 C. is preferred although the invention contemplates use of any temperature sufficient to promote infusion. Finally the porous matrix is stripped away and the polymer microbead replicates are lifted from the surface of the template . Where the template is porous silicon the porous silicon matrix may be stripped away by a solution of potassium hydroxide. Diluting the base solution with ethanol allows for better wetting during the stripping process. Once the polymer microbead replicates are lifted off the surface of the template the replicates can be collected via suction filtration.

Electron microscopy reveals each phase of photonic particle formation where precursor polymeric microbeads first rest on a surface of the porous template after having been transferred from the pad . Low heat approximately 100 C. was used to partially soften the precursor polymeric microbeads so that the precursor polymeric microbeads would stick to the template rather than to the pad during transfer. The polymer replicates are then lifted off of the surface of the template .

Still other embodiments include a method for forming small particles that can circulate in the bloodstream so called erythrocyte mimics because they resemble red blood cells . These particles may contain targeting moieties such as polypeptides or antibodies to allow the particles to selectively stick to cancer cells or other diseased tissue in the body. The particle would contain a payload such as a drug image contrast agent for MRI PET ultrasound imaging magnetic nanoparticles or other payload that can be released locally to the diseased tissue. The target moieties may be added by chemical modification after the particles are formed whereas the payload is preferably disposed inside of the particles.

More particularly targeting moieties may include a variety of structures including but not limited to peptides DNA and or RNA strands sugar molecules lectins and antibodies. The payload which is preferably disposed inside of the particles may also be selected from a vast array of substances including but not limited to an anti cancer agent such as doxorubicin an anti inflammatory agent such as dexamethasone a steroid an RNA aptamer a Fab fragment antigen binding domain of an immunoglobulin antibody an immunosuppressor such as rapamycin to name a few.

Advantageously the polymer filled photonic crystals are much more stable than the parent porous Si films allowing use of the polymer filled photonic crystals in high throughput or multiplexed bioassays. In such applications the polymer composites act as encoded particles to which the appropriate bioassay chemistries can be attached.

Methods of the invention are applicable to a variety of industries including but not limited to drug discovery biological screening chemical screening biological labeling chemical labeling in vivo labeling security identification and product marking. Various attributes of the particles and methods of the invention enable a wide range of applications in various industries. The small size of the particles facilitates ready incorporation into various hosts e.g. products test kits assays powders such as explosives for identification pastes liquids glass paper and any other host or system that can accept small particles. In vivo detection is enabled by biocompatible particles of the invention which may then be queried for example through tissues using near infrared and infrared wavelengths that penetrate tissues.

It is anticipated that embodiments of the invention may be used for a broad range of applications such as controlled drug release and or controlled drug delivery. Accordingly a particular drug or drugs may be loaded into the particles via one of a plurality of methods.

First the polymer impinged upon the surface of the porous film may already contain the drug or drugs dissolved in solution such that when the polymer infuses the pores the drug or drugs also infuses the pores of the film. Secondly the drug or drugs may be pre adsorbed to the porous Si or SiOfilm before spraying or melting the polymer therein. Third upon subsequent removal of the porous Si or SiOfilm the drug is infused into the resulting porous polymer particles or beads.

Sample preparation proceeded as follows. Multilayered porous Si films were prepared by electrochemical etch of Si wafers p type B doped 

Optical instrumentation and data acquisition proceeded as follows. Optical reflectivity spectra were obtained using a tungsten light source and a CCD spectrometer fitted to an optical microscope. All spectra were obtained at normal incidence with the illumination beam coaxial with the spectrometer light path.

Scanning electron microscope SEM images were obtained using an FEI Quanta 600 instrument operating at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. All samples were sputter coated with gold.

While various embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

