---

title: Drug-eluting stents coated with non-nucleotide P2Yreceptor antagonist compound
abstract: The present invention provides a drug-eluting stent, wherein the stent is coated with one or more non-nucleotide P2Yreceptor antagonist compounds or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt, solvate, or hydrate thereof. When the stent is placed in a narrowed or damaged arterial vessel, a therapeutically effective amount of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound is eluted continuously from the stent to the local environment of the stent. The P2Yreceptor antagonist compound-eluting stents are useful in preventing thrombosis and restenosis, and are effective in inhibiting the contraction of vascular smooth muscle cells, inhibiting cell proliferation, and reducing inflammation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07749981&OS=07749981&RS=07749981
owner: Inspire Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
number: 07749981
owner_city: Durham
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051104
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. application Ser. No. 11 124 619 filed May 5 2005 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 335 648 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

This invention relates to non nucleotide compounds and methods of making and using such compounds in the prevention or treatment of diseases or conditions associated with platelet aggregation including thrombosis stroke and myocardial infarction in humans and other mammals and for inhibition of platelet aggregation in blood and blood related products. This invention also relates to drug eluting stents wherein a therapeutically effective amount of a non nucleotide P2Yreceptor antagonist compound is eluted continuously from the stent to the local environment of the stent when the stent is placed in a narrowed or damaged arterial vessel.

Hemostasis is the spontaneous process of arresting bleeding from damaged blood vessels. Upon injury precapillary vessels contract within seconds and thrombocytes or blood platelets bind to the exposed subendothelial matrix of an injured vessel by a process called platelet adhesion. Platelets also stick to each other in a phenomenon known as platelet aggregation to form stable platelet aggregates that quickly help stop or slow blood outflow from injured vessels.

An intravascular thrombus can result from pathological disturbances of hemostasis or by the rupture of atherosclerotic plaques. Platelet adhesion and aggregation are critical events in intravascular thrombosis. Activated under conditions of high shear blood flow in diseased vessels or by the release of mediators from other circulating cells and damaged endothelial cells lining the vessel platelets and other cells accumulate at a site of vessel injury to form a thrombus and recruit more platelets to the developing thrombus. The thrombus can grow to sufficient size to block off arterial blood vessels. Thrombi can also form in areas of stasis or slow blood flow in veins. Venous thrombi can easily detach portions of themselves creating emboli that travel through the circulatory system. This process can result in blockade of other vessels such as pulmonary arteries. Blockages of this sort can result in pathological outcomes such as pulmonary embolism. Thus arterial thrombi cause serious disease by local blockade whereas the morbidity and mortality associated with venous thrombi arise primarily after distant blockade or embolization. Conditions associated with pathological thrombus formation include venous thromboembolism thrombophlebitis deep vein thrombosis arterial embolism coronary and cerebral arterial thrombosis unstable angina myocardial infarction stroke transient ischemic attack cerebral embolism renal embolism and pulmonary embolism.

A number of converging pathways lead to platelet aggregation. Whatever the initial stimulus the final common event is crosslinking of platelets by binding of fibrinogen to a membrane binding site glycoprotein IIb IIIa GP IIb IIa also known as integrin . Antagonists of the GP IIb IIIa receptor have been shown to produce potent antithrombotic effects Ali U.S. Pat. No. 6 037 343 Duggan et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 040 317 . GP IIb IIIa antagonists include function blocking antibodies like Abciximab ReoPro cyclic peptides and peptidomimetic compounds The EPIC investigators Califf R. M. coordinating author 330 956 961 1994 The IMPACT II investigators 349 1422 1428 1997 The RESTORE investigators 96 1445 1453 1997 . The clinical efficacy of some of these newer drugs such as Abciximab is impressive but recent trials have found that these approaches are associated with an increased risk of major bleeding sometimes necessitating blood transfusion The EPIC investigators Califf R. M. coordinating author 330 956 961 1994 . Also administration of this class of antiplatelet agent appears to be limited to intravenous methods.

Thrombin can produce platelet aggregation independently of other pathways but substantial quantities of thrombin are unlikely to be present without prior activation of platelets by other mechanisms. Thrombin inhibitors such as hirudin are highly effective antithrombotic agents. However functioning as both antiplatelet and anti coagulant agents thrombin inhibitors again can produce excessive bleeding The TIMI 9a Investigators 90 1624 1630 1994 The GUSTO IIa Investigators 90 1631 1637 1994 Neuhaus et al. 90 1638 1642 1994 .

Various antiplatelet agents have been studied as inhibitors of thrombus formation. Some agents such as aspirin and dipyridamole have come into use as prophylactic antithrombotic agents and others have been the subjects of clinical investigations. To date therapeutic agents such as the disintegrins and the thienopyridines ticlopidine TICLID and clopidogrel PLAVIX have been shown to have utility as platelet aggregation inhibitors although they can produce a substantial number of side effects and have limited effectiveness in some patients. Hass et al. 321 501 507 1989 Weber et al. 66 1461 1468 1990 Lekstrom and Bell 70 161 177 1991 . In particular the use of the thienopyridines in antiplatelet therapies has been shown to increase the incidence of potentially life threatening thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura Bennett et al. 342 1771 1777 2000 . Aspirin which has a beneficial effect on the inhibition of platelet aggregation Antiplatelet Trialists Collaboration 308 81 106 1994 Antiplatelet Trialists Collaboration 308 159 168 1994 acts by inhibiting the synthesis of prostaglandins. Its well documented high incidence of gastric side effects however limits its usefulness in many patients. In addition aspirin resistance has been observed in some individuals McKee et al. 88 711 715 2002 .

Many studies have demonstrated that adenosine 5 diphosphate ADP plays a key role in the initiation and progression of arterial thrombus formation Bernat et al. 70 812 826 1993 Maffrand et al. 59 225 230 1988 Herbert et al. 13 1171 1179 1993 . ADP induces inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and modulation of intracellular signaling pathways such as activation of phosphoinositide 3 kinase PI3K influx and mobilization of intracellular Ca secretion shape change and platelet aggregation Dangelmaier et al. 85 341 348 2001 . ADP induced platelet aggregation is triggered by its binding to specific receptors expressed in the plasma membrane of the platelet. There are at least three different P2 receptors expressed in human platelets P2X P2Y and P2Y. The P2Xreceptor is a ligand gated cation channel that is activated by ATP resulting in a transient influx of extracellular calcium. This receptor has been implicated in the regulation of platelet shape change and recent evidence suggests its participation in thrombus formation in small arteries under high shear forces. Jagroop et al. 14 15 20 2003 Hechler et al. 198 661 667 2003 . The P2Yreceptor is a G protein coupled receptor that is activated by ADP and is responsible for calcium mobilization from intracellular stores platelet shape change and initiation of aggregation. The P2Yreceptor also referred to as the P2Yand P2receptor is a G protein coupled receptor that is activated by ADP and is responsible for inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and activation of PI3K. Activation of P2Yis required for platelet secretion and stabilization of platelet aggregates Gachet 86 222 232 2001 Andr et al. 112 398 406 2003 .

ADP induced platelet aggregation requires the simultaneous activation of both P2Yand P2Yreceptors and therefore aggregation can be inhibited by blockade of either receptor. Several authors have demonstrated that ADP induced aggregation is inhibited in a concentration dependent manner by analogues of adenosine triphosphate ATP . ATP itself is a weak and nonselective but competitive P2Yand P2Yreceptor antagonist. Ingall et al. 42 213 220 1999 have reported that modification of the polyphosphate side chain of ATP along with substitution of the adenine moiety at the C position resulted in compounds that inhibited the P2receptor or P2Yreceptor . Zamecnik U.S. Pat. No. 5 049 550 has disclosed a method for inhibiting platelet aggregation by administration of a diadenosine tetraphosphate like compound App CH ppA. Kim and Zamecnik U.S. Pat. No. 5 681 823 have disclosed P P dithio P P monochloromethylene 5 5 diadenosine P P tetraphosphate as an antithrombotic agent.

Nucleotide P2Yantagonists have been developed however there is still a need for compounds that have improved oral bioavailability and blood stability.

Thienopyridines ticlopidine and clopidogrel react covalently with the P2Yreceptor and produce irreversible platelet inhibition in vivo Quinn and Fitzgerald 100 1667 1672 1999 Geiger et al. 19 2007 2011 1999 Savi et al. 84 891 896 2000 . Patients treated with thienopyridines usually require 2 3 days of therapy to observe significant inhibition of platelet aggregation however and maximal inhibition usually is observed between 4 to 7 days after initiation of treatment. Also the platelet inhibitory effect of thienopyridines persists up to 7 10 days after the therapy is discontinued and both ticlopidine and clopidogrel produce a significant prolongation of the bleeding time from 1.5 to 2 fold over control . Because of the prolonged effect of thienopyridines these drugs need to be discontinued for 7 to 10 days prior to elective surgery leaving the patient unprotected from a possible thrombotic event during that period. Recently the association of thienopyridine treatment with events of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura has been reported Bennett et al. 342 1773 1777 2000 Bennett et al. 128 541 544 1998 .

Derivatives of 5 7 disubstituted 1 2 3 triazolol 4 5 d pyrimidin 3 yl cyclopentanes and tetrahydrofurans have been disclosed as antagonists of the P2T or P2Y receptor on platelets Cox et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 747 496 and related patents Bonnert et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 297 232 WO 98 28300 Brown et al. WO 99 41254 WO 99 05144 Hardern et al. WO 99 05142 WO 01 36438 and Guile et al. WO 99 05143 for use in the treatment of platelet aggregation disorders.

Guile et al. WO 00 04021 disclose the use of triazolo 4 5 d pyrimidine compounds in therapy. Brown et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 369 064 disclose the use of Triazolo 4 5 d pyrimidine compounds in the treatment of myocardial infarction and unstable angina. Dixon et al. WO 02 096428 disclose the use of 8 azapurine derivatives in combination with other antithrombotic agents for antithrombotic therapy. Springthorpe discloses AZD6140 as a potent selective orally active P2Yreceptor antagonist which is now in Phase I clinical trials Abstracts of Papers 225ACS National Meeting New Orleans La. March 2003 MEDI 016 . WO 02 016381 discloses a method of preventing or treating diseases or conditions associated with platelet aggregation using mononucleoside polyphosphates and dinucleoside polyphosphates.

Stents are typically slotted metal tubes which can be expanded by a balloon in an angioplastied artery providing a rigid structural support for the arterial wall. The use of coronary stents for the treatment of patients with acute coronary syndrome has increased significantly during the past years. With coronary stents implanted in more than 2 million people worldwide some doctors and researchers are now concerned about a long term problem of blood clots inside the stents that is observed in some patients who have received stents.

In stent restenosis is caused primarily due to hyperplasia of smooth muscle cells in the intimal layer of the vessel wall so called neointimal hyperplasia and to a much lesser extent mural thrombus. On the molecular and cellular levels the initial vascular injury caused by both inflation of intracoronary balloons and the metal of the stent itself results in denudation of the intima and stretching of the media and adventitia in addition both macrophages and polymorphonuclear neutrophils migrate to the site of damage where they release chemokines. These chemokines serve to increase the amount of matrix metalloproteinase which leads to remodeling of the extracellular matrix and stimulate smooth muscle cell migration. The wound healing reaction stimulates platelets growth factor and smooth muscle cell activation followed by smooth muscle cell and fibroblast migration and proliferation into the injured area. Smooth muscle cells are also stimulated to increase the expression of genes involved in cell division. It is both the interaction and the extent of these processes that lead to neointimal hyperplasia and in stent restenosis which are characterized by a marked proliferative response produced by the stent as has been demonstrated by histological examinations. Stenting also raises the systemic levels of inflammatory markers such as C reactive protein and interleukin 6.

Recently stents are coated with agents that reduce or prevent exaggerated neointimal proliferation and thereby restenosis. For example paclitaxel eluting stents inhibit the proliferation of smooth muscle cells and sirolimus eluting stents inhibits the inflammation response of the arterial wall. One problem with these stents is that the drugs also inhibit the regeneration of the endothelium destroyed during the expansion of the narrowed artery creating a potential risk of thrombosis. Thus the placement of these stents often requires the treatment by systemic administration of antithrombotic drugs.

This invention is directed to methods of preventing or treating diseases or conditions associated with platelet aggregation or where the aggregation of platelets inhibits treatment options. This invention is directed to methods of preventing or treating thrombosis and related disorders. This invention is further directed to methods of inhibiting platelet aggregation in blood and blood products comprising platelets such as stored blood.

The method comprises administering to a mammalian subject or to a sample comprising blood or platelet comprising material a composition comprising one or more non nucleotide P2Yreceptor antagonist compound that effectively binds to P2Yreceptors on platelets preferably in a reversible manner and thereby causes a inhibition of the ADP induced platelet aggregation response in blood or in a platelet comprising material. The compounds useful for the methods are compounds of general Formula I III XII and or tautomers thereof and or pharmaceutically acceptable hydrates solvates and or salts thereof.

The invention also provides novel compounds and pharmaceutical compositions. The compounds of Formulae I and III XII are useful in that they possess antagonist activity at platelet P2Yreceptors.

Optionally the compounds of this invention can be used in combination with other compounds useful for the treatment of platelet aggregation disorders or diseases.

The present invention also provides a drug eluting stent wherein the stent is coated with one or more non nucleotide P2Yreceptor antagonist compounds of general Formula I or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt solvate or hydrate thereof. When the stent is placed in a vessel a therapeutically effective amount of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound is eluted to the local environment of the stent. The P2Yreceptor antagonist compound eluting stents are useful in preventing thrombosis and restenosis and are effective in inhibiting the contraction of vascular smooth muscle cells inhibiting cell proliferation and reducing inflammation.

When present unless otherwise specified the following terms are generally defined as but are not limited to the following 

Alkyl groups are from 1 to 12 carbons inclusively either straight chained or branched with or without unsaturation and with or without heteroatoms are more preferably from 2 to 8 carbons inclusively and most preferably 2 to 6 carbons inclusively.

Alkenyl groups are from 1 to 12 carbons inclusively either straight or branched containing at least one double bond but may contain more than one double bond with or without heteroatoms.

Alkynyl groups are from 1 to 12 carbons inclusively either straight or branched containing at least one triple bond but may contain more than one triple bond and additionally may contain one or more double bonded moieties with or without heteroatoms.

Cycloalkyl groups from 3 to 12 carbons inclusively more preferably from 3 to 10 carbons inclusively and most preferably 3 to 6 carbons inclusively with or without unsaturation and with or without heteroatoms.

Aralkyl groups are from 1 to 8 carbons inclusively in the alkyl portion are more preferably from 1 to 6 carbons inclusively in the alkyl portion and most preferably are 1 to 4 carbons inclusively in the alkyl portion as included in the alkyl definition above the alkyl portion of an aralkyl group can include one or more positions of unsaturation such as a double bond or a triple bond in the chain when the chain includes two or more carbon atoms the alkyl portion of an aralkyl group can also include one or more heteroatoms and or substituents the aryl portion of an aralkyl group can be a monocyclic or polycyclic moiety from 3 to 8 carbons inclusively per ring in the aryl portion more preferably from 4 to 6 carbons inclusively per ring and most preferably 5 to 6 carbons inclusively per ring the aryl portion of an aralkyl group can also bear one or more substituents and or heteroatoms.

Aryl groups are either monocyclic or polycyclic are from 3 to 8 carbons inclusively per ring are more preferably from 4 to 6 carbons inclusively per ring and are most preferably 5 to 6 carbons inclusively per ring aryl groups can also bear substituents and or heteroatoms.

Heteroaralkyl groups are from 1 to 8 carbons inclusively in the alkyl portion are more preferably from 1 to 6 carbons inclusively in the alkyl portion and most preferably are 1 to 4 carbons inclusively in the alkyl portion as included in the alkyl definition above the alkyl portion of a heteroaralkyl group can include one or more positions of unsaturation such as a double bond or a triple bond in the chain when the chain includes two or more carbon atoms the alkyl portion of a heteroaralkyl group can also include one or more heteroatoms and or substituents the heteroaryl portion of a heteroaralkyl group can be a monocyclic or polycyclic moiety from 3 to 8 carbons inclusively per ring in the heteroaryl portion and containing from 1 to 4 heteroatoms inclusively per ring more preferably from 4 to 6 carbons inclusively per ring and most preferably 5 to 6 carbons inclusively per ring the heteroaryl portion of an heteroaralkyl group can also bear one or more substituents and or heteroatoms.

Heteroaryl groups are either monocyclic or polycyclic contain from 1 to 4 heteroatoms inclusively per ring are from 3 to 8 atoms inclusively per ring are more preferably from 4 to 6 atoms inclusively per ring and are most preferably 5 to 6 atoms inclusively per ring heteroaryl groups can also bear substituents and or heteroatoms.

Substituents on the foregoing groups can be but are not limited to hydroxy nitro methoxy fluoro chloro bromo iodo methyl ethyl propyl butyl thioalkyl alkoxy carboxyl carboxamido alkylsulfonyl alkylsulfonylamino sulfonamido cyano amino substituted amino trifluoromethyl trifluoromethoxy phenyl pyridyl imidazolyl cyclopropyl cyclopentyl and cyclohexyl and preferred heteroatoms are oxygen nitrogen and sulfur.

A desired substituent on a chain or ring in place of a hydrogen at a position is one selected from the given alkyl aryl halogen aralkyl carboxy alkoxycarbonyl hydroxyl acyloxy alkoxy aryloxy or aralkoxy classes or from other classes which provides a compound with good to excellent P2Yreceptor binding properties but which does not yield a compound with undesirable properties like chemical instability in a formulation or one with levels of toxicity that are not well tolerated by a treated mammal or especially not well tolerated by a human.

Diastereomers are stereoisomers isomers of identical constitution but differing three dimensional architecture which do not bear a mirror image relation to each other.

Pharmaceutically acceptable salts are salts that retain the desired biological activity of the parent compound and do not impart undesired toxicological effects. Pharmaceutically acceptable salt forms include various polymorphs as well as the amorphous form of the different salts derived from acid or base additions. The acid addition salts can be formed with inorganic or organic acids. Illustrative but not restrictive examples of such acids include hydrochloric hydrobromic sulfuric phosphoric citric acetic propionic benzoic napthoic oxalic succinic maleic malic mesylic adipic lactic tartaric salicylic methanesulfonic 2 hydroxyethanesulfonic toluenesulfonic benzenesulfonic camphorsulfonic and ethanesulfonic acids. The pharmaceutically acceptable base addition salts can be formed with metal or organic counterions and include but are not limited to alkali metal salts such as sodium or potassium alkaline earth metal salts such as magnesium or calcium and ammonium or tetraalkyl ammonium salts i.e. NX wherein X is C . Other salts such as hydrochlorides hydrobromides mesylates sulfates acetates tartrates etc. are also contemplated in this invention. Preferred counterions are monovalent ions such as NH sodium lithium potassium chloride bromide bisulfate and mesylate with sodium potassium chloride and mesylate being most preferred due to ease of manufacture stability and physiological tolerance.

Solvates are addition complexes in which a compound is combined with a pharmaceutically acceptable cosolvent in some fixed proportion. Cosolvents include but are not limited to water methanol ethanol 1 propanol isopropanol 1 butanol isobutanol tert butanol acetone methyl ethyl ketone acetonitrile ethyl acetate benzene toulene xylene s ethylene glycol dichloromethane 1 2 dichloroethane N methylformamide N N dimethylformamide N methylacetamide pyridine dioxane and diethyl ether. Hydrates are solvates in which the cosolvent is water. It is to be understood that the definition of the compound of the present invention encompasses all possible hydrates and solvates in any proportion which possess the stated activity.

The P2Yreceptor antagonist compounds useful for preventing or treating diseases or conditions associated with platelet aggregation and or platelet activation include compound of general Formula I and or tautomers thereof or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt solvate or hydrate thereof 

when any of X Xis C the carbon atom bears an H when doubly bonded in an unsaturated ring or a substituent M as defined below or

when any of X Xis C the carbon atom bears two H when singly bonded in a saturated ring or one H plus one substituent M or two substituents M without H with the proviso that any such moiety with one or two M substituents is of sufficient chemical stability 

when any of X Xis N in an saturated ring the nitrogen atom bears an H or substituents such as alkyl or acyl 

any of X Xcan be absent with the proviso that at least two of X Xare present such that the ring described by X Xconsists of at least three atoms 

with the provisos that no two adjacent atoms X Xcan both be O or S and that the ring shown in Formula II contains no more than four heteroatoms and that the shown pendant CORunit in Formula II is a substituent on the ring described in Formula II 

Ris H a physiologically relevant cation forming a carboxylate salt alkyl aryl or aralkyl with the resultant moiety C O ORpreferably having an adjacent relationship to the attachment point of A preferably Ris H or alkyl such as ethyl 

M is selected from the group consisting of H halogen such as F Cl Br CF Calkyl Calkenyl Calkynyl Ccycloalkyl Ccycloalkenyl aryl aralkyl heteroaryl saturated or unsaturated Cheterocycle OH cyano saturated or unsaturated Calkoxy aralkoxy aryloxy SH Cthioalkyl thioaryl CO OR CO NRR amino N substituted amino and N N disubstituted amino wherein each said substituent on said amino of M is independently selected from the group consisting of Calkyl Calkenyl Calkynyl Ccycloalkyl Ccycloalkenyl aryl aralkyl heteroaryl Cheterocycle CO R CO O Calkyl and CO NRR and

Preferably the furanosyl moiety in Formula I has the 2 and 3 oxygen groups in a cis orientation relative to one another on the furanose ring. Further a furanosyl moiety which supports a 2 3 acetal or ketal group is preferably derived from ribose other furanose derivatives can be used however. A preferred stereochemical embodiment of this invention includes but is not limited to D ribose 2 3 acetal or ketal compounds of Formula I such as found in acetals derived from adenosine.

4 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy isophthalic acid 1 5 Amino 2 2 benzyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy benzoic acid 2 3 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy isoxazole 5 carboxylic acid 3 4 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy benzoic acid 4 5 Amino 2 2 2 dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy N hydroxy benzamide 5 5 Amino 2 2 benzyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy N hydroxy benzamide 6 6 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinamide 7 6 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 8 2 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 9 5 Chloro 6 2 2 dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 10 1 9 6 3 Hydroxy pyridin 2 yloxymethyl 2 2 dimethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl 9H purin 6 yl 3 phenyl urea 11 6 Chloro 2 2 2 dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy 5 fluoro nicotinic acid 12 2 2 Cyclohexyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 13 2 6 6 3 Phenyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 2 trifluoromethyl phenyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 14 2 2 3 4 Dihydro 1H naphthalenyl 6 6 3 cyclopentyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 15 2 2 4 Acetylamino phenyl 6 6 3 cyclopentyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 16 2 2 Phenyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 17 2 2 Biphenyl 3 yl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 18 2 2 Naphthalen 2 yl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 19 2 2 2 Bromo phenyl 6 6 3 ethyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 20 2 2 Benzo b thiophen 3 yl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 21 2 6 6 3 Cyclopentyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 phenethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 22 2 6 6 3 Cyclopentyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 phenethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 23 2 6 6 3 Hexyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 phenyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 24 2 2 Biphenyl 4 yl 6 6 3 hexyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 25 2 6 6 3 Ethyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 phenylethynyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 26 2 6 6 3 Ethyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 phenethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 27 2 6 6 3 Cyclopentyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 p tolyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 28 2 2 2 indanonyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 29 2 6 6 3 Ethyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 phenyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 30 2 2 tert Butyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 31 3 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl amino benzoic acid 32 2 Benzyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carboxylic acid 33 1 2 Benzyl 6 6 3 ethyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 34 1 6 6 3 Benzyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 phenyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 35 1 2 Benzyl 6 6 3 cyclopentyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 36 1 9 2 Benzyl 6 3 methylsulfonyl ureido methyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl 9H purin 6 yl 3 phenyl urea 37 1 6 6 3 Cyclopentyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 phenyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 38 1 2 Phenyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 39 1 2 Benzo b thiophen 3 yl 6 6 3 hexyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 40 1 6 6 3 Benzyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 naphthalen 2 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 41 1 2 Benzyl 6 6 3 2 phenyl cyclopropyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 42 1 2 Benzyl 6 6 3 hexyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 43 1 2 2 4 Difluoro phenyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 44 2 2 Benzyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxole 4 carbonyl amino 3 hydroxy propionic acid 45 3 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl acrylic acid methyl ester 46 3 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl propionic acid methyl ester 47 3 3 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl propionylamino benzoic acid 48 1 3 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl propionyl pyrrolidine 2 carboxylic acid 49 and 3 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl propionic acid 50 . The exemplified compounds named above can be in the forms depicted below or can be pharmaceutically acceptable salts hydrates or solvates thereof where chemically appropriate.

In one embodiment of the present invention when Rand Rare not identical the compounds depicted in the following structures falling under the definitions of Formulae III XII represent either one of the two possible diastereomers which arise from the resultant chiral carbon of the acetal in pure form or a mixture of the two diastereomers in any proportion. As a practical matter however the compounds as depicted represent the pure forms of the diastereomers. Diastereomers are distinct compounds each with potentially different chemical and biological properties thus pure forms are preferred as pharmaceutical agents. In addition there are generally reasons including but not limited to the ease of chemical synthesis or separation chemical or biological stability toxicity pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic properties in living systems and the like to choose between the two possible isomers. While it is possible to resolve such diastereomeric mixtures using chiral chromatographic methods more preferred is the synthesis of a single diastereomer.

Depending on the acetal in question the synthesis of a single diastereomer can be achieved in several ways. In some cases one diastereomer can be selectively generated over the other by carrying out the acetal forming reaction at a low temperature such as below 0 C. for example from 10 to 30 C. . In other cases a mixture of two diastereomers having different acetal stabilities can be subjected to aqueous acidic conditions which leads to decomposition of the less stable diastereomer while leaving the more stable diastereomer intact. In general the single diastereomer that survives the decomposition is preferred since chemical stability is an important attribute for a pharmaceutical product. These principles are exemplified and illustrated in the following compound examples but as they can be reasonably expanded to related structures the specific example should not be taken as limiting.

In another embodiment of the present invention the compound of Formula I is a compound of Formula IV 

Particularly useful groups of compounds are those of Formula IV where Ris H or alkyl and or M is H or alkyl.

In another embodiment of the present invention the compound of Formula I is a compound of Formula VII 

In another embodiment of the present invention the compound of Formula I is a compound of Formula VIII 

In another embodiment of the present invention the compound of Formula I is a compound of Formula IX 

In another embodiment of the present invention the compound of Formula I is a compound of Formula XI 

In another embodiment of the present invention the compound of Formula I is a compound of Formula XII 

The present invention additionally provides novel pharmaceutical formulations comprising a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and compounds of Formula I III XI or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt solvate or hydrate thereof. Pharmaceutically acceptable carriers can be selected by those skilled in the art using conventional criteria. Pharmaceutically acceptable carriers include but are not limited to saline solution aqueous electrolyte solutions isotonicy modifiers water polyethers such as polyethylene glycol polyvinyls such as polyvinyl alcohol and povidone cellulose derivatives such as methylcellulose and hydroxypropyl methylcellulose polymers of acrylic acid such as carboxypolymethylene gel polysaccharides such as dextrans and glycosaminoglycans such as sodium hyaluronate and salts such as sodium chloride and potassium chloride.

The pharmaceutical formulation of the present invention provides an aqueous solution comprising water suitable ionic or non ionic tonicity modifiers suitable buffering agents and a compound of Formula I Ia Ib or Ic. In one embodiment the compound is at 0.005 to 3 w v and the aqueous solution has a tonicity of 200 400 mOsm kG and a pH of 4 9.

The pharmaceutical formulation can be sterilized by filtering the formulation through a sterilizing grade filter preferably of a 0.22 micron nominal pore size. The pharmaceutical formulation can also be sterilized by terminal sterilization using one or more sterilization techniques including but not limited to a thermal process such as an autoclaving process or a radiation sterilization process or using pulsed light to produce a sterile formulation. In one embodiment the pharmaceutical formulation is a concentrated solution of the active ingredient the formulation can be serially diluted using appropriate acceptable sterile diluents prior to intravenous administration.

In one embodiment the tonicity modifier is ionic such as NaCl for example in the amount of 0.5 0.9 w v preferably 0.6 0.9 w v.

In another embodiment the tonicity modifier is non ionic such as mannitol dextrose in the amount of at least 2 or at least 2.5 or at least 3 and no more than 7.5 for example in the range of 3 5 preferably 3.5 5 and more preferably 4.2 5 w v.

Those skilled in the art will recognize various synthetic methodologies that may be employed to prepare non toxic pharmaceutically acceptable salts and prodrugs of the compounds.

The compounds of the present invention can be synthesized by those skilled in the art using conventional synthesis methodology and well known workup and purification procedures. The following list of references along with references cited therein disclose general procedures employed for the synthesis of a number of intermediates and compounds related to the present invention Baraldi et al. 39 3 802 806 1996 Camaioni et al. 5 12 2267 2275 1997 Zablocki et al. PCT International Publication No. WO01 40243 Zablocki et al. PCT International Publication No. WO01 40246 Mantell et al. PCT International Publication No. WO01 94368 Jacobson et al. 38 10 1720 1735 1995 Cristalli et al. 38 9 1462 1472 1995 Secrist III and Talekar 9 4 619 27 1990 Secrist III U.S. Pat. No. 4 794 174 1988 Lyga and Secrist III 48 12 1982 1988 1983 Dixon et al. PCT International Publication No. WO02 096248 Hardern et al. PCT International Publication No. WO01 36438 Guile et al. PCT International Publication No. WO00 04021 Lee et al. 13 6 1087 1092 2003 Cox et. al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 747 496 1998 .

In many cases commercially available starting materials can be used for the synthesis of compounds of this invention. When not available commercially useful starting materials can either be obtained from stepwise modification of commercially available compounds and derivatives or they can be synthesized from simpler precursors using literature methods known in the art. In addition the compounds of the present invention can be synthesized using the general methods shown in Schemes 1 12 or variations thereof.

Commercially available materials include adenosine adenosine 2 3 isopropylidineadenosine 5 acetyl 2 3 isopropylidineadenosine N 2 isopentenyl adenosine 2 chloroadenosine 2 amino 6 chloropurine riboside 6 chloropurine riboside inosine 8 bromoguanosine 8 bromoadenosine 8 azidoadenosine 8 azaguanine 8 azaadenine protected ribonic acid lactone derivatives and protected furanose derivatives. Other appropriate intermediates can be purchased from commercial sources and used as starting materials for compounds of the present invention or can be synthesized as described in the chemical literature.

As disclosed above commercially available compounds or their derivatives can be employed as starting materials for the methods of Schemes 1 12.

Scheme 1 for example discloses a useful method for the synthesis of 5 aryl or 5 heteroaryl ether derivatives by substitution of an appropriately functionalized adenosine analogue or 8 azapurine derivative for a halogen on an appropriately substituted halogenated aromatic compound or a related heteroaromatic derivative. Groups not defined in Scheme 1 are defined as in Formula I. Preferred substituents at M of the aromatic heteroaromatic group in Scheme 1 are hydrogen or halogen or groups containing carboxylic acid derivatives such as COR but they can also be halogen or esters or amides of alkylcarboxylic acids arylcarboxylic acids O alkylcarboxylic acids NR alkylcarboxylic acids and the like. When M is halogen in Scheme 1 preferred halogens are chloro and fluoro.

5 Substituted aryl derivatives can also be prepared via Mitsunobu coupling of phenols Mitsunobu 1 28 1981 Brown et al. 37 5 674 88 1994 Santosh and Balasubramanian 24 8 1049 62 1994 to derivatives of adenosine 8 azaadenosine guanosine 8 azaguanosine etc. as provided in Scheme 2. Groups in Scheme 2 are defined as in Formula I. Some preferred substituents at M of the aromatic heteroaromatic group in Scheme 2 independently can be hydrogen halogen alkyl alkoxy aryl or groups containing carboxylic acid derivatives such as COR but esters or amides of alkylcarboxylic acids arylcarboxylic acids O alkylcarboxylic acids NR alkylcarboxylic acids and the like are also included. When M is halogen in Scheme 2 preferred halogens are chloro and fluoro.

Alternatively the Mitsunobu coupling can be carried out using hydroxyisoxazoles as provided in Scheme 3. Groups in Scheme 3 are defined as in Formula I.

Some examples of preferred substituents at M of the isoxazole derivatives of Scheme 3 independently include hydrogen alkoxy or halogen or groups containing carboxylic acid derivatives such as COR but esters or amides of alkylcarboxylic acids arylcarboxylic acids O alkylcarboxylic acids NR alkylcarboxylic acids and the like are also included. When M is halogen in Scheme 3 preferred halogens are chloro and fluoro.

When the products of any of Schemes 1 2 or 3 comprise esters said esters can be useful in the invention. Said ester derivatives can be purified by methodologies well known in the art such as by normal phase or reverse phase chromatography or in suitable circumstances using crystallization techniques. Alternatively said ester derivatives can be used in the synthesis of other derivatives such as amides hydroxamic acids and different alkyl esters by well known methods in the art.

Optionally said esters can be hydrolysed under basic conditions or cleaved using other methods known in the art which cleave esters selectively in the presence of ketals or acetals to provide acid salts. These salts are also useful in the invention.

If desired said acid salts can be converted into acids upon mild acid treatment. Workup by common techniques and purification by methods well known in the art including purification by crystallization or chromatography can be used to give the purified acids. Said acids can also be converted into other useful derivatives such as amides hydroxamic acids aryl esters etc. by methods known to those skilled in the art of chemical synthesis. These acid derivatives are also useful in the invention and are also purified using well known methods such as crystallization or chromatography.

Diversity using common intermediates can be introduced into the 2 3 acetal or ketal position of compounds encompassed in Formula I as well as at the N position of compounds of Formula I using solid phase synthetic methods. Schemes 4 and 5 exemplify transketalization procedures using polymer bound relatives of compounds of Formula I. These methods can be used to transform one class of 2 3 ketal or acetal into other useful 2 3 acetal or ketal derivatives of adenosine guanosine 8 azaadenosine etc. These polymer bound approaches are very useful for after the desired reaction is complete excess reagents can be washed away using one to several solvent washes. The desired material remains attached to the resin in a pre purified form until it is cleaved from the solid phase using the appropriate conditions. Final purification of the desired product is then accomplished by conventional techniques like chromatography or crystallization.

Scheme 5 shows another variation of compound preparation employing resin bound materials of Formula I. It outlines a solid phase procedure that is useful for the introduction of functionality at the 6 position as well as for transketalization at the 2 3 position if desired. It should be noted that the chemistry procedures used in these solid phase approaches are similar to methods known and used for solution phase chemical transformations involving the synthesis of adenosine guanosine 8 azaadenosine etc. derivatives. The primary differences are the necessity of attachment of a starting material to a resin the simplicity of resin based purification techniques filtration and washing by compatible solvents compared to solution phase techniques chromatography crystallization etc. and the requirement for cleavage of a compound of the invention or an intermediate useful for the synthesis of a compound of the invention from a resin prior to final purification and or use of a compound so cleaved.

In Scheme 5 an early intermediate such as a 6 chloroadenosine 2 3 ketal or acetal derivative or a 6 chloro 8 aza adenosine 2 3 ketal or acetal derivative is attached to a resin such as polystyrene resin via a thioethanol linker e.g. hydroxyethylsulfanylmethyl polystyrene HESM polystyrene resin Garcia Echeverria 38 8933 7 1997 . After workup by filtration and rinsing with a useful solvent like dimethylformamide DMF the resin bound material is treated with a primary amine ammonia or a hydroxylamine derivative to introduce an amino group via displacement of the 6 chloride. As with solution phase techniques subsequent introduction of an ureido thioureido or guanidino group at N can be made in one step using an excess of an appropriate isocyanate isothiocyanate carbodiimide carbamoyl chloride or 2 alkyl 2 thiopseudourea or using a chemical equivalent of such materials. Alternatively a two step approach can be used to introduce a group at N which comprises treatment of an appropriate 6 amino derivative synthesized as in Scheme 5 with a solution of a small excess of phosgene or thiophosgene and a tertiary amine such as diisopropylethylamine in a suitable solvent such as dichloromethane or toluene at a temperature which allows reaction followed by treatment with an excess of a primary or secondary amine to give a resin bound urea or thiourea after workup. If desired transketalization can be performed on a bound substrate of Scheme 5 in a manner similar to that shown in Scheme 4. Or if a desired acetal or ketal moiety of a 6 chloroadenosine 6 chloroguanosine 6 chloro 8 azaadenosine etc. derivative is used to begin with then no transketalization is necessary. Cleavage from the thioethanol linker of the solid phase as shown for the HESM polystyrene resin in Scheme 5 is performed in two steps oxidation of the thioether linker using an oxidizing agent like m chloroperbenzoic acid in a solvent such as dichloromethane gives a sulfone linker and cleavage of the ether moiety from the oxidized linker occurs upon treatment with a strong base like DBU in a solvent like dichloromethane and yields a compound which can be purified by techniques known in the art. Preferred oxidizing agents include peracids like m chloroperbenzoic acid MCPBA and peracetic acid but other oxidizing agents like hydrogen peroxide permanganate salts or persulfate salts can be used to oxidize a thioether to a sulfone. Preferred elimination conditions include DBU in dichloromethane and 10 ammonium hydroxide in trifluoroethanol.

Following cleavage from the solid phase a compound formed using the procedures in Scheme 5 can be used in the present invention or can be further modified by well known methods for functional group transformations to generate new compounds which are also useful for this invention.

Preferred aldehydes aldehyde acetals and ketone ketals useful in the transketalization methods shown in Schemes 4 and 5 comprise the below said carbonyl compounds and or derivatives of benzaldehyde biphenyl 3 carboxaldehyde biphenyl 4 carboxaldehyde biphenyl 4 yl acetaldehyde 2 bromobenzaldehyde benzo b thiophene 3 carbaldehyde cyclohexanecarbaldehyde cyclopentanecarbaldehyde 2 5 dimethylbenzaldehyde 2 6 difluorobenzaldehyde 2 fluorobenzaldehyde naphthalene 2 carbaldehyde phenyl acetaldehyde phenyl propynal 3 phenyl propenal 3 phenyl propionaldehyde 2 trifluoromethyl benzaldehyde cyclohexanone cyclopentanone 4 ethyl cyclohexanone 3 4 dihydro 1H naphthalen 2 one and indan 2 one. Useful derivatives for transketalization of the above ketones comprise ketals like dimethoxy or diethoxy ketals etc.

In addition to the introduction of amines on the C position using solid phase techniques as provided in Scheme 5 diversity can also be introduced at the 6 position of an adenosine 8 azaadenosine guanosine etc. analog via the intermediacy of a 6 halogenated purine derivative using solution phase methods. Scheme 6 exemplifies the preparation of 5 isoxazole ethers introducing ammonia various amines or hydroxylamine derivatives at the 6 position of the purine 8 azapurine ring by displacement of a chloride leaving group a 6 chloride is shown in Schemes 5 and 6 but the leaving group at Ccould also be another type useful for such a transformation e.g. a 6 bromide or 6 mesylate moiety by such materials. Amines and amine like compounds useful for displacement of a 6 halogen intermediate as contemplated for these schemes comprise ammonia methylamine and other N alkyl amines N aralkylamines N cyclopropylamine and other N cycloalkylamines anilines ethers and other O derivatives of hydroxylamine aminopyridines and other heteroaromatic amines heterocyclic compounds having a pendant NHR group and N alkyl amines which have one or more heteroatom units like O NR and or S substituted for carbon units in the alkyl chain. Such N products can be further transformed into ureas thioureas or guanidines by literature methods or by methods disclosed for such transformations in Schemes 5 and 6. The materials can be purified by methods typically used in the literature such as by chromatography or in certain cases by crystallization Preferred substituents at Nare ureas.

2 3 O Isopropylideneadenosine 5 carboxylic acid and related acetals and ketals are useful intermediates for the preparation of various amides and sulfonamide derivatives. An intermediate of this type can be used in both solution phase and solid phase synthetic schemes to prepare compounds with various substituents at the 5 2 3 acetal ketal and 6 positions of adenosines or related purine derivatives as provided in Scheme 7. The methods shown in Scheme 7 are also useful for the preparation of substituted purine derivatives and or 8 azapurine derivatives.

Compounds containing the adenosine 5 carboxylic acid unit shown in Scheme 7 or related N substituted adenosine 5 carboxylic acids and 8 azaadenosine 5 carboxylic acids can also be used for the synthesis of esters or other materials useful in this invention using literature methods. In addition the N amine of such an acid can be transformed into a urea thiourea or guanidine or into a protected group such as a benzamide and the acid moiety which is at or linked to the 5 position of the furanose derivative can be coupled to a solid phase resin such as a 4 sulfamylbutyryl resin hydroxymethyl resin or a pegylated hydroxy resin etc. using techniques well known in the peptide literature and or solid phase organic synthesis literature to give a resin bound material. The benefits of solid phase chemistry can then be gained for modification of a resin bound material by transketalization techniques similar to those shown in Schemes 4 and 5. If a protecting group is used on the N position of such an acid it can be removed subsequent to a transketalization procedure and a N amine so formed can be converted into a urea thiourea or guanidine by methods disclosed herein or by methods in the literature. Cleavage from the solid support using known methods then yields a compound of the invention which can be purified if needed by employing commonly used techniques.

A variation of the method disclosed in Scheme 7 useful for the introduction of a group at Nprior to oxidation of the 5 position of an adenosine derivative or an 8 azaadenosine derivative is shown in Scheme 8. Although Scheme 8 shows an adenine unit it will be understood by chemistry practitioners that the methods of Scheme 8 are generally applicable to substituted members of the adenine family and also to the 8 azaadenines.

Preferred amines and amine derivatives for the 5 amide forming reactions shown in Schemes 7 and 8 are trifluoromethanesulfonamide methanesulfonamide serine glycine proline anthranilic acid and its regioisomers and methyl anthanilate and its regioisomers.

Amide derivatives of 5 carboxylic acids e.g. those shown in Scheme 7 and Scheme 8 or amide derivatives of acid moieties linked at the 5 position of Formula I can also include amides derived from amino acids peptides aminoalcohols and the like. A convenient way of attaching naturally occurring as well as synthetically derived amino acids and peptides or derivatives to a 5 carboxylic acid or related homologue is exemplified in Scheme 9 using the amino acid proline.

An example of the method is shown in Scheme 9 utilizing a resin linker combination like the polystyrene HESM as a solid phase. Other solid phase linkers known in the art can also be used in this method. Attachment of a group such as an amino acid e.g. proline as shown or a series of amino acids or a peptide by well known methods in the art of solid phase synthesis yields a resin linked amine. Said amine can then be reacted with an adenosine 5 carboxylic acid or another type of derivative useful for making compounds of this invention to yield a coupled product. The said coupled product if it bears an amine at the 6 position can then be treated with one of the various reagents described previously or with a reagent known in the literature to yield a urea thiourea or guanidine at the adenosine 6 position. Alternatively if a 5 carboxylic acid derivative used in a coupling to a solid phase has a urea etc. already installed at the 6 position then the latter said modification at Nneed not be performed. If desired a coupled 5 amide N derivatized product can be converted into a variety of different acetals or ketals using solid phase methods such as described for Schemes 4 and 5. When a synthesis is complete cleavage of a compound of the invention from a solid phase can be performed by a variety of methods known in the art such cleavage conditions depending upon the type of linker used. Cleavage methodologies useful for cleaving peptide or amino acid derivatives of 5 linked adenosine compounds comprise the linker oxidation elimination procedures given in Schemes 5 and 9 treatment with a hydroxide source such as lithium hydroxide using conditions as for the ester hydrolysis described in Scheme 6 and hydrolysis using potassium trimethylsilanolate as described in Scheme 4 as well as others known in the art including aminolysis to form amides . If desired a compound useful in this invention can be obtained in purified form by cleaving it from a resin and purifying it as described previously.

In another embodiment an amino group can be installed at the 5 position of an adenosine or 8 azaadenosine analogue or on the chain of a 5 homologue of such a material. This amine can be utilized to form amide sulfonamide and other derivatives. Scheme 10 illustrates how a sulfonylurea can be synthesized at the 5 position using a 5 amine or at related positions on homologous amine derivatives. In addition an amine introduced at the 5 position or on the 5 chain of a homologue is also useful for the synthesis of amides ureas sulfonamides and other amine derivatives using methods known in the art for such processes.

In still another embodiment the 5 position of the nucleoside derivative or 8 azanucleoside derivative is homologated with one or more carbon atoms affording compounds with different distances between the atoms of the tetrahydrofuran ring and the homologated group. Scheme 11 illustrates the preparation of a class of homologated adenosine analogs which are useful for the invention. Or if desired such a homologue can subsequently be coupled with an amino acid to give other compounds useful for this invention. In Scheme 11 proline is used to exemplify the amide coupling but other amines or amino acid derivatives can be employed. In Scheme 12 the reduction step of Scheme 11 is omitted which generates unsaturated homologues useful in this invention.

Scheme 12 for example discloses a useful method for the synthesis of aryl or heteroaryl nucleoside ethers from purine or 8 azapurine carbocyclic nucleoside acetals by substitution of an appropriately functionalized adenosine analogue or 8 azapurine derivative with a halogenated on an appropriately substituted halogenated aryl alkyl or alkylaryl compound or a related heteroaromatic derivative. Preferred substituents at M of the aromatic heteroaromatic group in Scheme 12 are independently hydrogen or halogen or groups containing carboxylic acid derivatives such as COR but they can also be halogen or esters or amides of alkylcarboxylic acids arylcarboxylic acids O alkylcarboxylic acids NR alkylcarboxylic acids and the like. When M is halogen in Scheme 1 preferred halogens are chloro and fluoro.

The method disclosed in Scheme 12 can also be extended to a wide range of alkyl or aralkyl halides making it a useful method for the general preparation of 5 substituted ethers.

Diversity using common intermediates can be introduced into the 2 3 acetal or ketal position Scheme 14 of compounds encompassed in Formula I as well as at the N position of compounds of Formula I. Final purification of the desired product is then accomplished by conventional techniques like chromatography or crystallization.

Preferred aldehydes aldehyde acetals and ketone ketals useful in the transketalization methods shown in Schemes 2 comprise the below said carbonyl compounds and or derivatives of benzaldehyde biphenyl 3 carboxaldehyde biphenyl 4 carboxaldehyde biphenyl 4 yl acetaldehyde 2 bromobenzaldehyde benzo b thiophene 3 carbaldehyde cyclohexanecarbaldehyde cyclopentanecarbaldehyde 2 5 dimethylbenzaldehyde 2 6 difluorobenzaldehyde 2 fluorobenzaldehyde naphthalene 2 carbaldehyde phenyl acetaldehyde phenyl propynal 3 phenyl propenal 3 phenyl propionaldehyde 2 trifluoromethyl benzaldehyde cyclohexanone cyclopentanone 4 ethyl cyclohexanone 3 4 dihydro 1H naphthalen 2 one and indan 2 one.

Those having skill in the art will recognize that the starting materials can be varied and additional steps employed to produce compounds encompassed by the present invention as shown in the above schemes and as demonstrated by the examples which follow. In some cases protection of certain reactive functionalities can be necessary to achieve some of the above transformations. In general the need for such protecting groups as well as the conditions necessary to attach and remove such groups will be apparent to those skilled in the art.

This invention provides a method of preventing or treating diseases or conditions associated with platelet aggregation and or platelet activation. This invention also provides a method for solving treatment problems or limited treatment options caused by the aggregation of platelets or by the irreversible inhibition of platelet aggregation.

This invention provides methods of preventing or treating thrombosis and related disorders such as venous thrombosis established peripheral arterial disease thrombophlebitis arterial embolism coronary and cerebral arterial thrombosis unstable angina myocardial infarction stroke cerebral embolism renal embolism pulmonary embolism and other embolism or thrombosis related afflictions produced by but not limited to procedural or surgical interventions. This invention further provides methods for the prevention of embolism or thrombosis during percutaneous coronary interventions placement of coronary stents coronary angioplasty coronary endarectomy carotid endarectomy or due to platelet aggregation complications related to atherosclerosis inflammation exposure of blood to artificial devices drug effects.

This invention further provides methods of inhibiting platelet aggregation in blood and blood products comprising platelets such as stored blood.

The method comprises administering to a subject or blood and blood products a composition comprising an effective amount of P2Yreceptor antagonist compound wherein said amount is effective to bind the P2Yreceptors on platelets and inhibit platelet aggregation preferably in a reversible manner.

The invention further provides useful methods of treating patients to inhibit platelet aggregation in a reversible manner especially in patients that are subject to a procedure such as percutaneous coronary interventions stent placement balloon angioplasty coronary atherectomy coronary endarterectomy carotid endarterectomy thrombolytic therapy coronary or other vascular graft surgery dialysis etc. In those patients it is important that platelet aggregation inhibition can be rapidly reversed within hours for oral administration and within minutes for intravenous administration if necessary. The method comprises the steps of a providing a patient in need of rapid reversal of platelet aggregation inhibition b administering a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of Formula I Ia or Ic to the patient c submitting the patient to a procedure selected from the group consisting of percutaneous coronary interventions stent placement balloon angioplasty coronary atherectomy coronary endarterectomy carotid endarterectomy thrombolytic therapy coronary or other vascular graft surgery and dialysis d discontinuing the administering of said compound to the patient and e allowing the amount of said compound in the patient s blood to reduce to below an therapeutically effective amount. In step b the administration of the compound can be either continuous or intermittent as long as it provides a therapeutically effective amount of the compound in the patient s blood. The amount of the compound in the patient s blood is monitored.

The compounds of general Formulae I III XII are antagonists of the effect of ADP on its platelet membrane receptor the P2Yreceptor. The compounds of general Formula I are useful in therapy in particular in the prevention or treatment of platelet aggregation. The compounds provide efficacy as antithrombotic agents by their ability to block ADP from acting at its platelet receptor site and thus prevent platelet aggregation. The compounds provide a more efficacious antithrombotic effect than aspirin but with less profound effects on bleeding than antagonists of the fibrinogen receptor.

The P2Yreceptor antagonists of this invention in contrast with currently available marketed products clopidogrel Plavix and ticlopidine Ticlid bind to the P2Yreceptor in a reversible fashion and therefore the effects of the treatment with compounds described in this invention are reversed by the simple discontinuation of the treatment restoring the hemostatic functionality of the platelet as necessary. Since platelets are non nucleated cell particles that lack the ability to synthesize new proteins treatment of subjects with irreversible P2Yantagonists results in the impairment of platelet function that lasts for the lifespan of the platelet approximately 8 to 10 days . The use of irreversible P2Yantagonists such as clopidogrel has been associated with increases in blood loss transfusion requirements and rate of reoperation after cardiac surgery Kapetanakis et al. 26 576 83 2005 . To avoid these complications subjects undergoing elective surgeries are required to discontinue the treatment with irreversible antagonists for at least five days prior to the surgery which increases the risk of a thrombotic event during this period. Therefore the compounds described in this invention represent an advantage over the currently marketed compounds.

The ADP induced platelet aggregation is mediated by the simultaneous activation of both P2Yand P2Yreceptors thus the combined administration of the Formula I compounds with antagonists of platelet P2Yreceptors can provide a more efficacious antithrombotic effect at concentrations of each antagonist that are below the effective concentrations to block each receptor subtype in other systems resulting in a decrease of the potential manifestation of adverse effects. In addition these compounds can be used in conjunction with lower doses of other platelet aggregation inhibitors which work by different mechanisms to reduce the possible side effects of said agents.

The compounds of the present invention are useful as anti thrombotic agents and are thus useful in the treatment or prevention of unstable angina coronary angioplasty PTCA and myocardial infarction.

The compounds of the present invention are useful in the treatment or prevention of primary arterial thrombotic complications of atherosclerosis such as thrombotic stroke peripheral vascular disease and myocardial infarction without thrombolysis.

The compounds of the invention are useful for the treatment or prevention of arterial thrombotic complications due to interventions in atherosclerotic disease such as angioplasty endarterectomy stent placement coronary and other vascular graft surgery.

The compounds of the invention are useful for the treatment or prevention of thrombotic complications of surgical or mechanical damage such as tissue salvage following surgical or accidental trauma reconstructive surgery including skin flaps and reductive surgery such as breast reduction.

The compounds of the present invention are useful for the prevention of mechanically induced platelet activation in vivo for example caused by cardiopulmonary bypass which results in temporary platelet dysfunction prevention of microthromboembolism . The compounds of the present invention are useful for prevention of mechanically induced platelet activation in vitro. For example the compounds are useful in the preservation of blood products e.g. platelet concentrates prevention of shunt occlusion such as renal dialysis and plasmapheresis and thrombosis secondary to vascular damage inflammation such as vasculitis arteritis glomerulonephritis and organ graft rejection.

The compounds of the present invention are useful in disorders with a diffuse thrombotic platelet consumption component such as disseminated intravascular coagulation thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura hemolytic uremic syndrome heparin induced thrombocytopenia and pre eclampsia eclampsia.

The compounds of the invention are useful for the treatment or prevention of venous thrombosis such as deep vein thrombosis veno occlusive disease hematological conditions such as thrombocythemia and polycythemia and migraine.

The compounds of the present invention are useful in treating a mammal to alleviate the pathological effects of atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis acute MI chronic stable angina unstable angina transient ischemic attacks and strokes peripheral vascular disease arterial thrombosis preeclampsia embolism restenosis or abrupt closure following angioplasty carotid endarterectomy and anastomosis of vascular grafts.

The compounds of the present invention are useful in treating chronic or acute states of hyper aggregability such as disseminated intravascular coagulation DIC septicemia surgical or infectious shock post operative and post partum trauma cardiopulmonary bypass surgery incompatible blood transfusion abruptio placenta thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura TTP snake venom and immune diseases are likely to be responsive to such treatment.

The compounds of the present invention are useful in treating diseases or conditions associated with platelet activation and or aggregation produced by the contact of blood with an artificial device. In one embodiment the artificial device is a paracorporeal artificial lung and an extracorporeal membrane oxigenation device. In another embodiment the artificial device is an internal implantable artificial heart. In another embodiment the artificial device is an apheresis instrument used to remove or isolate a specific component of the blood and returning the remaining blood components to the donor. In yet another embodiment the artificial device is a hemodialysis instrument.

The compounds of the present invention are useful in vitro to inhibit the aggregation of platelets in blood and blood products e.g. for storage or for ex vivo manipulations such as in diagnostic or research use. In such applications the compounds are administered to the blood or blood product.

Finally if the compounds of the present invention have sufficient binding affinity and bear a fluorescent moiety they are useful as biochemical probes for the P2Yreceptor.

In a preferred embodiment the compounds are used in the treatment of unstable angina coronary angioplasty and myocardial infarction.

In another preferred embodiment the compounds are useful as adjunctive therapy in the prevention or treatment of thrombotic disorders such as coronary arterial thrombosis during the management of unstable angina coronary angioplasty and acute myocardial infarction for example as adjuvants of thrombolytic therapy. The compounds are also administered in combination with other antiplatelet and or anticoagulant drugs such as heparin aspirin GP IIb IIIa antagonists or thrombin inhibitors.

This invention provides a method of inhibiting platelet aggregation and clot formation in a mammal especially a human which comprises administering to the subject a compound of Formula I and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

This invention further provides a method for inhibiting the reocclusion of an artery or vein and the formation of new blood clots following fibrinolytic therapy which comprises administering to a subject a compound of Formula I and a fibrinolytic agent. When used in the context of this invention the term fibrinolytic agent is intended to mean any compound whether a natural or synthetic product which directly or indirectly causes the lysis of a fibrin clot. Plasminogen activators are a well known group of fibrinolytic agents. Useful plasminogen activators include for example anistreplase urokinase UK pro urokinase pUK streptokinase SK tissue plasminogen activator tPA and mutants or variants thereof which retain plasminogen activator activity such as variants which have been chemically modified or in which one or more amino acids have been added deleted or substituted or in which one or more functional domains have been added deleted or altered such as by combining the active site of one plasminogen activator or fibrin binding domain of another plasminogen activator or fibrin binding molecule. The increased clinical efficacy of the combination of the compounds described in this invention with fibrinolytic agents allows to use lower concentrations of the fibrinolytic agent and decrease the risk of hemorrhagic events. This in turn allows the administration of fibrinolytic therapy over an extended period of time after a heart attack or stroke.

Extracorporeal circulation is routinely used for cardiovascular surgery in order to oxygenate blood. Platelets adhere to surfaces of the extracorporeal circuit. Platelets released from artificial surfaces show impaired hemostatic function. Compounds of the invention can be administered to prevent adhesion.

Other applications of these compounds include prevention of platelet thrombosis thromboembolism and reocclusion during and after thrombolytic therapy and prevention of platelet thrombosis thromboembolism and reocclusion after angioplasty of coronary and other arteries and after coronary artery bypass procedures.

The active compounds can be administered systemically to target sites in a subject in need such that the extracellular concentration of a P2Yantagonist is elevated to block the binding of ADP to P2Yreceptor thus inhibit the platelet aggregation. The term systemic as used herein includes subcutaneous injection intravenous intramuscular intrasternal injection intravitreal injection infusion inhalation transdermal administration oral administration rectal administration and intra operative instillation.

For systemic administration such as injection and infusion the pharmaceutical formulation is prepared in a sterile medium. The active ingredient depending on the vehicle and concentration used can either be suspended or dissolved in the vehicle. Adjuvants such as local anesthetics preservatives and buffering agents can also be dissolved in the vehicle. The sterile injectable preparation can be a sterile injectable solution or suspension in a non toxic acceptable diligent or solvent. Among the acceptable vehicles and solvents that can be employed are sterile water saline solution or Ringer s solution.

Another method of systemic administration of the active compound involves oral administration in which pharmaceutical compositions containing active compounds are in the form of tablets lozenges aqueous or oily suspensions viscous gels chewable gums dispersible powders or granules emulsion hard or soft capsules or syrups or elixirs.

For oral use an aqueous suspension is prepared by addition of water to dispersible powders and granules with a dispersing or wetting agent suspending agent one or more preservatives and other excipients. Suspending agents include for example sodium carboxymethylcellulose methylcellulose and sodium alginate. Dispersing or wetting agents include naturally occurring phosphatides condensation products of an allylene oxide with fatty acids condensation products of ethylene oxide with long chain aliphatic alcohols condensation products of ethylene oxide with partial esters from fatty acids and a hexitol and condensation products of ethylene oxide with partial esters derived from fatty acids and hexitol anydrides. Preservatives include for example ethyl and n propyl p hydroxybenzoate. Other excipients include sweetening agents e.g. sucrose saccharin flavoring agents and coloring agents. Those skilled in the art will recognize the many specific excipients and wetting agents encompassed by the general description above.

For oral application tablets are prepared by mixing the active compound with nontoxic pharmaceutically acceptable excipients suitable for the manufacture of tablets. These excipients can be for example inert diluents such as calcium carbonate sodium carbonate lactose calcium phosphate or sodium phosphate granulating and disintegrating agents for example corn starch or alginic acid binding agents for example starch gelatin or acacia and lubricating agents for example magnesium stearate stearic acid or talc. The tablets can be uncoated or they can be coated by known techniques to delay disintegration and absorption in the gastrointestinal tract and thereby provide a sustained action over a longer period. For example a time delay material such as glyceryl monostearate or glyceryl distearate can be employed. Formulations for oral use can also be presented as hard gelatin capsules wherein the active ingredient is mixed with an inert solid diluent for example calcium carbonate calcium phosphate or kaolin or as soft gelatin capsules wherein the active ingredient is mixed with water or an oil medium for example peanut oil liquid paraffin or olive oil. Formulation for oral use can also be presented as chewable gums by embedding the active ingredient in gums so that the active ingredient is slowly released upon chewing.

Additional means of systemic administration of the active compound to the target platelets of the subject would involve a suppository form of the active compound such that a therapeutically effective amount of the compound reaches the target sites via systemic absorption and circulation.

For rectal administration the compositions in the form of suppositories can be prepared by mixing the active ingredient with a suitable non irritating excipient which is solid at ordinary temperatures but liquid at the rectal temperature and will therefore melt in the rectum to release the compound. Such excipients include cocoa butter and polyethylene glycols.

The active compounds can also be systemically administered to the platelet aggregation sites through absorption by the skin using transdermal patches or pads. The active compounds are absorbed into the bloodstream through the skin. Plasma concentration of the active compounds can be controlled by using patches containing different concentrations of active compounds.

One systemic method involves an aerosol suspension of respirable particles comprising the active compound which the subject inhales. The active compound would be absorbed into the bloodstream via the lungs and subsequently contact the target platelets in a pharmaceutically effective amount. The respirable particles can be liquid or solid with a particle size sufficiently small to pass through the mouth and larynx upon inhalation in general particles ranging from about 1 to 10 microns but more preferably 1 5 microns in size are considered respirable.

Another method of systemically administering the active compounds to the platelet aggregation sites of the subject involves administering a liquid liquid suspension in the form of eye drops or eye wash or nasal drops of a liquid formulation or a nasal spray of respirable particles that the subject inhales. Liquid pharmaceutical compositions of the active compound for producing a nasal spray or nasal or eye drops can be prepared by combining the active compound with a suitable vehicle such as sterile pyrogen free water or sterile saline by techniques known to those skilled in the art.

Intravitreal delivery can include single or multiple intravitreal injections or via an implantable intravitreal device that releases P2Yantagonists in a sustained capacity. Intravitreal delivery can also include delivery during surgical manipulations as either an adjunct to the intraocular irrigation solution or applied directly to the vitreous during the surgical procedure.

For systemic administration plasma concentrations of active compounds delivered can vary according to compounds but are generally 1 10 1 10moles liter and preferably 1 10 1 10moles liter.

The pharmaceutical utility of P2Yantagonist compounds of this invention is indicated by their inhibition of ADP induced platelet aggregation. This widely used assay as described in S. M. O. Hourani et al. 105 453 457 1992 relies on the measurement of the aggregation of a platelet suspension upon the addition of an aggregating agent such as ADP.

Coating stents with pharmaceutical agents has an inherent advantage over systemic administration due to the ability to precisely deliver a much lower dose of the drug to the target area thus achieving high tissue concentration while minimizing the risk of systemic toxicity.

The present invention is also directed to a drug eluting stent which is a stent coated with one or more non nucleotide P2Yreceptor antagonist compounds of Formula I or III XII or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt solvate or hydrate thereof. When the stent is placed in a narrowed or damaged arterial vessel a therapeutically effective amount of the compound s is eluted continuously from the stent to the local environment of the stent. Local delivery to vasculature facilitates the achievement of high regional drug concentrations achieves a continuous exposure of the tissue to the drug and reduces potential adverse effects and systemic toxicity due to lower systemic doses. The drug can be targeted directly to the required site. A therapeutically effective amount of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound is an amount that is effective in preventing thrombosis and maintaining blood flow rate of the stented vessel by decreasing in shear forces relaxing vascular smooth muscle and reducing narrowing of the vascular lumen restenosis.

By coating with one or more P2Yreceptor antagonist compounds it is meant that the stent is coated with the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound itself without a carrier or the stent is coated with the compound in a carrier i.e. the compound is in the form of a component of a mixture or matrix. In one embodiment the stent is coated with a carrier that comprises at least one P2Yreceptor antagonist compound. The carrier is usually a biocompatible and non toxic polymer. The polymer is preferably a biodegradable polymer or a biostable polymer.

Biodegradable polymers suitable for this invention can be chosen from but are not limited to polycaprolactone polylactic acid D L or L poly lactide co glycolide poly hydroxybutyrate poly hydroxybutyrate covalerate polydioxanone polyorthoester polyanhydride poly glycolic acid poly glycolic acid cotrimethylene carbonate polyphosphoester polyphosphoester urethane poly amino acids poly trimethylene carbonate poly iminocarbonate cyanoacrylates polyalkylene oxalates polyphosphazenes and aliphatic polycarbonates. Alternately natural biomolecules such as cellulose starch dextran hyaluronic acid and collagen can also be used.

Biostable polymers can be chosen from but are not limited to polyurethanes polyesters polyamides polyolefins polycaprolactam polyvinyl chloride polyvinyl alcohol poly ethylene vinyl alcohol polyethers silicones acrylate polymers and copolymers polyvinylmethyl ether polyimide and polyacrylonitrile.

The concentration of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound in the stent is in general in the range of 0.001 20 preferably 0.01 10 and more preferably 0.1 5 g mm. Alternatively the concentration of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound in the stent is 1 500 preferably 10 100 g mm. Muni et al. 149 415 433 2005 have reported stent drug carriers drug concentrations stent sizes and types of lesions the article is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

In one embodiment the elution of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound is slow release and long acting i.e. the compound is eluted constantly and provides a local therapeutically effective amount at least until the epithelium damaged by the stent placement is healed. The local elution of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound into the tissue surrounding the stent is preferably over a period of 3 to 6 months and preferably 6 months. When the stent is coated with biodegradable polymers the elution of the compound from the stent directly relates to the rate of degradation of the polymer.

P2Yreceptor antagonists useful in this invention are compounds that do not require hepatic renal or any other metabolic transformation to become pharmacologically active. The compound can be a prodrug if the conversion of the prodrug into the active species is carried out locally in the release area. For example an ester prodrug can be converted into an active drug by tissue esterases such as endothelial esterases. All ester forms of P2Yreceptor antagonists are included in the application.

Recently Wihlborg et al. describe the presence of P2Yreceptors in vascular smooth muscle 2004 24 1810 1815 . The activation of these P2Yreceptors by endogenously released ADP results in vasoconstriction. This effect contributes to tonic contraction of smooth muscle cells by circulating ADP or by released ADP from adhering platelets endoethelial cells and leukocytes attracted to the damaged area as part of the healing process. P2Yreceptor activation is associated with an increase in cell proliferation and the onset of inflammation both of these effects contribute to in stent restenosis observed in approximately 10 of the patients treated with currently marketed stents.

Applicants have discovered the therapeutic benefits of P2Yreceptor antagonists eluting stents. The elution of P2Yreceptor antagonists to local stented tissues can prevent the stenosis of stented arteries by relaxing the arterial smooth muscle which results in an increase in blood flow rate of the stented artery and a decrease in shear forces that could promote thrombosis. Additionally the inhibition of vascular smooth muscle contraction in stented arteries can decrease the risk of ischemia and thrombosis. Therefore the use of P2Yreceptor antagonists eluting stents improves the therapeutic benefit of current stents by decreasing the incidence of thrombosis and restenosis and improving of the flow rate of perfusion of the stented artery due to the relaxing activity of smooth muscle cells.

P2Yreceptor antagonist compound eluting stents can be used as in situ antithrombotics to decrease the risk of stent thrombosis by a constant delivery of the P2Yantagonist for several months. This treatment decreases the risk of thrombosis by inhibiting the aggregation of platelets in the stented artery. P2Yreceptor antagonist compounds are useful to coat all types of stents including coronary stents cerebral arterial stents basilar or vertebral arteries other arterial stents aortic carotid renal peripheral etc and vein stents portal renal including vein graft conduits . Peripheral artery is defined as an artery that carries blood to upper and lower extremities. P2Yreceptor antagonist eluting stents are useful for saphenous vein grafts previously grafted in coronary arteries which have reduced patency due to restenosis or thrombosis. Preferred stents for this invention are coronary stents.

Marketed P2Yantagonists such as PLAVIX and TICLID are not suitable for coating stents because PLAVIX and TICLID need to be metabolized in the liver in order to generate the active metabolites. The P2Yreceptor antagonists of the present invention do not require metabolism for activation and therefore they are capable of exerting their antithrombotic and smooth muscle relaxing activity in situ.

P2Y12 receptor antagonist compound eluting stents provide the advantages of inhibiting the contraction of vascular smooth muscle cells inhibiting cell proliferation and reducing inflammation. P2Y12 receptor antagonist compound eluting stents are useful in preventing the thrombosis and restenosis observed on patients after placement of bear metal and other drug eluting stents.

Currently patients who receive stents require the prophylactic treatment with anti thrombotic drugs for at least 3 months to reduce the risk of thrombosis. The local delivery of an antiplatelet and vascular smooth muscle relaxant drug with potential for anti inflammatory effects due to the inhibition of platelet activation and release of pro inflammatory substances such as the P2Y12 receptor antagonists of the present invention provide additional benefit compared with the current stent therapy.

The present invention provides a method for treating blocked or narrowed arteries. The method comprises the step of placing a P2Y12 receptor antagonist compound eluting stent according to claim in a narrowed or blocked artery of a patient whereby a therapeutically effective amount of the compound is eluted to the stented area whereby the blood flow is resumed by the stent and the restenosis and thrombosis are prevented by the P2Y12 receptor antagonist compound. The artery can be for example coronary artery cerebral artery or peripheral artery which has been narrowed or blocked by a plaque or a plaque rupture respectively. The inserted stent delivers P2Y12 receptor antagonist compound locally to the stented area and decreases the incidence of thrombosis and restenosis. The method optionally comprises the step of monitoring the patient to ensure patency of the stented artery. For example when the stent is inserted into the coronary artery the patient can be monitored by clinical symptoms of the cardic function e.g. electrocardiogram EKG to determine if the blood flow in the heart muscle is restored. When the stent is inserted into the carotid artery the patient can be monitored by ultrasound to determine if the narrowed artery is restored and by evaluation of clinical symptoms such as headache facial droop loss of coordination vertigo and depressed mental status. When the stent is inserted into the cerebral arteries the patient can be monitored by neurological examinations including clinical symptoms such as headache facial droop loss of coordination vertigo and depressed mental status.

Stents are frequently made from stainless steel. Stents can be made of any biocompatible metal including but not limited to steel cobalt titanium tantalum chromium zirconium niobium tungsten platinum palladium vanadium silver gold molybdenum nickel or magnesium and alloys thereof in any combination. Alternately stents can be constructed of non metallic biocompatible materials such as bioabsorbable or biostable polymers.

The preparation of drug eluting stents has been described in Kavanagh et al. 102 1 15 2004 Doorty et al. 12 105 110 2003 Hossainy U.S. Pat. No. 6 908 624 . Both articles are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

In general P2Yreceptor antagonist compounds of the present invention are preferably not attached directly covalently of non covalently to the surface of an unmodified stent. In order to deliver the compounds of the present invention to the site of action the stent is preferably coated with an organic or inorganic polymer or polymers or some other substance such as an inorganic coating that is able to retain the compound to be delivered and release it at a desired rate. The nature of this retention can be covalent or non covalent with the latter being preferred.

In one embodiment the stent is first modified by coating it with an inorganic substance or an organic or inorganic polymer which is capable of binding the compound to the stent surface. For example when the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound bears a phosphate or other acidic moiety the stent is first coated with a substance or a polymer that bears a basic moiety and the compound is bound to the modified stent by an ionic interaction. When the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound bears a basic moiety the stent is first coated with a substance or a polymer that bears an acidic moiety and the compound is bound to the modified stent by an ionic interaction.

In another embodiment the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound is first incorporated into a compatible polymer matrix which is then used to coat a stent. The advantage of this approach is that the elution of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound from the stent depends on the property of the polymer thus one can select a suitable polymer which provides controlled and sustained release of the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound to the site of action. The polymer can be hydrophilic hydrophobic biodegradable or biostable thus one can further select a polymer to optimize the desired therapeutic effect.

The present invention provides a composition comprising at least one biodegradable polymer and at least one P2Yreceptor antagonist compound of general Formula I wherein said biodegradable polymer is selected from the group consisting of polycaprolactone polylactic acid poly lactide co glycolide poly hydroxybutyrate poly hydroxybutyrate covalerate polydioxanone polyorthoester polyanhydride poly glycolic acid poly glycolic acid cotrimethylene carbonate polyphosphoester polyphosphoester urethane poly amino acids poly trimethylene carbonate poly iminocarbonate cyanoacrylates polyalkylene oxalates polyphosphazenes aliphatic polycarbonates cellulose starch dextran hyaluronic acid and collagen.

The present invention further provides a composition comprising at least one biostable polymer and at least one P2Yreceptor antagonist compound of general Formula I wherein said biostable polymer is selected from the group consisting of polyurethanes polyesters polyamides polyolefins polycaprolactam polyvinyl chloride polyvinyl alcohol poly ethylene vinyl alcohol polyethers silicones acrylate polymers and copolymers polyvinylmethyl ether polyimide and polyacrylonitrile.

When biodegradable polymers are used the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound is incorporated into the polymer matrix and released in a controlled manner by a gradual degradation of the polymer matrix. This degradation can occur by various processes including hydrolysis metabolism bulk erosion or polymer surface erosion. When biostable polymers are used the P2Yreceptor antagonist compound is uniformly distributed in the polymer or encapsulated within the polymer from which the compound is eluted via diffusion processes or through pores of the polymer structure.

The P2Yreceptor antagonist compound can be incorporated into the polymer via processes known to those skilled in the art. These include but are not limited to encapsulation of the compound within a polymer matrix during polymer synthesis prior to application of the polymer to the stent dissolving both polymer and the compound in an appropriate solvent and applying the solution to a stent after which the solvent is allowed to evaporate and the stent is allowed to dry or pre coating a stent with a polymer after which the therapeutic agent is applied as a solution in an appropriate solvent. Application methods can include but are not limited to spraying dipping or spin coating processes.

The invention is illustrated further by the following examples that are not to be construed as limiting the invention in scope to the specific procedures described in them.

Adenosine 10 g 37 mmol was dissolved in N N dimethyl formamide 100 mL and dimethoxypropane 25 mL followed by addition of Amberlyst 15H resin. The mixture was stirred 3 h at 55 C. The resin was removed by filtration and the solvents removed in vacuo affording 2 3 di O isopropylidene adenosine 11 g 95 .

This product 6 g 20 mmol was dissolved in N N dimethyl formamide 22 mL and stirred with triisopropylsilyl chloride and imidazole 16 h at 23 C. The solution was partitioned between ether 200 mL and brine 100 mL and the ether phase washed with additional brine 2 50 mL . The ether was dried over magnesium sulfate and evaporated affording 5 O triisopropylsilyl 2 3 di O isopropylidene adenosine.

This residue was dissolved in toluene 20 mL and treated with phenylisocyanate 3.6 g 30 mmol for 16 h at 25 C. A solution of sodium bicarbonate 1 mL of 10 M was added and the mixture evaporated to dryness. The residue was partitioned between ethyl acetate 100 mL and water 25 mL . The organic phase was dried with magnesium sulfate and evaporated to dryness. The solid was dissolved in tetrahydrofuran 20 mL and stirred with tetrabutyl ammonium fluoride in tetrahydrofuran 20 mL of a 1 M solution for 1 h in a dry ice acetone bath. Removal of the solvent in vacuo followed by washing with hexane afforded the 5 alcohol 5.3 g .

A portion of the above phenylurea product 0.41 g 0.96 mmol was suspended in 25 mL of 20 aqueous acetic acid and 5 mL of tetrahydrofuran dioxane 1 1 and was stirred at 50 C. for 24 h. The white suspension became a clear yellow solution. The mixture was concentrated and then lyophilized to give 0.360 g 97 yield of 1 9 3 4 dihydroxy 5 hydroxymethyl tetrahydro furan 2 yl 9H purin 6 yl 3 phenyl urea as a yellow solid. MW calculated for CHNO MH 387. found 387 by LCMS.

A small amount of 4A flame dried molecular sieves cooled down by a flow of argon was added to a vial containing a portion of the product immediately above 0.131 g 0.34 mmol . The mixture was capped with a rubber septum and cooled down to 0 C. To this mixture trifluoroacetic acid 2.5 mL was added via syringe and the mixture stirred at this temperature for 15 min. Phenyl acetaldehyde dimethylacetal 0.230 ml 4 eq. was added dropwise and the mixture stirred at 0 C. for 2 h. One more equivalent of phenyl acetaldehyde dimethyl acetal was added and stirred an additional five hours. The volatiles were evaporated off and the residue was purified by flash chromatography hexane ethyl acetate 8 2 1 triethylamine to give 0.095 g of product 60 yield as a yellow solid. MW calculated for CHNO MH 489. found 489 by LCMS.

A portion of this acetal product 0.068 g 0.14 mmol was dissolved in dry N N dimethyl formamide 2.5 mL and potassium tert butoxide 0.084 g 5 eq was added to give a yellow solution. To this mixture was added 2 fluoro 5 nitrobenzoic acid 0.046 g 1.8 eq . After 2.5 h of stirring at room temperature the mixture was concentrated and purified by preparative HPLC to give the nucleoside analog as a white powder. MW calculated for CHNO MH 654. found 654 by LCMS.

The nitro group of the product immediately above was reduced under a hydrogen atmosphere with a catalytic amount of 10 Pd C in methanol during 6 h. Filtration through Celite followed by HPLC purification yielded 52 mg 62 yield of the title compound as clear semisolid.

To a stirred solution of 1 9 6 hydroxymethyl 2 2 dimethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl 9H purin 6 yl 3 phenyl urea 43 mg 0.1 mmol in dry N N dimethylformamide 1 mL at 23 C. was added potassium tert butoxide 45 mg 0.4 mmol . After 30 min 2 chloronicotinic acid 60 mg 0.4 mmol was added to the solution. The resulting mixture was stirred at 23 C. for 15 h and then quenched with water 1 mL suspended in ethyl acetate 50 mL washed with brine 3 dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate filtered and concentrated in vacuo to give the crude product. Preparative reverse phase HPLC was used to obtain the pure compound 15 mg 27 yield as a white solid. H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 11.76 s 1H 10.15 s 1H 9.16 s 1H 8.65 s 1H 8.05 dd J 8.5 Hz 3.5 Hz 1H 7.94 dd J 9.0 Hz 3.0 Hz 1H 7.60 d J 2.0 Hz 1H 7.57 d J 2.0 Hz 1H 7.32 t J 12.5 Hz 2H 7.05 t J 12.5 Hz 1H 6.96 dd J 12.5 Hz 8.5 Hz 1H 6.25 d J 6.0 Hz 1H 5.80 t J 7.5 Hz 1H 5.10 dd J 9.0 Hz 2.5 Hz 1H 4.67 m 1H 4.53 dd J 20.0 Hz 4.0 Hz 1H 4.36 dd J 20.0 Hz 4.0 Hz 1H 1.59 s 3H 1.38 s 3H . MW calculated for CHNO MH 548. found 548 by LCMS. Similarly other 5 substituted pyridines were prepared 

6 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 9 mg 8 yield as a white solid. H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 11.68 s 1H 10.20 s 1H 8.71 s 1H 8.64 d J 3.0 Hz 2H 8.12 dd J 15.0 Hz 3.5 Hz 1H 7.63 d J 2.0 Hz 1H 7.61 d J 1.5 Hz 1H 7.36 t J 13.0 Hz 2H 7.09 t J 12.5 Hz 1H 6.84 dd J 13.5 Hz 1.0 Hz 1H 6.33 d J 3.5 Hz 1H 5.61 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.0 Hz 1H 5.20 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.5 Hz 1H 4.64 m 1H 4.54 m 2H 1.60 s 3H 1.40 s 3H . MW calculated for CHNO MH 548. found 548 by LCMS.

6 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy pyridine 2 carboxylic acid 5 mg 4.6 yield as a white solid. H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 11.64 s 1H 10.15 s 1H 8.68 s 1H 8.60 s 1H 7.83 dd J 13.5 Hz 12.5 Hz 1H 7.62 m 3H 7.34 t J 12.5 Hz 2H 7.06 t J 12.5 Hz 1H 6.96 dd J 13.0 Hz 1.0 Hz 1H 6.30 d J 4.0 Hz 1H 5.59 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.5 Hz 1H 5.17 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.5 Hz 1H 4.64 m 1H 4.50 m 2H 1.58 s 3H 1.38 s 3H . MW calculated for CHNO MH 548. found 548 by LCMS.

5 Chloro 6 2 2 dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 11 mg 1.5 yield as a white solid. MW calculated for CHCINO MH 582. found 582 by LCMS.

Two isomer were obtained from the reaction with 2 6 dichloronicotinic acid. The major product was A 80 mg 69 yield . LC MS calculated for CHClNO MH 582. found 582. The minor product was B 20 mg 17 yield . MW calculated for CHClNO MH 582. found 582 by LCMS.

2 Chloro 6 2 2 dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy isonicotinic acid 60 mg 52 yield as a white solid. H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 11.63 s 1H 10.18 s 1H 8.68 s 1H 8.61 s 1H 7.6 s 1H 7.59 s 1H 7.36 s 1H 7.33 t J 13.0 Hz 2H 7.06 t J 13.5 Hz 1H 6.29 d J 3.5 Hz 1H 5.63 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.0 Hz 1H 5.17 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.5 Hz 1H 4.64 m 1H 4.47 m 2H 1.60 s 3H 1.38 s 3H . MW calculated for CHClNO MH 582. found 582 by LCMS.

6 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinamide 15 mg 14 yield as a white solid. H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 11.70 s 1H 10.10 s 1H 8.69 s 1H 8.61 s 1H 8.60 d J 4.0 Hz 1H 8.09 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.0 Hz 1H 7.95 s 1H 7.62 s 1H 7.59 s 1H 7.39 s 1H 7.34 t J 15.0 Hz 2H 7.07 t J 12.5 Hz 1H 6.80 d J 14.0 Hz 1.0 Hz 1H 6.31 d J 4.0 Hz 1H 5.59 dd J 10.5 Hz 4.5 Hz 1H 5.17 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.5 Hz 1H 4.63 m 1H 4.49 m 2H 1.59 s 3H 1.39 s 3H . MW calculated for CHNO MH 547. found 547 by LCMS.

6 Chloro 2 2 2 dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy 5 fluoro nicotinic acid 35 mg 19 yield as a white solid. MW calculated for CHClFNO MH 600. found 600 by LCMS.

Dry argon was bubbled through a solution of 1 9 6 3 Benzyloxy pyridin 2 yloxymethyl 2 2 dimethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl 9H purin 6 yl 3 phenyl urea 18 mg 0.03 mmol prepared as above in methanol ethyl acetate 1 1 v v 10 mL at 23 C. for 10 min. Palladium on activated carbon 10 was added and the suspension was degassed by argon for another 5 min. Hydrogen H was conducted to the solution via a balloon and the reaction proceeded for 5 h. The mixture was filtered and concentrated in vacuo to give the crude product. Preparative reverse phase HPLC was used to obtain the pure compound 5 mg 31 yield as a white solid. MW calculated for CHNO MH 520. found 520 by LCMS.

2 2 2 Dimethyl 6 6 3 phenyl ureido purin 9 yl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy nicotinic acid 180 mg 0.33 mmol was dissolved in a mixture of trifluoroacetic acid and water TFA HO 4 1 v v 20 mL and the suspension was stirred at 23 C. for 30 min. The solvents were removed under reduced pressure to give the intermediate diol product 120 mg 72 yield as a white solid. MW calculated for CHNO MH 508. found 508 by LCMS.

To a stirred solution of the diol immediately above 0.23 mmol in dry trifluoroacetic acid 5 mL at 23 C. was added phenyl acetaldehyde 130 mg 1.1 mmol . The resulting mixture was stirred at 23 C. for 6 h. After the removal of most trifluoroacetic acid by evaporation under reduced pressure the reaction was quenched with saturated sodium bicarbonate solution 10 mL . The product was extracted using ethyl acetate 50 mL washed with brine 3 dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate filtered and concentrated in vacuo to give the crude product. Preparative reverse phase HPLC was used to obtain the pure acetal compound 7 mg 5 yield as a white solid. H NMR 300 MHz DMSO d 11.67 s 1H 10.50 s 1H 8.68 s 1H 8.51 s 1H 8.27 dd J 8.0 Hz 3.0 Hz 1H 8.10 dd J 10.0 Hz 4.0 Hz 1H 7.60 dd J 14.0 Hz 2.0 Hz 1H 7.30 m 7H 7.08 m 3H 6.21 d J 4.5 Hz 1H 5.51 dd J 10.5 Hz 4.0 Hz 1H 5.32 t J 8.0 Hz 1H 5.06 dd J 10.0 Hz 3.0 Hz 1H 4.70 m 1H 4.62 dd J 20.0 Hz 5.0 Hz 1H 4.45 dd J 20.0 Hz 5.0 Hz 1H 3.10 d J 8.5 Hz 2H . MW calculated for CHNO MH 610. found 610 by LCMS.

Other 5 substituted pyridine ethers were transformed to various 2 3 acetals using methods similar to those given immediately above.

To a solution of 6 6 Chloro purin 9 yl 2 2 dimethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl methanol 0.570 g 1.74 mmol in 16 mL of dry dichloromethane was added polymer bound triphenylphosphine PS TPP Argonaut Tech. 2.14 mmol g 0.91 g 1.2 eq followed by methyl 3 hydroxy 5 isoxazolecarboxylate 0.248 g 1 eq . The mixture was sonicated for 15 minutes then stirred at room temperature for 1 h under argon. The reaction mixture was cooled to 0 C. and under argon flow diethylazodicarboxylate 0.33 g 1.1 eq dissolved in 1 ml of dichloromethane was added dropwise via syringe. The mixture was protected from light and stirred at 0 C. for 30 min. then at room temperature for 20 h. The resin was washed liberally with dichloromethane and methanol. The organic solution obtained from the washes was concentrated to give after flash chromatography purification 0.740 g of the product as a white solid 95 yield . H NMR 300 MHz CDCl 8.76 s 1H 8.23 s 1H 6.42 s 1H 6.23 d J 2.1 Hz 1H 5.43 dd J 2.1 Hz 1H 5.14 dd J 3.6 Hz 1H 4.7 m 1H 4.61 dd J 3.9 Hz 1H 4.49 dd J 5.7 Hz 1H 3.93 s 3H 1.65 s 3H 1.42 s 3H . MW calculated for CHClNO MH 452. found 452 by LCMS.

To a solution of 3 6 6 Chloro purin 9 yl 2 2 dimethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy isoxazole 5 carboxylic acid methyl ester 0.106 g 0.23 mmol in tetrahydrofuran 1.2 mL was added polymer bound diisopropylethylamine PS DIEA Argonaut Tech. 3.83 mmol g 0.190 g 3 eq followed by addition of 0.040 mL of N methyl N benzylamine 1.2 eq . The resulting mixture was stirred at room temperature overnight. The PS DIEA resin was washed three times with dichloromethane and the solution obtained from the washes was concentrated to yield 3 6 6 N Benzyl N methyl amino purin 9 yl 2 2 dimethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 ylmethoxy isoxazole 5 carboxylic acid methyl ester as yellow oil. This material 0.23 mmol was dissolved in 1 4 dioxane 1.2 mL and 0.250 mL of an aqueous 2M lithium hydroxide solution added. The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 4 h. The crude product isolated after acid workup was used without further purification in the following step. MW calculated for CHNO MH 523. found 523 by LCMS.

A solution of the above acetonide 0.075 g 0.140 mmol dissolved in 1.5 mL of dry dichloromethane was cooled in an ice bath to 0 C. To this clear mixture was added 1.8 mL of trifluoroaceic acid. The mixture was stirred at 0 C. for 5 h to afford the intermediate diol as a yellow semisolid after evaporative workup. This crude product 0.23 mmol was dissolved at 0 C. in 1 mL of dry trifluoroacetic acid in the flask. To this mixture was added a small amount of 3 A molecular sieves previously dried by flame in situ and cooled by a stream of argon . The flask was capped with a rubber septum and cooled to 0 C. then 0.1 mL of phenyl acetaldehyde dimethyl acetal was added and the mixture stirred for 18 h at 0 C. At that point 0.1 mL more of acetal was added and stirred an additional 6 h. Purification by HPLC yielded 52 mg of the desired product as a clear semisolid 62 yield . MW calculated for CHNO MH 585. found 585 by LCMS.

In a reaction vessel bis acetoxyiodobenzene BAIB 1.15 g 3.58 mmol 2 2 6 6 tetramethyl 1 piperidinyloxy TEMPO 0.051 g 0.325 mmol and 2 3 isopropylideneadenosine 0.500 g 1.63 mmol were combined and 3 mL of 1 1 acetonitrile water mixture was added to the reaction vessel. The reaction mixture was stirred at ambient temperature under argon for 1 h then filtered. The white crystalline product was washed with acetonitrile water mixture 1 1 and dried in vacuo to yield 0.464 g of product 89 . H NMR 300 MHz CDSOCD 12.77 br s 1H 8.22 s 1H 8.06 s 1H 7.27 s 2H 6.32 s 1H 5.52 dd J1 5.7 Hz J2 1.8 Hz 1H 5.45 d J 9.5 Hz 1H 4.67 d J 1.5 Hz 1H 1.52 s 3H 1.35 s 3H .

To a vial containing 2 3 O Isopropylideneadenosine 5 carboxylic acid 0.241 g 0.75 mmol was added 3 amino benzoic acid methyl ester 0.144 g 0.75 mmol in one portion at RT followed by heating at 50 C. overnight. The reaction mixture was diluted with 100 ml of ethyl acetate washed with 1N hydrochloric acid saturated sodium bicarbonate brine and dried over MgSO. Upon removal of solvent the solid residue was purified with chromatography with 2 5 methanol in dichloromethane to give 90 mg 26 of the carboxamide as white solid. MW calculated for CHNO MH 455. found 455 by LCMS. This carboxamide product 90 mg 0.20 mmol was dissolved in DMF 2 mL and added to a flask containing phenyl isocyanate 35 mg 0.30 mmol in 2 ml of toluene at 50 C. The reaction was stirred at 50 C. overnight. Additional phenyl isocyanate 35 mg 0.20 mmol was then added in several portions until nearly complete consumption of the starting material was noted by TLC analysis. The reaction mixture was then diluted with ethyl acetate 100 ml washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate brine and dried over magnesium sulfate. The crude product was purified by a chromatography with 0 2 methanol in dichloromethane to give 57 mg 50 of pure product and recovered starting material 10 mg . H NMR 300 MHz CDCl 11.53 s 1H 9.21 s 1H 8.54 s 1H 8.36 s 1H 8.21 s 1H 7.72 m 1H 7.58 m 2H 7.38 m 2H 7.24 m 1H 7.12 m 1H 6.29 d J 2.1 Hz 1H 5.66 dd J 6.3 1.5 Hz 1H 5.56 dd J 6.3 1.5 Hz 1H 4.88 d J 1.8 Hz 1H 3.78 s 3H 1.65 s 3H 1.44 s 3H . MW calculated for CHNO MH 574. found 574 by LCMS.

To a vial containing 2 3 O Isopropylideneadenosine 5 carboxylic acid 250 mg 0.778 mmol triethylamine 1.57 mg 1.56 mmol and 3 amino benzoic acid allyl ester 0.276 mg 1.56 mmol in 0.5 ml of N N dimethyl formamide at 0 C. was added PyBOP 0.443 mg 0.856 mmol in one portion. Reaction was continued at 0 C. for 4 h and at ambient for 4 h. Additional PyBOP 50 mg was added and the reaction continued overnight at ambient temperature. The reaction mixture was diluted with ethyl acetate 100 ml washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate brine and dried over magnesium sulfate. The crude was purified by a chromatography with 0 2 methanol in dichloromethane to give the desired amide product. MW calculated for CHNO MH 481. found 481 by LCMS.

Phenyl isocyanate was coupled with the amide product using a method similar to those described above affording the intermediate phenylurea compound. MW calculated for CHNO MH 600. found 600 by LCMS.

This phenylurea compound 36 mg 0.057 mmol and morpholine 0.015 mg 0.17 mmol were dissolved in tetrahydrofuran 5 ml followed by addition of tetrakis triphenylphosphine palladium 5 mg 0.004 mmol . Reaction was completed in 4 h at RT. After removal of the solvent the crude product mixture was purified by preparative HPLC to give the desired product. H NMR 300 MHz CDCl 11.52 s 1H 9.99 s 1H 9.60 s 1H 8.61 s 1H 8.42 s 1H 7.94 s 1H 7.72 m 4H 7.34 m 2H 7.23 m 1H 7.06 m 1H 6.56 s 1H 5.56 m 2H 4.88 s 1H 1.58 s 3H 1.39 s 3H .

To a vial containing 2 3 O Isopropylideneadenosine 5 carboxylic acid 20 mg 0.045 mmol dimethylaminopyridine 5 mg 0.045 mmol and methanesulfonamide 0.009 mg 0.091 mmol in dichloromethane 0.5 ml was added dicyclohexylcarbodiimide 10 mg 0.05 mmol . The mixture was stirred for 2 days at RT. Additional dicyclohexylcarbodiimide 10 mg 0.05 mmol and dimethylaminopyridine 5 mg 0.045 mmol were added and the reaction was continued at RT overnight. To the reaction mixture was added ethyl acetate 75 ml which was washed with 1 N hydrochloric acid water saturated sodium bicarbonate brine and dried over magnesium sulfate. Upon removal of solvent the residue was purified by prep. HPLC to yield 13 mg of desired product 55 . MW calculated for CHNOS MH 518. found 518 by LCMS.

Commercially available hydroxymethylsulfanylmethyl HESM polystyrene resin 1.4 mmol g 200 mesh NovaBiochem 2.82 g 3.95 mmol was swelled for 15 minutes in 50 mL. In a separate reaction vessel Boc Pro OH 3.40 g 15.8 mmol HATU 5.7 g 15.0 mmol dimethylaminopyridine 0.24 g 1.98 mmol and diisopropylethylamine 3.5 mL 19.8 mmol were dissolved in 40 mL of N N dimethyl formamide and stirred for 15 minutes. N N dimethyl formamide was drained from the HESM resin and the solution of activated proline derivative was added to the resin. The resin was agitated at RT for 17 h. The solvent was then drained and the resin washed with N N dimethyl formamide 3 30 mL dichloromethane 3 30 mL methanol 3 30 mL dichloromethane 2 30 mL methanol 3 30 mL and dried in vacuo overnight. Mass of resin 3.42 g 93 loading.

Resin obtained in the previous step was agitated with a 40 trifluoroacetic acid dichloromethane solution 75 mL for 15 minutes. The solvent was drained and a fresh solution of 40 trifluoroacetic acid in dichloromethane was added and resin was agitated for another 15 minutes. After this the resin was washed with dichloromethane 5 40 mL 20 diisopropylethylamine dichloromethane 2 30 mL dichloromethane 3 30 mL and methanol 5 40 mL . The resin was dried under vacuum. A chloranil test indicated the presence of a free amino group and this proline bound resin was carried over to the next step.

The proline resin product from the previous step was swelled in 50 mL N N dimethyl formamide for 30 minutes after that the N N dimethyl formamide was drained. In a separate reaction vessel 2 3 O Isopropylideneadenosine 5 carboxylic acid 1.40 g 4.35 mmol dichloroethane 0.91 g 4.74 mmol HOBtHO 0.73 g 4.74 mmol and diisopropylethylamine 3.5 mL 19.8 mmol were dissolved in 55 mL of N N dimethyl formamide. The solution was stirred for 15 minutes and then added to the proline resin. The resin was agitated at RT for 17 h. The solvent was drained the resin was washed with N N dimethyl formamide 3 30 mL dichloromethane 3 30 mL methanol 3 30 mL dichloromethane 2 30 mL methanol 3 30 mL and dried in vacuo for 48 h. A chloranil test performed on a few sample beads indicated that coupling had occurred. A small amount of resin was cleaved using the following procedure to verify attachment of the carboxylic acid and analysed by LCMS. Calculated mass for CHNO MH 419. found 419 by LCMS. Mass of resin 3.66 g 0.55 mmol g 82 in three steps.

A small amount of resin is suspended in a solution of 5 6 equivalents of m chloroperbenzoic acid in dichloromethane and agitated for 7 8 hours at RT. The solution is then drained and the resin is washed 5 6 times with fresh dichloromethane. Then resin is suspended in a solution of 4 5 equivalents of DBU in dichloromethane and agitated at RT for 4 5 hours. The resin is then filtered and the solution is analyzed by LC MS HPLC or another method. The compounds are recovered from solution by rotary evaporation.

The adenosine proline amide derivatized resin from the previous resin synthesis step 0.5 g 0.275 mmol was suspended in anhydrous N N dimethyl formamide 10 mL . Ethyl isocyanate was added 0.43 mL 5.5 mmol and the reaction mixture was heated in a capped vial at 55 C. for 16 h. The resin was then drained and washed with N N dimethyl formamide 3 10 mL dichloromethane 3 10 mL methanol 3 10 mL dichloromethane 2 10 mL methanol 3 10 mL and the procedure was repeated once again then the resin dried in vacuo for 24 h. A negative chloranil test indicated complete reaction. A small amount of this resin bound to the 5 adenosine 2 3 acetonide proline amide derivatized as the 6 ethylurea was cleaved by the procedure described for cleavage of HESM resin and the isolated product was analyzed by LCMS. Mass calculated for CHNO MH 490. found 490 by LCMS. Loading 0.52 mmol g mass 0.52 g 98 .

The procedure described above was also used to prepare N ureas with R CH Ph CHPh CHCHPh cyclopentyl and trans 2 phenyl cycloprop 1 yl groups using the appropriate isocyanates.

The resin described above 0.05 g 0.026 mmol was suspended in trifluoroacetic acid then benzaldehyde 0.095 g 0.9 mmol was added all at once. The resin was agitated in a tightly closed vial for 24 h. The resin was drained washed with dichloromethane 5 3 mL 20 diisopropylethylamine dichloromethane 2 3 mL dichloromethane 3 3 mL and methanol 5 3 mL then dried in vacuo for 3 h. The resin was cleaved using the cleavage procedure described above the crude product was collected analyzed by LCMS and purified by preparative HPLC. Calculated MW for CHNO MH 538. found 538 by LCMS.

The following analogs were prepared in a similar manner to that described above using appropriate combinations of isocyanates and aldehydes. Compounds analyzed by LCMS.

In a reaction vessel were combined 2 3 O benzylidene N6 phenylurea adenosine 0.200 g 0.409 mmol p toluene sulfonyl chloride 0.148 g 0.778 mmol and 4.0 mL of pyridine. The mixture was stirred for 4 h at RT. The solvent was removed in vacuo and the tosylate 0.260 g 99 was recovered as a yellow solid. MW calculated for CHNOS 643.19 MH . found 642.9.

This tosylate product 0.260 g 0.409 mmol was dissolved in 3 mL of anhydrous N N dimethyl formamide sodium azide 0.266 g 4.09 mmol was added and the mixture was heated at 80 C. in a closed vial for 7 h while being stirred. The mixture was diluted with 50 mL of dichloromethane and extracted with 5 sodium bicarbonate solution and brine. The organic layer was separated dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and solvent was removed in vacuo. The azide derivative was recovered 0.183 g 87 as a white solid. MW calculated for CHNO 514.19 MH . found 514.1.

This residue containing the azide 0.180 g 0.351 mmol was dissolved in 6 mL of tetrahydrofuran water mixture 18 1 polystyrene bound triphenylphospine was added 2.19 mmol g 0.800 g 1.75 mmol and the reaction mixture was stirred at RT under argon for 24 h. The reaction mixture was then filtered the solvent was removed in vacuo and the crude product was chomatographed on a silica gel column 2 cm 15 cm . The column was eluted with dichloromethane methanol triethylamine 88 10 2 to give 0.072 g 42 of the amine as a white solid. MW calculated for CHNO 488.20 MH . found 488.0.

A portion of the amine product above 0.022 g 0.046 mmol was dissolved in 2 mL of dichloromethane anhydrous and methylsulfonylethylcarbamate 0.008 g 0.046 mmol was added. The reaction was stirred at RT under argon for 72 h. Solvent was then removed in vacuo and the crude product was purified by preparative HPLC acetonitrile 0.1 trifluoroacetic acid water 0.1 trifluoroacetic acid buffer . 0.016 g 59 of product was recovered as a white solid. MW calculated for CHNOS 609.18 MH . found 609.4. H NMR 300 MHz CDSOCD 11.69 br s 1H 10.22 br s 1H 8.69 s 1H 8.65 s 1H 7.60 d J 7.8 Hz 2H 7.36 7.21 m 6H 7.07 t J 7.5 Hz 1H 6.90 6.87 m 1H 6.57 s 1H 6.22 d J 2.4 Hz 1H 5.75 s 1H 5.45 dd J1 6.3 Hz J2 2.1 Hz 1H 5.31 t J 5.1 Hz 1H 4.92 dd J1 6.6 Hz J2 3.3 Hz 1H 4.16 4.02 m 5H 3.11 s 3H .

To a vial containing the starting compound 1 9 6 Hydroxymethyl 2 2 dimethyl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl 9H purin 6 yl 3 phenyl urea 1.07 g 2.5 mmol in 10 ml of dimethylsulfoxide was added IBX 1.06 g 3.75 mmol in one portion at RT. The white solid gradually dissolved as the reaction proceeded. After stirring at RT for 2 hours methyl triphenylphosphorylidene acetate 0.84 g 2.5 mmol was added in one portion. The reaction was run at RT overnight. To the reaction mixture was added ethyl acetate 100 ml which was washed with saturated NaHCO brine and dried over MgSO. After removal of solvent the residue was recrystallized with isopropyl alcohol to provide the title compound. MW calculated for CHNO MH 481.5. found 481.3 by LCMS.

To a round bottom flask containing product from the previous step 1.2 g 2.5 mmol and palladium on carbon 10 w w 10 mg under nitrogen was added methanol 20 ml . After flushing with hydrogen gas the reaction mixture was stirred under a hydrogen atmosphere using a hydrogen balloon overnight at RT. Upon filtration and removal of solvent the crude white solid product was recrystallized from isopropyl alcohol to give the desired methyl ester compound. MW calculated for CHNO MH 483.5. found 483.2.

The methyl ester 500 mg 1.04 mmol was dissolved in 4 ml of methanol and sodium hydroxide 83 mg 2.1 mmol was then added. The reaction was stirred overnight at RT. After removal of methanol acetic acid 2.1 mmol 120 mmol was added and a white solid precipitated. The solvent was removed under vacuum. The residue was recrystallized from water to provide the pure desired product as a white solid 0.4 g 83 . MW calculated for CHNO M 1 467.5 found 467.4 by LCMS.

To a vial containing the carboxylic acid product from the previous step 0.117 g 0.25 mmol thionyl chloride 0.3 g 2.5 mmol was added at 0 C. After addition the cold bath was removed followed by addition of two drops of N N dimethyl formamide. The reaction mixture was heated to 50 C. for 30 minutes. The excess of thionyl chloride was removed under vacuum and the solid residue was washed with ethyl ether to give the acid chloride. The acid chloride 61 mg 0.125 mmol was added to a vial containing L proline methyl ester 23 mg 0.138 mmol and triethylamine 28 mg 0.275 mmol in 1 mL of dichloromethane at 0 C. The reaction was gradually warmed to RT overnight. To the reaction mixture was added ethyl acetate 75 ml which was washed with 1 N hydrochloric acid saturated sodium bicarbonate and dried over magnesium sulfate. The residue was purified by elution from a silica column using 2 methanol in dichloromethane to give purified prolylmethyl ester product 10 mg 14 . MW calculated for CHNO MH 580.6 found 580.3 by LCMS. The prolylmethyl ester 6 mg 0.010 mmol was dissolved in tetrahydrofuran 0.1 ml followed by addition of 6 l of 15 sodium hydroxide. After stirring at RT for 2 hrs ethyl acetate 50 ml was added and enough 1 N hydrochloric acid was added to adjust the pH to 3. The organic layer was washed with brine and dried over magnesium sulfate. After removal of solvent the title compound was obtained as a white powder. MW calculated for CHNO MH 566.6 found 566.3 by LCMS.

The 2 3 cinnamylacetal N ethylurea derivative of AMP 0.750 g 0.14 mmol as a mixture of acetal diastereoisomers was dissolved in water 25 mL 1.4 mol in a round bottom flask and the pH was adjusted to 8.3 with NaOH. The temperature was adjusted to 35 C and alkaline phosphatase 0.003 g 0.00004 mol was added. Within 15 minutes the mixture became rather heterogenous and methanol 20 mL 0.5 mol was added to resolubilize the nucleoside product. After 4 h the reaction was judged essentially complete by HPLC. The reaction was worked up by adding more MeOH 20 mL heating to 60 C to denature the enzyme and filtering through a 0.22 uM filter. The methanol was evaporated in vacuo and a white fine particle solid precipitated from the remaining solvent. This mixture was cooled in an ice bath and filtered. Washing the material with water followed by drying over POin a dessicator afforded the title product as a mixture of acetal diastereomers. Dry weight 440 mg 0.10 mmol 71 yield .

1 Ethyl 3 9 6 hydroxymethyl 2 styryl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl 9H purin 6 yl urea 5.0 g 11 mmol was suspended in dry acetonitrile 50 mL and Dess Martin periodinate 6.7 g 16 mmol was added. The suspension was stirred 2 h after which time proton NMR of an aliquot showed complete conversion to the aldehyde. Methoxycarbonylmethylene triphenylphosphorane 3.9 g 12 mmol was added and stirring was continued overnight. The reaction mixture was then diluted with ethyl acetate 300 mL washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate thiosulfate solution 100 mL dried with sodium sulfate and filtered. The filtrate was evaporated and the solid was dissolved in hot isopropyl alcohol 50 mL . It was allowed to cool then heptane was added and it was stirred overnight. The resulting precipitate was washed with heptane and dried under vacuum affording the desired product 2.9 g 71 . H NMR 300 MHz dDMSO 1.15 t 3H J 7 Hz 3.21 q 2H J 7 Hz 3.59 s 3H 4.98 m 1H 5.28 t 1H J 6 Hz 5.51 dd 1H J 6 Hz 

3 6 6 3 Ethyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 styryl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl acrylic acid methyl ester 250 mg 0.5 mmol was dissolved in dry methanol 3 mL . Copper II sulfate 90 mg 0.5 mmol was added followed by sodium tetrahydroborate 90 mg 2.5 mmol and the reaction was stirred 48 h. The reaction was diluted with water filtered and concentrated in vacuo. The residue was dissolved in ethyl acetate and precipitated with heptane. The precipitate was dissolved in dichloromethane and was chromatographed on silica gel with dichloromethane methanol 95 5 as eluent affording the title compound 125 mg 50 . H NMR 300 MHz dDMSO 1.15 t 3H J 7 Hz 1.90 m 2H 2.19 m 2H 3.21 q 2H J 7 Hz 3.55 s 3H 4.20 m 1H 4.98 dd 1H J 4 Hz 6 Hz 5.45 dd 1H J 3 Hz 7 Hz 5.85 d 1H J 6 Hz 6.25 d 1H J 3 Hz 6.27 dd 1H J 6 Hz 16 Hz 6.90 d 1H J 16 Hz 7.35 m 3H 7.50 d 2H J 7 Hz 8.56 s 1H 8.57 s 1H 9.30 t 1H J 5 Hz 9.60 s 1H .

3 6 6 3 Ethyl ureido purin 9 yl 2 styryl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl propionic acid methyl ester 5.0 g 10 mmol was dissolved in tetrahydrofuran 300 mL . Water 100 mL was added followed by lithium hydroxide 1.0 g 25 mmol . The solution was allowed to stir 16 h at room temperature. It was acidified to pH 5 with acetic acid concentrated in vacuo then extracted with chloroform 300 mL . The organic extract was evaporated redissolved in ethyl acetate and precipitated with heptane to afford the title compound 3.9 g 80 as a mixture of acetal diastereomers. Compound 183 which is the trans diastereomer contained within the acetal mixture was obtained by separation on a chiral HPLC column. Phenomenex Synergi Polar RP chiral Ccolumn . Alternately Compound 183 was obtained by subjecting the diastereomeric mixture of acetals to aqueous acid conditions for example 65 aqueous acetic acid at 50 C. or aqueous p toluenesulfonic acid at 30 C. which cleaved the less stable cis diastereomer leaving the trans isomer Compound 183 intact. H NMR of the diastereomeric mixture of acetals 300 MHz dDMSO 1.14 t 3H J 7 Hz 1.90 m 2H 2.19 m 2H 3.26 q 2H J 6 Hz 4.17 m 1H 4.93 t 1H J 6 Hz 5.43 dd 1H J 3 Hz 7 Hz 5.84 d 1H J 6 Hz 6.24 d 1H J 3 Hz 6.28 dd 1H J 7 Hz 13 Hz 6.90 d 1H J 16 Hz 7.35 m 3H 7.51 d 2H J 7 Hz 8.56 s 1H 8.61 s 1H 9.30 t 1H J 6 Hz .

1 Ethyl 3 9 6 hydroxymethyl 2 trans styryl tetrahydro furo 3 4 d 1 3 dioxol 4 yl 9H purin 6 yl urea 0.200 g 0.44 mmol was suspended in tetrahydrofuran 5 mL and sodium hydride 60 w w in oil 0.106 g 2.65 mmol added. Once the bubbling ceased added methyl 2 bromomethyl 3 chloro benzoate 0.233 g 0.88 mmol and stirred the reaction mixture overnight at room temperature. Mass spectral analysis indicated that the reaction was complete and that the product was the title compound arising from in situ hydrolysis of the methyl ester. The pH was lowered to 5 with acetic acid and the mixture partitioned between ethyl acetate 40 mL and 50 saturated sodium chloride 50 mL . The layers were separated and the ethyl acetate layer concentrated to dryness. The residue was reconstituted in aqueous acetonitrile and the product purified on preparative HPLC Ccolumn gradient from 0.05 M ammonium acetate pH 6.5 to acetonitrile over 20 minutes . The solvent was removed from the fraction containing the product giving the title compound Compound 115 after overnight lyophilization 0.194 g 70 

MW calculated for CHClNO MH 620.0 found 619.6 by LCMS. H NMR 300 MHz CDCl 1.29 t 3H 3.42 q 2H 3.77 dd 1H 3.97 dd 1H 4.70 s 1H 4.90 d 1H 5.05 d 1H 5.19 d 1H 5.60 dd 1H 5.86 d 1H 6.18 dd 1H 6.28 d 1H 6.83 d 1H 7.36 m 7H 7.89 d 1H 8.52 s 1H 8.57 s 1H 9.33 s 1H 9.56 t 1H .

Isolation of Platelets Human blood is obtained from informed healthy adult volunteers. Blood is collected into one sixth volume of acid citrate dextrose ACD buffer 85 mM sodium citrate 65 mM citric acid and 100 mM glucose . Collected blood is placed in a water bath at 37 C. for 30 minutes. Blood is then centrifuged at 275 g for 16 minutes at room temperature and the platelet rich plasma is removed and centrifuged at 2200 g for 13 minutes at room temperature. The platelet pellet is resuspended in 40 mL of HEPES buffered Tyrode s solution 137 mM NaCl 2.7 mM KCl 1 mM MgCl 2 mM CaCl 12 mM NaHCO 0.36 mM NaHPO 5.5 mM glucose 5 mM HEPES pH 7.4 0.35 bovine serum albumin or 0.35 human serum albumin containing 10 U mL heparin and 5 M final concentration prostaglandin 12 PGI . The platelet suspension is incubated in a 37 C. water bath for 10 minutes and then 5 M final conc. PGIis added just before centrifugation at 1900 g for 8 minutes. The resulting pellet is resuspended in 40 mL of HEPES buffered Tyrode s solution containing 5 M final concentration PGIand then is incubated for 10 minutes in a 37 C. water bath. A small aliquot 500 L of the platelet suspension is removed for platelet counting. Prior to centrifugation 5 M final concentration PGIis added to the suspension and then the suspension is centrifuged at 1900 g for 8 minutes. The pellet is resuspended at a density of 5 10cells mL in HEPES buffered Tyrode s solution containing 0.05 U mL apyrase.

Aggregation Studies ADP induced platelet aggregation is determined by measuring the transmission of light through a 0.5 ml suspension of stirred 1000 rpm washed platelets in a lumi aggregometer at 37 C. Chrono Log Corp. Havertown Pa. . The baseline of the instrument is set using 0.5 ml of Hepes buffered Tyrode s solution. Prior to aggregation measurements the platelet suspension is supplemented with 1 mg ml fibrinogen. Platelet aggregation is initiated by the addition of indicated concentrations of ADP or other agonists and the light transmission is continuously recorded for at least 8 min. When inhibitors of platelet aggregation are tested platelets are incubated for 2 min in the presence of indicated concentrations of inhibitor before addition of ADP or other agonists and the response is recorded for at least 8 min. The potency of agonists and inhibitors of platelet aggregation is calculated from both the rate of aggregation and the maximal extent of aggregation obtained for each determination by fitting the data to a four parameter logistic equation using the GraphPad software package GraphPad Corp. San Diego Calif. .

When a broad range of concentrations of P2Yantagonist is tested usually from 1 nM to 100 M an ICvalue is also obtained. ICvalues represent the concentration of antagonist necessary to inhibit by 50 the aggregation elicited by a given concentration of ADP.

Human blood is obtained from informed healthy adult volunteers. Blood is collected into syringes containing heparin sodium citrate PPACK or hirudin as anticoagulant. Blood is carefully transferred to a conical tube and maintained at room temperature. Assays are conducted within 60 min from the collection of the blood sample. ADP induced platelet aggregation is performed using the impedance mode of an aggregometer Chrono Log Corp. Havertown Pa. . Blood is gently mixed and an aliquot of 500 L is transferred to a measurement cuvette then 450 L of warm sterile saline is added to each cuvette and the sample is stirred at 1000 rpm. The impedance probe is introduced into the cuvette and the sample is allowed to warm for approx. 3 4 minutes in the aggregometer. The basal impedance is recorded for 1 minute and then 50 L of the appropriate concentrations of ADP are added to generate an ADP dose response curve. For the evaluation of P2Yreceptor antagonists on platelet aggregation after the basal impedance is recorded for 1 minute as indicated above blood samples are supplemented with 50 L of the antagonist or vehicle and after 2 minutes 50 L of ADP EC usually 5 10 mol L ADP are added and the impedance is recorded for up to 8 minutes. The potency of agonists and inhibitors of platelet aggregation is calculated from the impedance values obtained in each sample by fitting the data to a four parameter logistic equation using the GraphPad software package GraphPad Corp. San Diego Calif. .

To evaluate the ability of these compounds to inhibit platelet aggregation in vivo an experimental protocol similar to the method of R. G. Humphries et al. Br. J. Pharmacol. 115 1110 1116 1995 is performed.

Surgical Preparation and Instrumentation Male Sprague Dawley rats are anesthetized. Body temperature is maintained at 37 0.5 C. with a heating lamp. Animals breathe spontaneously and a tracheotomy is performed to ensure a patent airway. A cannula containing heparinized saline is introduced into the left femoral artery and connected to a transducer to record blood pressure and heart rate. Cannulae containing non heparinized saline are introduced into the left common carotid artery and left jugular vein for withdrawal of arterial blood samples and intravenous administration of compounds respectively. Experimental Protocol Either compound or vehicle is administered to each animal as an infusion. Blood samples are taken immediately prior to the first infusion at the end of each infusion and 20 min after cessation of the final infusion for measurement of platelet aggregation ex vivo. Immediately after sampling ADP induced platelet aggregation is measured in duplicate in 0.5 ml blood samples diluted 1 1 with saline and incubated at 37 C. for 4 min. For the final minute of this period cuvettes are transferred to a lumi aggregometer and the sample stirred at 900 rpm. ADP 3 M is added in a volume of 20 l and the aggregation response is recorded using the impedance mode of the aggregometer.

To evaluate the effect of these compounds on thrombus formation in vivo the following experimental protocol is performed.

Rats CD 1 male approximately 350 grams Charles River Raleigh N.C. are anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital 70 mg kg i.p. . The abdomens are shaved and a 22 gauge intravenous catheter is inserted into a lateral tail vein. A midline incision is made and the intestines are wrapped in saline soaked gauze and positioned so the abdominal aorta is accessible. The inferior vena cava and abdominal aorta are carefully isolated and a section approximately 1 cm of the abdominal aorta distal to the renal arteries proximal to the bifurcation is dissected. All branches from the aorta in this section are ligated with 4 0 silk suture. A 2.5 mm diameter flow probe connected to a Transonic flow meter is placed on the artery and a baseline pre stenosis flow is recorded. Two clips are placed around the artery decreasing the vessel diameter by approximately 80 . A second baseline flow measurement is taken post stenosis and the hyperemic response is tested. Animals are then treated with either compound or saline intravenously via tail vein catheter. Thrombosis is induced five minutes after treatment by repeated external compressions of the vessel with hemostatic forceps. Two minutes post injury the vessel compressions are repeated and a 10 minute period of flow monitoring is started. Animals are monitored continuously for a minimum of the first ten minutes post injury. After twenty minutes post injury a flow measurement is repeated and the animals are euthanized. The section of the aorta that includes the injured section is harvested and placed in 10 formalin for possible histologic evaluation.

To evaluate the ability of these compounds to be absorbed orally and to inhibit platelet aggregation in vivo the following experimental protocol is conducted.

Male Sprague Dawley rats are anesthetized using an inhaled anesthetic. A cannula containing heparinized saline is introduced into the jugular vein for withdrawal of venous blood samples. Animals are allowed a 48 hour recovery period prior to dose administration.

Either compound or vehicle is administered to each animal as an oral gavage. Blood samples are taken immediately prior to compound administration and at up to 12 time points ranging from 15 min to 24 hours following compound administration. HPLC MS MS is used to measure the amount of compound and or metabolite in the blood samples.

To evaluate the effect of the compounds of this invention on dynamic thrombus formation in vivo the following experimental protocol similar to the method of J. L. Romson et al. 17 841 853 1980 is performed.

Surgical Preparation and Instrumentation Briefly purpose bred dogs are anesthetized intubated and ventilated with room air. The heart is exposed by a left thoracotomy in the fifth intercostal space and suspended in a pericardial cradle. A 2 3 cm segment of the left circumflex coronary artery LCCA is isolated by blunt dissection. The artery is instrumented from proximal to distal with a flow probe a stimulation electrode and a Goldblatt clamp. The flow probe monitors the mean and phasic LCCA blood flow velocities. The stimulation electrode and its placement in the LCCA and the methodology to induce an occlusive coronary thrombus have been described previously J. K. Mickelson et al. 81 617 627 1990 R. J. Shebuski et al. Circulation 82 169 177 1990 J. F. Tschopp et al. Coron. Artery Dis. 4 809 817 1993 .

Experimental Protocol Dogs are randomized to one of four treatment protocols n 6 per treatment group in which the control group receives saline intravenously and the three drug treated groups are administered compound intravenously. Upon stabilization from the surgical interventions dogs receive either saline or compound. After approximately 30 minutes an anodal current is applied to the LCCA for 180 min. The number and frequency of cyclic flow variations CFV that precede formation of an occlusive thrombus are recorded. These cyclic phenomena are caused by platelet thrombi that form in the narrowed lumen as a result of platelet aggregation J. D. Folts et al. Circulation 54 365 370 1976 Bush et al. Circulation 69 1161 1170 1984 . Zero flow in the LCCA for a minimum of 30 minutes indicates a lack of antithrombotic efficacy L. G. Frederick et al. 93 129 134 1996 .

ICvalues for representative compounds of the present invention. Platelet ICdata were determined using washed human platelets according to the protocol of example 14. Agonist challenge ADP typically in the range of 1 5 M. Data are presented in M and are from the average of two experiments or more.

The data in Table 1 illustrates that a diverse set of compounds of the present invention show activity as antagonists of P2Y mediated platelet aggregation. For example compounds falling under Formula I 1 14 19 24 26 36 37 show P2Yantagonist activity despite having differing moieties at the 4 and 2 3 acetal positions of the ribose and or 6 urea position of the base. Additionally compounds falling under preferred Formula IV 65 69 and 70 illustrate that diastereomerically pure molecules containing a prolinamide residue at the 4 position a phenyl or styryl acetal moiety at the 2 3 position and an ethyl urea at the 6 position have improved potency relative to the less preferred compounds previously listed as falling under Formula I. Further compounds falling under a more preferred Formula V and Formula II 107 108 109 110 112 115 127 128 and 130 show dramatically better potency ICdata below 0.1 and even below 0.01 for Compound 112 believed to be as a result of their containing a benzyl ether with or without substituents falling under the definition of M or 2 nicotinylmethyl moiety at the 4 position in addition to the preferred acetals and urea previously listed for preferred compounds falling under Formula IV.

Table 1 also shows that replacing the oxygen of the benzyl ether moiety and reducing the linking group between the ribose ring 4 position and the terminal phenyl ring falling under the definition of V and Formula II to two total atoms instead of three 158 still lead to active molecules. Yet further preferred compounds falling under Formula VII 183 189 191 and 210 show that P2Yantagonist activity can be obtained by modification of the ribose 4 position with simple acyclic non aromatic moieties in conjunction with the preferred styryl acetal and ethyl urea moieties previously described. Even further preferred compounds falling under Formula IX 233 show P2Yantagonist activity when one of the linking groups at the 4 position falling under the definition of A and B in Formula I is a thiocarbamate moiety. In another illustration preferred compounds falling under Formula X 239 show potent activity when part of the linking group between the 4 position of the ribose and the phenyl ring falling under the definition of moiety X in Formula I and Formula II is an amide. In yet another illustration compounds falling under the definition of Formula XII 298 are active when the moiety defined by X in Formula I and Formula II is a 5 membered heterocyclic ring. Taken together Table 1 illustrates that a wide variety of molecules falling under the definitions of Formulae IV XII are useful as antagonists of P2Ymediated platelet aggregation and consequently useful as therapeutics in diseases where inhibition of platelet aggregation is beneficial.

A stent is coated with a P2Yantagonist compound with procedures modified from that described in Example 4 of U.S. Pat. No. 6 908 624 Hossainy . A stent is suspended in isopropanol and cleaned in an ultrasonic bath for 30 minutes. The stent is dried and cleaned in a plasma chamber. A poly ethylene vinyl alcohol solution is made by dissolving one part poly ethylene vinyl alcohol in seven parts dimethylsulfoxide with stirring and shaking at 60 C. for 24 hours. A P2Yantagonist compound for example compound 41 typically in the range of 2 10 by weight of the total is added to the poly ethylene vinyl alcohol dimethyl sulfoxide solution and the solution is mixed vortexed and placed in a tube. The stent is attached to a mandrel wire and dipped into the solution. The coated stent is briefly passed over a hotplate at 60 C. then is cured for 6 hours at ambient temperature after which it is dried for 24 hours in a vacuum oven at 40 60 C. The above process is repeated two or three times to give two or three layers. Following final drying the stent is optionally sterilized by electron beam radiation.

The invention and the manner and process of making and using it are now described in such full clear concise and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in the art to which it pertains to make and use the same. It is to be understood that the foregoing describes preferred embodiments of the present invention and that modifications can be made therein without departing from the scope of the present invention as set forth in the claims. To particularly point out and distinctly claim the subject matter regarded as invention the following claims conclude this specification.

