---

title: Quiet load for motor testing
abstract: A device for imposing a torque load upon rotating machinery comprises a rotary unit and plural electromagnetic units. The rotary unit includes a shaft and conductive disks discretely fastened thereto. Each electromagnetic unit includes a bracket-shaped magnetic core and one or more ferromagnetic pieces discretely fastened thereto. The device's shaft is joined end-to-end to the motor's shaft, permitting integral axial rotation of the device's shaft, the disks and the motor's shaft. Each electromagnetic unit is placed so that the core “brackets” the two extreme disks, while each piece is between two disks. During rotation, a wire (coiled around each core) conducts current of selected amperage so as to generate a magnetic field of sufficient intensity that a magnetic flux circuit is formed through the stationary core and pieces and the rotating disks, resulting in a Lorentz force associated with the magnetic field and eddy currents engendered in the disks.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07592727&OS=07592727&RS=07592727
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07592727
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050801
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates to machines e.g. motors that include rotational members more particularly to methods and apparatuses for imposing torque loading upon a rotational member for purposes of conducting testing such as involving vibration e.g. acoustic vibration of a machine.

Vibration such as sound vibration e.g. that which produces noise is an important consideration in the operation of various types of machinery. The current methodologies for providing a torque load for vibration testing of machines such as motors are deficient in terms of induced load smoothness heat generation and vibration generation. The devices conventionally used for motor testing include Prony brakes water brakes generator loads and magnetic rheological devices.

It is desirable that a quiet load be used for vibration testing of a quiet motor so as to minimize or avoid contribution of vibration by the load to the overall vibration that is being measured with attribution to the motor. When a quiet motor is to be tested e.g. for an endurance test it is unsuitable to use a noisy load for testing as such would represent an abnormal operating condition for the motor. A quiet motor is designed to operate quietly in a quiet environment and the introduction of a noisy test component would be incongruous. A quiet motor as the term is used herein is a motor that is designed to generate a relatively low amount of vibration during operation of the motor. A quiet load as the term is used herein is an induced load that generates as little vibration as possible at all frequencies or all significant frequencies during induction of the load with respect to the motor during testing e.g. vibration testing of the motor. It is further desirable that the load be able to operate over wide ranges of speed and torque.

In view of the foregoing it is an object of the present invention to provide a methodology for imparting a torque load in such a way that such imparting does not compromise the accuracy of testing e.g. vibration testing of a machine such as a motor.

It is a further object of the present invention to provide such a methodology that is characterized by or admits of range versatility regarding speed and torque.

According to typical inventive practice an axle is fastened to a rotor of a test machine so that the axle and rotor share the same axis of rotation. The axle has fastened thereto one or more electrically conductive wheels. A magnetic field and an associated magnetic circuit are electromagnetically produced the magnetic circuit intersecting each electrically conductive wheel. When the rotor is caused to rotate electrical eddy currents occur in each electrically conductive wheel. A Lorentz force associated with the combination of the magnetic field and the electrical eddy currents exerts a counter rotational influence on the rotor.

The present invention is useful in the vibration testing of machines such as motors particularly those that are designed to be characterized by relative quietness viz. quiet motors. The present invention s methodology is practicable for acoustic testing or for various other testing purposes. The present invention provides a load without inducing any vibration that is not otherwise present. Featured by the present invention is the novel application of a non contact electromagnetic torque load to test electric motors. The inventive device s torque load uniquely describes an eddy current quiet load for a motor e.g. quiet motor wherein the scientific principle underlying the present invention bears some similarity to the scientific principle underlying a magnetic damper. The non contact nature of the inventively applied load avoids or substantially avoids the introduction of vibration into the test. According to typical inventive practice the applied torque load is variably controlled.

Among the advantages afforded by the present invention are the following smoothness of the applied torque load quietness of the applied torque load elimination or substantial reduction of introduction of vibration by the torque load into the machine being tested precision of variable control of the torque load directional independence e.g. reversibility of variable control of the torque load. As compared with conventional devices the inventive device is much smoother with respect to the torque load that can be applied to the motor being tested. The present invention s quiet load generates only steady torques generating no forces on the test machine rotor and generating no torques or forces on the test machine frame.

In accordance with typical embodiments of the present invention an inventive device comprises a rotating assembly and at least one stationary electromagnetic structure. More typically at least two stationary electromagnetic structures are included. The rotating assembly includes a rigid shaft and at least two electrically conductive disks that are separated from and parallel to each other and that are perpendicular to the shaft each electrically conductive disk being concentrically and fixedly attached to the shaft so as to be rotatable commensurately with the shaft. A housing is provided for the stationary electromagnetic structures. Each stationary electromagnetic structure includes a square bracket shaped shaped or shaped core member and at least one wedge shaped guidance member wherein the number of wedge shaped guidance members is one less than the number of electrically conductive disks. Each bracket shaped shaped or shaped core member is conceptually divisible into a vertical segment shaped I shaped main core section and two protrusive end core sections each horizontal segment shaped shaped . In each stationary electromagnetic structure each wedge shaped guidance member is fixedly attached to the main core section of the bracket shaped core member.

The stationary electromagnetic structures are positioned generally surroundingly and generally symmetrically according to frequent inventive practice with respect to the rotating assembly so that in each stationary electromagnetic structure the main core section of the bracket shaped core member in longitudinal orientation is parallel to the shaft and perpendicular to the electrically conductive disks each of the two protrusive end core sections of the bracket shaped core member in longitudinal orientation is perpendicular to the shaft and parallel to the electrically conductive disks each of the two protrusive end core sections of the bracket shaped core member is radially disposed with respect to the geometric rotational axis of the shaft each wedge shaped guidance member is radially disposed with outwardly increasing thickness with respect to the geometric rotational axis of the shaft the main core section of the bracket shaped member is situated near the rims of the electrically conductive disks each of the two protrusive end core sections of the bracket shaped core member is situated next to the outward faces of the two longitudinally extreme electrically conductive disks each wedge shaped guidance member is closely interposed between two adjacent electrically conductive disks.

For purposes of testing a motor the inventive device s shaft is coaxially and fixedly attached to the motor s rigid shaft the inventive device s shaft and the motor s shaft thereby effectively constituting a single rigid shaft having a single geometric axis of rotation. An electrical winding for conducting direct current is wound coiled about the main core section of the bracket shaped core member. When the motor s shaft and hence the inventive device s shaft is motivatively energized and electrical current is caused to flow through the electrical winding a closed magnetic flux path is disposed through the bracket shaped core the wedge shaped guidance block s and the rotating electrically conductive disks that is the magnetic flux flows in a closed loop through the stationary electromagnetic structure and through the conductive disks. As a result of the magnetic circuit established by the completely closed magnetic flux path electrical eddy currents develop in the electrically conductive disks. The eddy currents arise due to the rotation of the electrically conductive disks in combination with the intersection of the electrically conductive disks by the magnetic flux path. The inventive device s shaft and hence the motor s shaft develops a resistive torque load corresponding to the generation of Lorentz forces that are associated with the physical interaction of a the electrical eddy currents generated in the disks and b the magnetic field emanating from the combination of the electrical winding and the main core section about which the electrically winding is wound of the electromagnetic core s bracket shaped core member.

Other objects advantages and features of the present invention will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

Referring now to through inventive device comprises a rotational unit and at least one stationary unit . Rotational unit and stationary unit are separately shown in and respectively. Rotational unit includes rotational shaft and at least two electrically conductive disks . Each stationary unit includes a bracket shaped electromagnetic core and at least one wedge shaped guide block . For illustrative purposes only one stationary unit is shown in and however according to more typical inventive practice inventive device includes plural e.g. several or many stationary units circumferentially arranged such as exemplified in and .

Stationary units are shown in and to be arranged at approximately ninety degree angles and to be symmetrical with respect to geometric longitudinal rotational axis a of shaft . Inventive practice permits utilization of one or practically any plural number of stationary units . In each stationary unit the core and each guide block are constructed of ferromagnetic material such as iron or steel. Each stationary unit extends radially outward from shaft but without being in contact with shaft . As shown in shaft is rigidly connected to and is driven by motor shaft . Thus connected the inventive shaft effectively extends and is rotative along with the test motor s shaft . The inventive device s shaft and the test motor s shaft are axially connected in the direction of rotational axis a which is shared by both shaft and shaft .

Each centrally apertured circular disk is firmly mounted on shaft and rotates in conjunction with shaft which extends through the center hole of disk . The respective geometric centers c of the plural disks approximately lie in geometric axis a. Each disk is made of an electrically conductive material such as aluminum or copper. Disks are approximately parallel approximately congruous and approximately equally spaced apart from each other. To support high speed operation it may be preferred inventive practice to strengthen each disk by means of a high strength band made e.g. of steel or Kevlar situated on the outer rim of disk . Shaft and disks do not contact any non rotating components. As diagrammatically represented in through frame rigidly supports cores using fastening means such as an adhesive e.g. a polyester or epoxy or similar material having moderate strength and electrical insulating characteristics or one or more fasteners e.g. bolts that are made of plastic aluminum or another non magnetic material such as a non magnetic composite material. The entire inventive device is supported in a rather stiff housing such as frame which firmly maintains the positions of core and guide blocks via fasteners with respect to disks .

Inventive practice usually provides for the implementation of housing support structure for the stationary electromagnetic elements. In the light of the instant disclosure multifarious configurations and techniques for housing or supporting the stationary electromagnetic elements will be evident to the ordinarily skilled artisan. For instance according to many inventive embodiments a common frame joins all of the electromagnetic elements. As illustrated in and rotational unit is characterized by circular symmetry. Stationary units are radially disposed around shaft . The circularity of frame affords some compatibility with the circular symmetry of rotational unit . It is emphasized that frames and fasteners shown in through and are merely representative in highly diagrammatic fashion of the large variety of housing support systems that the ordinarily skilled artisan who reads the instant disclosure can bring to bear in practicing the present invention.

Notable is the absence of any bearing means for supporting the rotating assembly. The implementation of bearings such as bearings on shaft that are associated with frame would defeat an important feature of the present invention namely the complete lack of physical coupling between the rotor component which includes main shaft and rotational unit and the stator component which includes stationary units windings and frame . An important principle of the present invention is the application of a torque via the magnetic field in the aether action at a distance without the need for any contact forces. The inclusion of any bearing apparatus would create contact forces between the rotor and the stator thus transferring forces between the rotor and the stator via contact and possibly also generating forces due to irregular surface shapes. As the present invention is usually practiced the present invention s intent is that the rotor be supported on the rotating test object while the stator be placed in the proper proximity to the rotor and carefully aligned but without any physical contact with the rotor.

Each stationary unit includes one ferromagnetic bracket shaped core and plural two shown in and discrete ferromagnetic wedge shaped guide blocks . In each stationary unit the combination of a core and plural guide blocks describes a largely solid substantially rectilinear geometric shape wherein core mechanically supports guide blocks by non magnetic means such as through utilization with respect to each guide block of fastening means comprising either an adhesive material e.g. a polyester or epoxy material or a similar material having moderate strength and electrical insulating characteristics or one or more one or more fasteners e.g. one or more brackets attached to core that are made of plastic aluminum or another non magnetic material such as a non magnetic composite material. The term fastening means is broadly used herein to refer to any means that can be used for attaching joining affixing fastening connecting or holding together two or more objects including but not limited to any one of or any combination of devices such as nail screw bolt nut washer clamp clasp clip bracket peg pin staple rivet hook tie weld adhesive etc. As illustrated in bracket shaped core is conceptually divisible into three generally straight sections viz. a back longitudinal core section which defines an axis of symmetry that is parallel to axis a a top end core section which defines an axis of symmetry that is perpendicular to axis a and a bottom end core section which defines an axis of symmetry that is perpendicular to axis a .

Blocks are styled herein guide blocks because they serve as magnetic flux guides. That is blocks afford guidance with respect to the path of magnetic flux in the context of magnetic circuit M which represents the completely closed circuitous magnetic flux path. According to frequent inventive practice each guide block is characterized by a wedge shape having a trapezoidal nearly triangular cross sectional profile to spatially facilitate the radial distribution of guide blocks about axis a. When two or more guide blocks are associated with a core it is typical inventive practice that the guide blocks represent congruous segments that are aligned end to end so as to describe a combined geometric form having the same trapezoidal cross sectional profile. Each core has associated therewith an electrically conductive wire through which flows a current i. Wire includes a winding portion in which wire is wound or coiled circumferentially on back section of core .

When a current flow i is applied to core via wire in the manner and direction shown in and an upward magnetic flux is generated in back section of such core . As shown in the back core section and the coiled wire portion together represent an electromagnet that generates a magnetic flux . Magnetic flux is then guided leftward as shown through top section of core toward shaft . Magnetic flux then leaves top section of core in a downward direction passing through the first disk viz. top disk Magnetic flux is then guided down further through the upper guide block until it reaches the next second disk viz. middle disk Magnetic flux then passes downward through middle disk and then continues downward to and through the next guide block viz. lower guide block Magnetic flux then reaches and passes through the next third disk viz. bottom disk Magnetic flux is then guided rightward as shown through bottom section of core and toward back section of core whereupon magnetic flux reaches and proceeds upward through back section of core thereby closing the magnetic flux path so as to form a magnetic circuit M. Application of current i to winding causes magnetic flux to return to core from bottom disk and turn rightward and then upward thereby effecting closure of the path of magnetic flux . Current i is applied continuously during the time that inventive device is in operation. Steady magnetic flux exists as long as steady current i is flowing in winding . The description in this paragraph disregards all fringing magnetic flux as being negligible.

Magnetic flux passes through each disk in a corresponding region . The region where magnetic flux passes through each disk is indicated in via a solid outline. The total surface area of regions which is the sum of the individual surfaces areas of regions increases in accordance with the number of cores that the inventive device includes. That is the more cores that are utilized the greater is the overall surface area of each disk through which magnetic flux passes. In each disk eddy currents e are created at the corresponding region the location of through passage of magnetic flux . Eddy currents e occur in each disk as a consequence of the rotation of disk in synchronism with the intersection thereof of magnetic flux . The interaction of the eddy currents e with the magnetic field causes a Lorentz force F. Because of the geometrical configuration of the inventive system this Lorentz force F is manifested as a torque t developed on the disk in a direction such as to oppose the rotation r of shaft . Torque t will oppose be counter rotational with respect to shaft rotation r regardless of whether shaft rotation r is clockwise or counterclockwise. With some approximation torque t will be directly proportional to the rotational speed i.e. the speed of rotation r of shaft . No torque t whatsoever will be produced when shaft is at a standstill or in other words when the rotational speed equals zero. For this reason inventive practice will generally not be useful for determining the ability of the motor to start under load.

If the current i in the portion windings of wire is held constant the load torque t applied to shaft will rise with the rotational speed of shaft . In some applications the inventive practitioner may desire that torque t be maintained at a constant value while passing from a first non zero rotational speed of shaft to a second higher rotational speed of shaft . Holding torque t constant requires that the current i in the portion wire windings be appropriately decreased as the rotational speed of shaft increases. If the inventive system is operating at one load level and it is desired to increase the load to a higher level at the same rotational speed the current i in the portion wire windings must be increased. The limiting loading rate is largely controlled by the voltage rating of power supply shown in and by the inductance and resistance of the portion wire windings.

The operation of inventive device is somewhat similar in principle to that of the magnetic motion damper also referred to simply as a magnetic damper that is found in some scientific balances and similar apparatus. In accordance with previously known applications of the magnetic damper type the magnetic field is constant and usually is supplied by a permanent magnet. In contrast in accordance with typical embodiments of the present invention the magnetic field B is specifically supplied by an electromagnet and the current i in the electromagnet is controlled in order to achieve control over the developed torque t.

As schematically illustrated in test motor shaft is included in or associated with test motor . Controller is electrically connected to power supply e.g. a battery or other device providing direct current and rotational speed sensor . The rotational speed of motor shaft and hence of inventive shaft can be controlled either through existing mechanism included in or associated with test motor or through controller so as to be dedicated to control of the entire load testing procedure. Inventive shaft and motor shaft are fixedly structurally connected in the direction of rotational axis a and rotate together as an integral unitary shaft. Inventive practice will normally necessitate utilization of a rotational speed sensor for sensing the rotational speed of motor shaft and hence of inventive shaft . Rotational speed sensor electrically connected to inventive shaft or motor shaft communicates with controller in order that controller can set a current i to produce a given torque t. As the rotational speed changes the current i will in most cases need to be continuously adjusted to produce the required torque time characteristics.

As shown in and each space between two guide blocks or between a guide block and a core end section or represents a slot that accommodates a disk so as to leave two air gaps . In order to minimize the required magnetomotive force mmf it is preferable to minimize the air gaps . By air gap is meant herein a space between a guide block and the non contactingly abutting surface of an adjacent disk or a space between a core end section or and the non contactingly abutting surface of an adjacent disk . In order to minimize the reluctance of the magnetic circuit M and therefore the associated magnetomotive force mmf and hence current i inventive practice frequently prefers a shortening of the magnetic circuit M insofar as is reasonably possible. Such reduction or minimization of the length of magnetic circuit M can be achieved by doing one or more of the following to the extent that it is suitably practicable spacing disks closer together on shaft decreasing the length in the direction of axis a of guide blocks decreasing the clearance width of air gaps increasing the cross sectional area of main core section of core increasing the cross sectional area of end core sections and of core increasing the cross sectional area i.e. the mathematical area of region of guide blocks increasing the number of turns of wire in winding portion provided that there is room to do so .

It may be useful in inventive practice particularly in situations in which an inventive device is being custom designed to be built for a specific test to perform lateral vibration analyses on the rotor and on the complete system after the inventive design is considered completed. In the absence of a forced vibration analysis all that can be done in this regard is to extract the natural frequencies and assure that there are none in the intended operating range. If there is significant lateral vibration this can tilt disks out of plane causing closure of air gaps and concomitant metal to metal contact between disks and guidance blocks and or between disks and upper and lower core end sections and . This type of failure is unacceptable and generally demands that the inventive system be designed anew. The present invention can thus be practiced in the manner of designing an inventive device to suit a specific test machine or purpose. The present invention can also be practiced in the manner of providing an inventive device to suit various test machines and purposes. For instance many inventive device embodiments can be associated with whatever machine needs to be tested generally in such cases the inventive practitioner accepts the rotor dynamics that exist for any such combination of inventive device and test machine.

Reference is now made to which is illustrative of inventive embodiments that involve implementation of a single electrically conductive disk and that hence obviate implementation of any guide blocks . Although three disks are shown in and it is to be understood that an inventive device can be embodied to include a single disk or any plural number of disks . Inventive device shown in includes a single disk nevertheless the inclusion of at least two disks represents generally much preferred inventive practice. The inventive single disk configuration shown in while possible in accordance with inventive principles will usually be highly impractical insofar as it will require enormous current in the windings to develop sufficient torque t unless the rotor motor shaft and hence inventive shaft is operating at a very high speed. Note that similar inventive principles obtain for inventive device in that a magnetic field B oriented generally parallel to the length of back core section is associated with the combination of circumferential winding portion and back core section and in that magnetic circuit of flux is created through the combination of core and one disk as distinguished from typical inventive embodiments involving implementation of plural disks wherein a magnetic circuit of flux is created through the combination of core at least two disks and at least one guide block .

In the light of the instant disclosure the ordinarily skilled artisan will be capable of practicing the present invention with desired effect by selectively varying among parameters including the following i diameter of shaft ii length of shaft iii number of disks iv material of disk v diameter of disk thickness of disk vi geometrical shape of core vii number of turns of wire on each winding portion number of cores with a winding portion on each core operating current i geometrical shape of each guide block air gap widths or clearances within contiguous pairs of guide blocks and disks air gap widths or clearances within contiguous pairs of core end sections or and disks . These and other factors are available to the inventive practitioner for adjustment as needed to satisfy particular design requirements. Another consideration is that it may become necessary in inventive practice to water cool disks however water cooling of disks is to be avoided if at all possible as it would tend to complicate inventive practice. The desirability of avoiding such water cooling would tend to militate in favor of a greater number of disks sharing a reduced magnetic field that requires less winding current and therefore has less Ohmic losses .

According to one approach to fabricating an inventive device s stationary unit a coil is wound around a core member and the combination thereof is vacuum impregnated in epoxy. Next the guide members are positioned relative to the wound core member and epoxy is applied to hold the guide members in place. Then the entire inventive stationary unit assembly is dipped in epoxy. Subsequently epoxy can be used for adhering or affixing the inventive stationary unit assembly with respect to a housing support structure . In the light of the instant disclosure the ordinarily skilled artisan will appreciate the various methods and techniques for making a test device in accordance with the present invention.

The present invention which is disclosed herein is not to be limited by the embodiments described or illustrated herein which are given by way of example and not of limitation. Other embodiments of the present invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from a consideration of the instant disclosure or from practice of the present invention. Various omissions modifications and changes to the principles disclosed herein may be made by one skilled in the art without departing from the true scope and spirit of the present invention which is indicated by the following claims.

