---

title: Methods and systems for providing remote file structure access on an imaging device
abstract: Aspects of the present invention relate to systems, methods and devices for providing remote file structure data access to an imaging device user interface. Some aspects relate to methods and systems wherein a request for file structure data is sent from an imaging device (IDev) to a remote computing device (RCD) that is capable of retrieving and converting file structure data. Some aspects relate to reading the file structure data of a remote resource and converting that file structure data to a format that is compatible with an IDev user interface (UI). The converted file structure data may then be received by the IDev and displayed at the IDev UI.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08213034&OS=08213034&RS=08213034
owner: Sharp Laboratories of America, Inc.
number: 08213034
owner_city: Camas
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050729
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 962 248 entitled Methods and Systems for Imaging Device Remote Application Interaction filed on Oct. 8 2004 this application is also a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 961 793 entitled Methods and Systems for Imaging Device Remote Form Management filed on Oct. 8 2004 this application is also a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 961 911 entitled Methods and Systems for Imaging Device Remote Location Functions filed on Oct. 8 2004 this application is also a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 961 594 entitled Methods and Systems for Imaging Device Remote document Management filed on Oct. 8 2004 and this application is also a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 962 103 entitled Methods and Systems for Imaging Device Document Translation filed on Oct. 8 2004 this application also claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 704 066 entitled Methods and Systems for Imaging Device Applications filed Jul. 28 2005.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise systems methods and devices for providing remote file structure data on an imaging device user interface.

Imaging devices such as printers copiers scanners and fax machines can have a wide array of functions and capabilities to fit specific uses or combinations of uses. Imaging devices often take the form of a multi function peripheral device MFP that combines the functions of two or more of the traditionally separated imaging devices. An MFP may combine any number of imaging devices but typically comprises the functions of a printer scanner copier and fax machine.

Some imaging devices may contain computing resources for data storage and processing such as processors hard disk drives memory and other devices. As imaging devices add more features and functions they become more costly and complex.

More complex imaging devices and MFPs may comprise network connectivity to provide communication with other computing devices such as personal computers other imaging devices network servers and other apparatus. This connectivity allows the imaging device to utilize off board resources that are available on a connected network.

Imaging devices typically have a user input panel with an array of buttons knobs and other user input devices. Some devices also have a display panel which can be for display only or can be a touch panel display that enables user input directly on the display.

Devices with touch panel displays or displays with buttons arranged in cooperation with the display can display menu data that may be selected by user input. This menu data is typically driven by an on board server module within the imaging device.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise systems methods and devices for interacting with a remote computing device from an imaging device. These embodiments comprise remote computing devices configured to communicate with imaging devices imaging devices configured to communicate with remote computing devices and systems comprising various combinations of remote computing devices in communication with imaging devices.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise methods and systems for providing remote file structure access on an imaging device.

The foregoing and other objectives features and advantages of the invention will be more readily understood upon consideration of the following detailed description of the invention taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

Embodiments of the present invention will be best understood by reference to the drawings wherein like parts are designated by like numerals throughout. The figures listed above are expressly incorporated as part of this detailed description.

It will be readily understood that the components of the present invention as generally described and illustrated in the figures herein could be arranged and designed in a wide variety of different configurations. Thus the following more detailed description of the embodiments of the methods and systems of the present invention is not intended to limit the scope of the invention but it is merely representative of the presently preferred embodiments of the invention.

Elements of embodiments of the present invention may be embodied in hardware firmware and or software. While exemplary embodiments revealed herein may only describe one of these forms it is to be understood that one skilled in the art would be able to effectuate these elements in any of these forms while resting within the scope of the present invention.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise interfaces and architecture that integrate imaging devices with remote computing device applications and environments to provide solutions that may not be possible solely with an imaging device alone. Some embodiments comprise an infrastructure and set of interfaces that allow applications on a network to programmatically control imaging device functions and interact with a user through an imaging device input panel. Software functions that are not practical within the imaging device can be performed on the server but are accessible from the imaging device.

For the purposes of this specification and claims an imaging device IDev may be described as a device that performs an imaging function. Imaging functions comprise scanning printing copying image transmission sending and receiving image conversion and other functions. Exemplary imaging devices comprise printers copiers facsimile machines scanners computing devices that transmit convert or process images and other devices. An IDev may also perform multiple imaging functions. For example and not by way of limitation a multi function peripheral device MFP which typically has the capability to perform a plurality of functions comprising a printer scanner copier and or a facsimile machine or image transmitter receiver is a type of imaging device. Other MFP imaging devices may comprise other combinations of functions and still qualify as an IDev.

For the purposes of this specification and claims a remote computing device RCD is a device capable of processing data and communicating with other devices through a communications link. An RCD is a remote device because it requires a communications link such as a network connection a telephone line a serial cable or some other wired or wireless link to communicate with other devices such as an imaging device. Some exemplary RCDs are network servers networked computers and other processing and storage devices that have communications links.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . These embodiments comprise an imaging device IDev that may be a multi function peripheral device MFP or a single function device. The imaging device further comprises a user interface UI panel which may comprise input buttons and a display device or may comprise a touch panel system with or without buttons . User input and display may also be performed through a separate UI device which may be connected to the imaging device by a communication link such as a USB connection a network cable a wireless connection or some other communications link. UI device may comprise an input device such as a keyboard or buttons as well as a display device which may also be a touch screen panel. UI device may also comprise an interface for transfer of instructions that are input to the device from a remote input device. This form of UI device may comprise memory sticks USB memory cards and other storage devices that may be configured to store input for transfer to an imaging device.

These embodiments further comprise a remote computing device RCD that is linked to the imaging device via a communications link such as a network connection. This network connection may be a typical wired connection or a wireless link.

Embodiments of the present invention may provide menu data from the RCD to the imaging device UI panel or remote panel via the network connection . Once this menu data is fed to the imaging device an UI panel on the imaging device may be used to interact with applications that run on the remote computing device . User input received from UI panels may be returned directly to the remote computing device .

A Web Service is a software application identified by a Uniform Resource Identifier URI whose interfaces and binding are capable of being defined described and discovered by Extensible Markup Language XML artifacts and supports direct interactions with other software applications using XML based messages via Internet based protocols.

An application on the remote computing device may use one or more Web Services to control various features in the imaging device such as enabling disabling or setting device values or controlling device functions access control and usage.

Embodiments of the present invention allow network applications running on remote computing devices to interact with the user of the imaging device through the imaging device I O panel. These embodiments allow imaging device user interface UI control i.e. touch panel button display by applications. Some embodiments may also integrate custom display screens or menus with the native imaging device UI. Embodiments may hand off control of imaging device functions between standard operation modes performed on the imaging device in response to user input to an imaging device UI and open systems modes that utilize network resources such as applications on RCDs through user input at the imaging device UI.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise network based applications that have full control over the imaging device UI to display text and graphics in any format. In these embodiments the application can programmatically display buttons textboxes graphics etc. in any layout desired.

In some embodiments the UI layout is easy to program using a standard language such as a markup language. These languages comprise Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML Wireless Markup Language WML Extensible Hypertext Markup Language XHTML and other languages.

In some embodiments of the present invention a remote computing device application or server application is able to request a keyboard UI to be displayed on the imaging device display . In some embodiments this functionality is available on the imaging device and does not need to be recreated by remote computing device applications. In some embodiments the remote computing device may define the keyboard prompt and default values. These embodiments may comprise a remote computing device that is able to rename imaging device UI buttons such as the OK and Cancel buttons as well as define additional buttons.

In some embodiments menu templates may be served to the imaging device UI by the imaging device itself or from a remote computing device .

Some embodiments of the present invention may comprise a remote computing device application that is registered as the External Authorization server. The External Authorization application may control access to the imaging device and may have top level control of the UI. UI control may be given to this application in the same manner that control is given to an internal auditor.

In these embodiments when an imaging device system boots it checks to see if an External Authorization application is registered. If so the imaging device is placed in disabled mode and the application is contacted to take control of the UI. If the External Authorization server is not available an error message may be displayed and the device may remain disabled. The imaging device may periodically try to contact the External Authorization server until it is available. Table 1 below describes what entity has control of the UI in an exemplary embodiment when the device is in a disabled state.

In embodiments of the present invention access to the custom UI panels of imaging devices may vary from application to application. Some solutions such as Document Management integration may wish to leverage the native Image Send screens but display some custom UI s to gather additional information about a scan job. Other solutions like custom printing applications may be accessed from a separate mode than the native functions.

In order to accommodate the diversified needs of these solutions applications embodiments may support multiple integration points for UI control. These integration points are based on a user action trigger for which applications may register. In some embodiments applications may be registered with target devices so that the device knows that when trigger A occurs on the front panel to contact remote computing device B for instructions. In exemplary embodiments applications may be integrated with an imaging device at any of several trigger points.

Remote computing devices may be registered to a specific function and contacted when that function s hardware key is pressed e.g. Image Send on the imaging device UI. Any UI information provided by the remote computing device may be displayed instead of the standard function screens native to the imaging device. This trigger may be used for applications that wish to replace the existing functions with completely custom UI s such as an alternative scan solution or a specialized display such as a Section 508 compatible screen or other specialized need interface that may have large buttons or other accommodations.

In some embodiments each function on the imaging device may have a menu on the touch screen that remote computing devices such as servers can register. This enables solutions applications to provide custom content and still use some of the standard functionality provided by the imaging device. When a button assigned to a custom application is selected a menu will be displayed with the solutions registered to that function. Users may select the desired solution and the remote computing device will be contacted for instructions.

In some embodiments a stand alone RCD mode that provides remote computing device application access can be accessed from the job queue portion of the UI that is displayed on every screen. This trigger point may be used for applications that do not fit within one of the standard device functions such as custom printing solutions on an imaging device. When the RCD menu is selected a menu will be displayed with the solutions applications registered to the generic RCD mode. Users will select the desired solution and the remote computing device will be contacted for instructions.

In some embodiments of the present invention when an imaging device is enabled additional hardware keys may be used to manage the device. Hardware key assignments for an exemplary embodiment are shown in table 2.

In some embodiments in addition to the key for logout a timeout period may be implemented. Some embodiments also comprise an auto clear setting that can be configured for a given period of time such as 10 to 240 seconds or disabled . In these embodiments when there is no activity for the time configured in auto clear the device may automatically return to disabled mode and attempt to contact a remote computing device to retake control of the UI.

Depending on a particular solution a remote computing device application may have full or only partial control of the imaging device UI and a particular imaging job. In some embodiments partial control may include cases where a remote computing device is monitoring clicks but native modes are responsible for the UI interaction and controlling the job. Partial control may also include cases where the remote computing device application is integrated with a native mode UI trigger function custom menu . In these embodiments the imaging device may handle all error and jam notifications with only a notification sent to the relevant remote computing device application.

For some embodiments in cases where the remote computing device application has full control over the UI and the job error and jam notifications may be handled differently depending on the type of error. For recoverable errors a notification may be sent to the remote computing device application and the application may be responsible for displaying messages and resolving the error. For non recoverable errors the imaging device and RCD mode may interact to gracefully handle the error condition e.g. provide user with instructions for clearing jam .

In some embodiments at different points throughout an imaging job several applications may need control over an imaging device including but not limited to an External Authorization application a standard RCD application an imaging device native mode and other applications. The following section describes for an exemplary embodiment the various steps in an exemplary job the entities that may have control during each step and what type of control may be allowed.

Step 1 User provides credentials to access the device at the device UI. This step may be controlled by a remote computing device such as an External Authorization application or by Internal Accounting native mode in the imaging device itself. At the end of this step the device is enabled. The External Authorization application may also specify default parameters or disable specific job parameters e.g. default file format is PDF but user may change color mode is set to B W and user may not change .

Step 2 User sets parameters for the job using one of the native imaging device modes or a standard RCD application. At the end of this step the user makes an input to initiate the job. When the input is made an optional notification may be sent to the standard RCD application which can then change job parameters if desired. An e mail application is one example of an application that may request notification when the user input is made. A user may use native Image Send screens or other input to select scan options and choose e mail recipients. A user may then select a custom application button and choose the scan to e mail option from the menu. The e mail application may then display custom screens for the user to set permissions for the file. Once a user places the original document s on the scanner and initiates the process the e mail application may capture the destination parameters set by the user and change the target destination to the e mail application FTP server. The e mail application may then receive the file apply the appropriate permissions and send to the e mail recipients selected by the user. A remote computing device application may also want to retake control of the UI at this point if as in some embodiments the application generates thumbnails of the scanned images and displays them to the user for verification.

Step 3 Once the job is initiated the imaging device is responsible for scanning or RIPing the job and spooling it to the HDD. If the imaging device is configured to authorize jobs with an external authorization application it may send a click report to the application and wait for instructions. The external authorization application may enable the job for sending printing cancel the job or change job parameters and then enable . As an example a rules based printing application may wish to change job parameters after it receives a click report. Some rules based printing applications support rules based printing and scanning that can limit what each user is allowed to do based on the time of day the destination or many other parameters. For example only users in the marketing group may be able to scan high quality color images. If a user from another group selects color and 600 dpi a rules based application may change the parameters to color and 200 dpi. At the end of this step the job should either be authorized or canceled.

Step 4 In some embodiments this may be an optional step where the standard RCD application in step 2 may have specified the destination as a HDD for temporary storage. This step may also be used in some embodiments by a Java application running on the imaging device. For example a government office may have a custom encryption application running on the device that takes the scanned document encrypts it and then requests the imaging device to send it to the target destination selected by the user in step 2. In some embodiments it may be beneficial to send a notification to the external authorization application after this step because the imaging device does not know how long the file will be on the HDD or what the application is going to do with it and after the send print step.

Step 5 In the final step the file is actually output. In typical embodiments the file is either sent over the network or printed locally. At the end of this step a notification that the job was successfully completed should be sent to the external authorization application and optionally to the standard RCD application.

The API s may be used to allow a remote computing device application to control access to an imaging device for vend applications and to manage the device from a remote location.

In some embodiments of the present invention a Device Control and Vend API allows applications to enable and disable access to the device and track click counts. The Device Control and Vend API may provide an RCD with the following controls 

Enable disable device of function this may allow an RCD to enable or disable access to the device as a whole or by function to enforce individual user privileges. In some exemplary embodiments the functions listed in Table 3 may be selectively enabled or disabled by an application.

Report clicks used at the end of a successful job the clicks used may be reported back to an RCD including 

Debit mode in these embodiments when an application enables the device it may specify if the current job requires authorization. If so the job will be spooled to memory and click information e.g. as defined in Table 4 will be sent to an RCD. An RCD will then notify the device if the job should be deleted or output sent. At this point the application also has the option of changing job parameters. If the application does not require authorization the job will continue as normal and a click report will be sent at the end of the job.

Print job accounting in these embodiments an RCD may wish to monitor print jobs along with walk up functions. For print job accounting an IDev may monitor all incoming print jobs and send accounting data in the PJL header to an RCD for verification before printing the job. The RCD will evaluate the accounting data or lack thereof and inform the IDev to continue with or cancel the job.

Report on unidentified jobs in these embodiments an RCD may also wish to monitor print jobs that it cannot associate to a specific user such as device reports and incoming fax jobs. The RCD can register to receive click counts for all unidentified jobs so that it may bill them to a general account.

In some embodiments of the present invention a Device Management API allows a network application to remotely setup and manage the imaging device. In exemplary embodiments the Device Management API may provide an RCD with the following controls 

The above groupings are provided only as an exemplary embodiment detailing which settings should be included. In some embodiments actual API s should be grouped by functional areas since there may be overlap between Key Operator settings and web page settings.

In some embodiments an Internal Accounting API may allow a remote computing device application to configure internal accounting and report click counts. In some exemplary embodiments an Internal Accounting API may include 

Some embodiments of the present invention may comprise a Font and Form Management API which allows an RCD application to remotely download and manage fonts and forms in mass storage. In some exemplary embodiments a Font and Form Management API may provide a remote computing device with the following controls 

In some embodiments of the present invention a Firmware Management API may allow a remote computing device or network application to remotely download and manage the imaging device firmware. In some exemplary embodiments a Firmware Management API may provide a remote computing device e.g. a server with the following controls 

In some embodiments of the present invention device function API s allow a remote computing device application to use existing imaging device functionality to provide new custom solutions.

In some embodiments an Image Send API may provide the remote computing device application with the following controls 

In some embodiments a remote computing device can change the default values on the imaging device or the values for the current job. For the current job the remote computing device may also specify if scan parameters may be modified by the user or not. If one remote computing device application e.g. Access Control specifies that a parameter cannot be changed and then a second application e.g. Document Management tries to set the parameter a notification may be sent to the second application and the setting will not be changed.

In some embodiments print jobs may be submitted by remote computing device applications using standard printing channels. In some exemplary embodiments a Print API may provide a remote computing device with the following additional control 

In some embodiments of the present invention a Copy API may provide a remote computing device with the following exemplary controls 

In some embodiments a remote computing device can change the default values on the imaging device or the values for the current job. For the current job the remote computing device may also specify if copy parameters may be modified by the user or not.

In some embodiments of the present invention a Document Filing API may provide a remote computing device with the following exemplary controls 

Allowing external applications to control an imaging device opens up the imaging device to new security vulnerabilities. In embodiments of the present invention that provide some security measures the following exemplary items are security concerns that may be addressed by the remote computing device interface.

Access to remote computing device interfaces may be limited to valid applications. Embodiments provide extensive access and control of the imaging device which poses a significant security risk. The interface of these embodiments may be protected from access by attackers while maintaining ease of setup and use for valid solutions.

Confidential data user credentials and job data may be protected during network transfer. User credentials and job data may be secured during network transfer to ensure that it cannot be stolen an intruder cannot monitor device activity and a man in the middle attack cannot change messages. Imaging devices may support Secure Sockets Layer SSL and other connections to ensure data is safe while being communicated between the imaging device and remote computing device applications.

Administrators may have the ability to lock down imaging device access. For users with strict security policies administrators may have the ability to disable access by remote computing devices or limit access to specific applications. Administrators may have an option to register the limited applications that they wish to access the imaging device interfaces.

Remote computing device applications may ensure the imaging device is not being spoofed. The remote computing device may be able to authenticate an imaging device that it is contract with it to ensure an intruder cannot imitate the imaging device to collect network configuration and password information monitor file folder structures of a document management system or spoof security settings and DSK status of the imaging device.

A remote computing device may ensure that the server is not being spoofed. The imaging device must be able to authenticate all remote computing devices that it is in contact with to ensure that an intruder is not spoofing the remote computing device s IP address. By pretending to be the remote computing device an intruder could steal user credentials redirect scanned documents change device settings or firmware or bring down the access control system either to provide access to unauthorized users or initiate a denial of service attack for valid users .

Access control vend applications may not be compromised when a remote computing device is unavailable. When the remote computing device is unavailable it may not be acceptable to provide open access to the device. If the remote computing device is unavailable at startup or becomes unavailable at anytime e.g. someone disconnects network cable the imaging device may immediately be disabled and an error message displayed.

An administrator may be able to adjust a security level based on company and application requirements. Security requirements can have a large impact on the time it takes to develop a remote computing device application and the resources required to implement the solution. Users using some embodiments may range from a small business with one imaging device no IT staff and a simple scan or print application to a large government office using access control and audit trails to track all device activity. The security measures used to protect imaging device interfaces may be adjustable by the administrator to match the target environment.

The imaging device and remote computing device applications may be able to hand off user credentials. Users may be prompted to login at multiple points throughout a job. For example an access control application or accounting application may control total device access the imaging device may have user authentication enabled for Image Send and a document management application may require user login before showing a folder list. In many environments all of these applications will use a common user database. In some embodiments it is therefore desirable for the applications to pass user credentials to each other so that each one does not have to repeat the authentication process.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . These embodiments comprise an imaging device only which is configured to interact with a remote computing device such as a server through a communications link. The imaging device comprises a user interface which comprises a user input device such as a keypad one or more buttons knobs or switches or a touch screen panel and a display which may comprise user input device in the form of a touch screen panel.

Imaging device will typically be capable of performing one or more imaging functions including but not limited to scanning printing copying facsimile transmission sending and receiving and others.

These embodiments further comprise a communications link which may be a wired connection as shown in comprising a network cable a Universal Serial Bus USB cable a serial cable a parallel cable a powerline communication connection such as a HomePlug connection or other wired connections. Alternatively the communications link may comprise a wireless connection such as an IEEE 802.11 b compliant connection a Bluetooth connection an Infrared Data Association IrDA connection or some other wireless connection.

The operation of some imaging device embodiments may be explained with reference to . In these embodiments menu data is received from a remote computing device not shown in which is connected to the imaging device via the communication link through a wired or wireless connection. This menu data is then displayed on the imaging device user interface display . This display of remote menu data is intended to prompt a user to make an input on the user interface input device .

Imaging devices of these embodiments are further configured to accept input from a user in response to a display of remote menu data and communicate that user input to a remote computing device. In some embodiments this user input data will be processed by a remote computing device. This may comprise running an application on the remote computing device. This processing may also comprise accessing and communicating data that is stored on the remote computing device.

The imaging devices of these embodiments are further configured to receive data resulting from processing the user input data. This may comprise data generated by an application running on the remote computing device in response to the user input. The imaging device may also receive data that was stored on a remote computing device such as a file server in response to processing the user input.

Once the imaging device has received the processed data the imaging device may perform a native function in response to the data or using the data. For example and not be way of limitation the imaging device may print a document that was stored on the remote computing device and modified on the remote computing device according to the user input. As another non limiting example the imaging device may active or enable functions i.e. scanning copying printing fax transmission on the imaging device in response to the receipt of processed data.

Some more specific imaging device embodiments may be explained with reference to . In these embodiments the imaging device is configured to receive menu data formatted in a markup language from a remote computing device. The communication link by which the menu data is communicated may be established and maintained using a Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP . The markup language may comprise terms from Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML Wireless Markup Language WML Extensible Hypertext Markup Language XHTML and or other languages.

Once the menu data is received it may be displayed on the imaging device user interface display . As in previously described embodiments the menu data is typically intended to prompt user input on imaging device user interface . Display of the remotely stored menu data may be accomplished with a browser application that is native to the imaging device .

In these embodiments the imaging device is further configured to route user input received though its user interface to a remote computing device. The remote computing device that receives the user input may then run an application or otherwise process the user input and return the results of the processing to the imaging device . Accordingly the imaging device is further configured to receive processed data from a remote computing device. In some embodiments the imaging device may perform one or more functions in response to the receipt of processed data.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be explained with reference to . These embodiments comprise a remote computing device RCD which has a communications link . Communications link may be a wired connection as shown in comprising a network cable a Universal Serial Bus USB cable a serial cable a parallel cable a powerline communication connection such as a HomePlug connection or other wired connections. Alternatively the communications link may comprise a wireless connection such as an IEEE 802.11 b compliant connection a Bluetooth connection an Infrared connection such as those defined in the Infrared Data Association IrDA standard or some other wireless connection. In some embodiments RCD may further comprise a data storage device which is typically a hard drive but may also be an optical drive device such as an array of compact disk drives flash memory or some other storage device.

Embodiments of RCD may be further described with reference to . In these embodiments RCD comprises a processor for processing data and running programs such as operating systems and applications. RCD may further comprise memory which may be in the form of Random Access Memory RAM and Read Only Memory ROM . Generally any applications processed by processor will be loaded into memory . RCD may further comprise a network interface which allows RCD to communicate with other devices such as an imaging device . In some embodiments RCD may also comprise a user interface but this is not required in many embodiments. Storage may be used to store applications and data that may be accessed by an imaging device of embodiments of the present invention. Processor memory storage network interface and optionally user interface are typically linked by a system bus to enable data transfer between each component. Communications link may couple the RCD to other devices via network interface .

In some embodiments described with reference to an RCD may comprise menu data stored on storage device or in memory . This menu data may be configured for display on an imaging device user interface . Menu data may be stored in many formats and configurations. In some embodiments menu data may take the form of terms expressed with a markup language. The markup language may comprise terms from Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML Wireless Markup Language WML Extensible Hypertext Markup Language XHTML and or other languages. In these embodiments menu data may be sent through a communications link to an imaging device . Accordingly menu data configured for display on an imaging device is stored on RCD .

An RCD of some embodiments will be further configured to receive user input obtained through the user interface of an imaging device and transferred to the RCD over communications links . Once this input data is received at an RCD the input data may be processed . This processing may comprise conversion of the data to a new format execution of commands contained within the data or some other process. Once the input data has been processed the processed output may be sent back to the imaging device where the processed output may be used in an imaging device process or function.

In some embodiments as described with reference to an RCD may send menu data configured for an imaging device display using a markup language. The markup language menu data is then received at the imaging device and displayed to a user. Typically this will prompt the user to enter an input on the imaging device user interface . This user input will then be sent by the imaging device to the RCD . The RCD will then receive the input data prompted by the display of the menu data on the imaging device . Once received the input data may be processed on the RCD . Processing may comprise the selection recordation and or modification of a form document or other data stored on RCD the authorization of a user identified by the user input the translation of a document input by the user generation of a map or other directions related to user input or some other process or function. After this processing the RCD may send the results of the processing to the imaging device .

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . These embodiments comprise at least one RCD and a plurality of imaging devices . In these embodiments at least one of the imaging devices comprises a user interface with a display and user input panel that is integral with the display i.e. touch screen or a separate input unit. RCD is connected to imaging devices by a communications link and network to enable data transmission between RCD and imaging devices 

In these embodiments menu data is stored on RCD and sent to at least one of the imaging devices where the menu data is displayed on a user interface. Any of Imaging devices that receive the menu data are configured to accept and transmit user input to an RCD . Once the user input data is received at the RCD the data may be processed as discussed in previously described embodiments. The result of processing may then be sent back to any combination of the imaging devices 

In these embodiments a single RCD may be used to provide processing power resources and functionality to a plurality of imaging devices without reproducing these resources in each imaging device. In some embodiments data generated by input on one imaging device may be directed to another imaging device for processed data output or final processing.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . In these embodiments an imaging device IDev comprises a user interface which is capable of receiving user input and displaying data to a user. The user interface will typically comprise a display often in the form of a touch panel. The display may be used to display data to a user. This data may comprise menu data to prompt for a user selection or data entry such as a user ID and password form selection or some other input. The imaging device has a communication link which may comprise a typical computer network connection a serial cable or some other wired or wireless communication link as described in other embodiments. The communication link may connect the imaging device to a remote computing device RCD such as a server. The RCD may be used to store documents such as forms and other data and make that data accessible from the imaging device . The RCD may also execute applications that interact with or receive input from the imaging device and its user interface . In some embodiments a database may be linked to the imaging device and or an RCD . In some embodiments an RCD or database may be connected to an IDev over a wide area network such as the internet .

Embodiments of the present invention comprise systems and methods for providing access to the file structure of a remote computing device through an imaging device user interface UI thereby enabling the IDev to push files to remote resource such as servers or pull files from remote resources. Some exemplary embodiments may be described with reference to wherein a remote computing device comprises a storage device with files stored thereon. In a typical system the files will be stored using an operating system that prescribes a specific file structure. Some operating systems such as some Microsoft Windows systems may use a FAT32 system or an NTFS system as described in Microsoft s Windows SDK and other documentation known in the industry. Apple computers may use a MAC OS and other computing devices may use a UNIX system or some other system. Generally these systems use a graphical user interface GUI through which the file structure is displayed to a user as a series of nested file folders. This structure may also be displayed through a textual interface such as was commonly used in older disk operating system based DOS based systems. While these systems work well to manage files on computing devices running these operating systems the file structure can be difficult to export to other systems particularly systems with display and interface restrictions such as typical imaging devices.

File structure data may comprise any data that relates to the identification and organization of any data that is stored for use on a computing device. Typically data is stored as files that are organized into folders that are related in a tree type relational structure. However this is generally just an user interface representation of the actual data organization used by the computing device. The real data is stored as binary numbers that are accumulated into bytes and clusters that may be spread across multiple hard drive locations and memory addresses. The term File structure data may comprise data relating to the actual structure used by the computing device to organize files or the interface representation of those files in a tree type format.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise systems and methods that allow an imaging device user to select files from a remote computing device through the imaging device user interface UI . Some of these embodiments comprise scan to folder scan to server scan to document management system scan to DMS print from file form fill and many other functions. For these and other functions it is often convenient to select a file that is stored on a remote computing device RCD through the imaging device UI.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . These embodiments comprise systems and methods for reading the file structure of a remote computing device RCD and converting that file structure to a format that can be displayed on an imaging device UI display. The converted file structure is then sent to the imaging device for display. In these embodiments an application running on the RCD may read the file structure data of files stored on an RCD convert the file structure data to a format compatible with the imaging device UI display and send the converted file structure to the imaging device for display. The file structure being read may be read from a storage device on the same RCD that comprises the file structure reading application or the reading application may reside on a separate RCD that reads file structure remote to it. For example with reference to an application residing on RCD may read the file structure on a remote RCD or a remote storage device .

An imaging device of some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . In these embodiments an imaging device may receive converted file structure data and display the file structure on a user interface in the form of a prompt to select a file or file folder. This display may be configured in any number of formats from a file tree structure as is common in many OS GUIs a table format a simple list or many other formats. A user may then select a file or folder using the imaging device UI and the selection will be accepted by the imaging device and sent to an RCD 

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . In these embodiments an RCD may receive a file structure request from an imaging device . Because the RCD may serve multiple imaging devices the imaging device may also send UI parameters to identify its particular UI to the RCD . This information may be received from the imaging device in the form of a data package using a markup language such as extensible markup language XML . In some embodiments a Simple Object Access Protocol SOAP may also be used. In some embodiments a Web Service call may use a SOAP channel for communication. In some embodiments a SOAP protocol may run on top of a hyper text transfer protocol HTTP . Data may also be sent using HTTP a file transfer protocol FTP or any other transfer mechanism.

Once request data has been received an RCD application may read the storage device file structure. This may be performed using a Framework Operating System Programming language API to retrieve directory names. The file structure data may then be converted to a format that is compatible with the UI display of the imaging device as defined by the UI parameter data received from the imaging device. This converted file structure data may be formatted with a markup language such as XML XHTML HTML or another markup language. Once converted to a form that is compatible with the imaging device UI the converted file structure data may be sent to the imaging device for display.

An imaging device of embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . In these embodiments an imaging device may send its UI parameters to an RCD . The imaging device may also request file structure data from the RCD . The RCD may then obtain the file structure and send it to the imaging device as explained above in relation to . The imaging device then receives the file structure data in a format that is compatible with its UI characteristics and display the file data.

Other embodiments of the present invention may be described in relation to . In these embodiments an imaging device may request file structure data from an RCD . The imaging device may also send UI parameter data in some embodiments to identify the user interface characteristics to the RCD . The RCD may then read the file structure data from a storage device and convert the file structure data to a format that is compatible with the UI of the imaging device . The RCD then sends the converted file structure data to the imaging device . The imaging device then displays the converted data and accepts user input identifying a file structure element in relation to the displayed data. This selection is then transmitted to the RCD to identify the selected element which may then be retrieved and sent to the imaging device .

In still other embodiments of the present invention described in relation to file structure data is pushed to an imaging device. In these embodiments a file structure is read from a storage device by an RCD and converted to a format that is compatible with the UI of an imaging device . This converted file data is then pushed to the imaging device and displayed on the imaging device UI. User input may then be accepted in relation to the displayed file data and a selected file element may be requested .

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise a scan to folder functionality. In these embodiments described in relation to a user may initiate a scan to folder function through the imaging device UI. In some of these embodiments the imaging device may also send its user interface parameters to the RCD . The scan to folder function then requests file structure data for a storage device in communication with the RCD . The file structure data is read from the storage device and converted to a format that is compatible with the imaging device user interface. This converted file structure data is sent to the imaging device. Once received at the imaging device the converted file structure data is displayed on the UI display and a user is prompted to select a file folder for the current scan operation. The user s document is scanned and the scanned image file is sent to the selected folder for storage. The actual scan operation may take place at different points in the process in various embodiments and may occur at the beginning end or elsewhere in the scan to folder process.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise a scan to server functionality. In these embodiments described in relation to a user may initiate a scan to server function through the imaging device UI. In some of these embodiments the imaging device may also send its user interface parameters to the RCD . The scan to server function may then request file structure data for one or more servers in communication with the RCD . The file structure data is read from the servers and converted to a format that is compatible with the imaging device user interface. This converted file structure data is sent to the imaging device. Once received at the imaging device the converted file structure data is displayed on the UI display and a user is prompted to select a server location for the current scan operation. This server location selection input is accepted at the imaging device UI. The user s document is scanned and the scanned image file is sent to the selected sever location for storage. The actual scan operation may take place at different points in the process in various embodiments and may occur at the beginning end or elsewhere in the scan to server process.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise a scan to document management system scan to DMS functionality. In these embodiments described in relation to a user may initiate a scan to DMS function through the imaging device UI. In some of these embodiments the imaging device may also send not shown its user interface parameters to the RCD . A remote computing device RCD may then send DMS UI content to the imaging device IDev for display thereon. The scan to DMS function may also request file structure data for one or more servers in communication with the RCD . The file structure data is read from the servers and converted to a format that is compatible with the imaging device user interface. This converted file structure data is sent to the imaging device. Once received at the imaging device the converted file structure data is displayed on the UI display and a user is prompted to select a DMS file location for the current scan operation. This DMS file location selection is accepted at the imaging device UI. The user s document is scanned and the scanned image file is sent to the selected DMS location for storage. The actual scan operation may take place at different points in the process in various embodiments and may occur at the beginning end or elsewhere in the scan to DMS process.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise a print from file functionality. In these embodiments described in relation to a user may initiate a print from file function through the imaging device UI. In some of these embodiments the imaging device may also send its user interface parameters to the RCD . The print from file function may also request file structure data for one or more storage devices in communication with the RCD . The file structure data is read from the storage devices and converted to a format that is compatible with the imaging device user interface. This converted file structure data is sent to the imaging device. Once received at the imaging device the converted file structure data is displayed on the UI display and a user is prompted to select a file for the print operation. This file selection is accepted at the imaging device UI and the file is requested from the RCD. The user s selected file may then be printed .

The terms and expressions which have been employed in the forgoing specification are used therein as terms of description and not of limitation and there is no intention in the use of such terms and expressions of excluding equivalence of the features shown and described or portions thereof it being recognized that the scope of the invention is defined and limited only by the claims which follow.

