---

title: Underway hull survey system
abstract: A method and survey system for inspecting hulls of ships has a base portion and side portions defining an inspection channel in water. Sonar is mounted on the side portions transmitting acoustic signals onto a hull as a ship passes through the inspection channel, receiving reflected acoustic signal portions of the transmitted acoustic signals, and converting the reflected acoustic signal portions into electromagnetic acousto-signals corresponding to the hull and objects on the hull. An electro-optic scanning array is mounted on the base member transmitting optical signals onto the hull as the ship passes through the inspection channel, receiving reflected optical signal portions of the transmitted optical signals, and converting the reflected optical signal portions into electromagnetic opto-signals corresponding to the hull and objects on the hull. A control module receiving the corresponding electromagnetic acousto-signals and opto-signals transmits these signals as amplified RF signals.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07301851&OS=07301851&RS=07301851
owner: United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07301851
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050705
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

This invention relates to inspection of ships hulls. More particularly this invention is to a system and method for optically and acoustically inspecting the entire hulls of ships that can be underway toward or away from a harbor or other protected anchorage.

Current methods of inspecting ships hulls have required divers to inspect the hull either manually or with hand held sonar devices. These methods are man power intensive and expensive. There are areas along the hull that it is considered unsafe for diver operations limiting a complete hull search. Divers are not currently able to navigate to a great degree of accuracy to ensure a complete search of the assigned areas further limiting the percent of the hull inspected. The ship and harbor area can be tied up for the duration of the inspection.

Thus in accordance with this inventive concept a need has been recognized in the state of the art for a means for optically and acoustically inspecting hulls of ships thoroughly and quickly before the ships enter or exit a harbor or other area of interest.

An object of the invention is to provide a method and system for inspecting the undersides of ship hulls.

Another object of the invention is to provide a method and system for inspecting the undersides of ship hulls using electro optic and sonar arrays.

Another object of the invention is to provide a method and apparatus for inspecting the undersides of ship hulls outside of harbor areas and port facilities.

Another object of the invention is to provide a method and apparatus for inspecting the undersides of ship hulls outside of harbor areas and port facilities and transmitting inspection data to a remote station for evaluation.

Another object of the invention is to provide a method and system for rapidly inspecting the undersides of ship hulls and not exposing divers or other personnel to danger.

Another object of the invention is to provide a method and system for inspecting the entire undersides of ship hulls for objects that may have been covertly attached without unduly exposing others to danger.

Another object of the invention is to provide a method and system for inspecting the undersides of ship hulls using electro optic arrays using laser illumination and sonar arrays operating as side scan sonar synthetic aperture sonar and high frequency imaging sonar.

These and other objects of the invention will become more readily apparent from the ensuing specification when taken in conjunction with the appended claims.

Accordingly the present invention is to a method and system for rapidly inspecting the entire undersides of ship hulls. A support structure has a base portion connected at opposite ends to first and second side portions. The base portion and first and second side portions define an inspection channel in water to receive and allow passage of ships during inspection. Sonar is mounted on each of the first and second side portions and faces upward toward the center of the inspection channel. Each sonar transmits acoustic signals onto the hull as the ship passes through the inspection channel receives reflected acoustic signal portions of the transmitted acoustic signals that are representative of the hull and objects on the hull and converts the reflected acoustic signal portions into electromagnetic acousto signals corresponding to the hull and objects on the hull.

An electro optic scanning array is mounted on said base member and faces upward toward the center of the inspection channel. The array transmits optical signals onto the hull as the ship passes through the inspection channel receives reflected optical signal portions of the transmitted optical signals that are representative of the hull and objects on the hull and converts the reflected optical signal portions into electromagnetic opto signals corresponding to the hull and objects on the hull.

A control module receives the corresponding electromagnetic acousto signals and corresponding electromagnetic opto signals and transmits them as amplified RF signals to a remote station for evaluating the amplified RF signals for objects on the hull and for controlling operation of the sonars and the electro optic scanning array.

Each sonar has at least one acoustic transducer transmitting the acoustic signals onto the hull as the ship passes through the inspection channel receiving the reflected portions of the transmitted acoustic signals representative of the hull and objects on the hull and converting the reflected acoustic signal portions into electromagnetic acousto signals corresponding to the hull and objects on the hull. The array has at least one laser transmitting the optical signals onto the hull as the ship passes through the inspection channel. The array has at least one optical detector receiving the reflected portions of the transmitted optical signals representative of the hull and objects on the hull and converting the reflected optical signal portions into electromagnetic opto signals corresponding to the hull and the objects on the hull.

The first and second side portions and base portion have buoyancy ballast chambers for floating the support structure on the water to define the inspection channel in the water.

Referring to of the drawings a survey system of the invention is shown performing an inspection as a ship proceeds underway through it on water . Inspection system subjects the entire underside of hull of ship to a thorough inspection along its entire length. Inspection system can reveal objects such as explosive charges or other anomalies of interest such as damage or separations on hull for appropriate action.

Inspection system has a support structure including a pair of side potions and upwardly extending from a base portion that together define an inspection channel filled with water . Inspection channel can have a depth of about twenty to two hundred feet and a width of about two hundred feet. Side portions can be sloped and each have at least one sonar mounted on each of portions and faced upward toward the center of inspection channel . Base portion has an electro optic scanning array upwardly facing toward the center of inspection channel . Each sonar and electro optic scanning array can be connected to a control module on either of side portions .

Control module has a source of electrical power connected to sonar and electro optic scanning array and has a computer that can be programmed to activate controlling sonar and electro optic scanning array to transmit acoustic signals and optical signals toward ship as it proceeds through inspection channel . Sonar and electro optic scanning array receive reflected acoustic signal portions and reflected optical signal portions of the transmitted acoustic signals and transmitted optical signals from ship respectively. Reflected acoustic signal portions and reflected optical signal portions are representative of hull and possible objects and or anomalies on hull .

In other words sonars convert reflected acoustic signal portions into electromagnetic acousto signals that correspond to hull and possible objects and or anomalies on hull and connect these corresponding electromagnetic acousto signals to control module . Electro optic scanning array converts reflected optical signal portions into electromagnetic opto signals that correspond to hull and possible objects and or anomalies on hull and connects corresponding electromagnetic opto signals to control module .

Control module can have an RF transceiver connected to computer and to receive signals to transmit corresponding electromagnetic acousto signals and electromagnetic opto signals as amplified RF signals from antenna to a remote station or facility for evaluation and appropriate action. Antenna can also receive control signals from the remote station for selectively actuating sonars and array by control module . Sonars and array can be controlled by remote control signals to use different frequencies operational cycles different power levels etc. in accordance with control signals . In fact no personnel need to be at support structure of survey system during inspection of many different ships but could be at remote station at a facility where meaningful evaluations of RF signals can be made by highly trained technicians and or military observers. Unattended operation of survey system at support structure can also reduce the possibility of injury or loss of life if an object on a hull is intentionally or unintentionally detonated.

Support structure of survey system can have a dry dock or barge like shape that can be towed on water to a desired site. Portions can have buoyancy ballast chambers that include associated machinery to create inspection channel of water that has sufficient depth and width to receive and allow passage of ships as they proceed underway through survey system . Support structure of survey system need not have all the other structure usually found on a barge like vessel but may be modified to have only a framework of structural members e.g. corrosion resistant interconnected beams extending as side portions and base portion . This kind of a framework would need to be connected to and supported by buoyancy ballast chambers at side portions to define channel of water .

Support structure of survey system could also make use of structure that exists in the environment to define channel . Side portions could be banks of existing canals or parallel rock jetties that define passageways between bays and open water and base portion could be the bottom of the canal that is between the walls or the floor between the parallel jetties. In either case each sonar and electro optic scanning array would be mounted on the banks or jetties and bottoms or floors and be oriented to point upward and toward the center of inspection channel where ships will pass for survey.

Each sonar of survey system can be an array of one or more transducers that can transmit acoustic signals through water receive reflected acoustic portions of transmitted acoustic signals and create representative signals representative of reflected acoustic portions . The spectral content of signals is such as to give acceptable resolution for objects and anomalies of interest that are desired to be detected.

Sonar on each portion can be either of three highly effective off the shelf sonar technologies known in the art as side scan sonar side looking sonar synthetic aperture sonar or high frequency sonar. Side scan sonar technology is a commercially available mature and uncomplicated technology used to classify mine like contacts. Side scan sonar is available in varying frequencies depending on range and resolution required. These sonars require relative movement between the sonars and the background being investigated. In this application a relatively high frequency would be required to classify an object attached to a hull.

Typically a side scan sonar for sonar can use single or multiple acoustic beam s at frequencies in the range of 500 to 1000 Hz. at a range of twenty to forty feet from sonar to ship to provide acceptable resolution for identification of object having dimensions greater than six to ten inches. A single beam while acceptable for some scan rates and low resolutions may not be fast enough for the extent of coverage of all of hull of each ship as it proceeds through survey system . Although multi beams are more expensive they can cover more area in real time. Therefore a side scan sonar for each sonar can use multiple sonar beams at frequencies in the range of 500 to 1000 Hz. at a range of twenty to forty feet from sonar to ship to provide acceptable resolution for identification of object having dimensions greater than six to ten inches.

In addition to or in place of side scan sonar technology for each sonar synthetic aperture sonar technology may be used for each sonar to provide very high resolutions. Briefly synthetic aperture sonar creates an improved sensing means wherein a single acoustic transducer is moved along the track of a desired large array and the returned signals at each position along the track are processed to generate the high resolution of what appears to be a larger multiple array system. With the high resolution of synthetic aperture sonar of each sonar false alarm rates are low and imaging capability is acceptable for objects having dimensions as small as about one inch. Since synthetic aperture sonar for each sonar is more complex and the constant velocity of each ship must also be considered additional processing capability that takes into account a Doppler velocity log for ship velocity is provided in control module .

Another option is to include high frequency sonar technology for sonar in addition to or in place of side scan sonar and or synthetic aperture sonar technology. Transmitting and receiving high frequency acoustic signals in excess of 1000 Hz. can provide acceptable resolution for identification of object having dimensions greater than four to six inches.

Electro optical scanning array can utilize blue green illumination by lasers for optical signals transmitted from array through water and onto each surveyed ship . Reflected optical portions of transmitted optical signals are received and detected by optical detectors of array which create signals representative of reflected optical portions and couple them to control module . This optical data gathering technology is currently mature and is capable of providing a very high resolution of about one quarter of an inch at ranges between hull and array of no greater than about thirteen feet in inspection channel . There are few false alarms and inspections of ships can proceed to provide topographical information of hull in real time with this optical technology 

The effectiveness of this optical data gathering technology must take into consideration water clarity that can change with changing weather conditions storms and water path length for accurate inspections and evaluations. Bio fouling of sensor optics of optical detectors might occur if electro optic scanning array is immersed in water continuously for a period of time. In addition upward looking lasers can create potential safety issues that can be reduced when possible observers on ships are forewarned of an inspection. Appropriate signs or flashing lights on support structure should minimize this potential hazard.

In operation survey system can be taken to where it is needed to inspect ships near a port facility or harbor. Survey system can be towed through water or disassembled transported and reconstructed at a desired survey site where it is moored by lines extending to anchors not shown . Many ships of different displacements and configurations can be rapidly inspected in an uninterrupted sequence. Control module can implement different scanning patterns for differently sized hulls and send the gathered information via RF signals or other means such as optically acoustically over fibers conductive wires etc. to remote station for evaluation. Because of the size of inspection channel each ship may be steered by its crew through water in inspection channel however a trained pilot may be preferred to make sure that each ship is steered through the center of channel .

An operator at control module or at distant survey station can configure the direction extent and durations of scanning patterns of sonars and array via control signals to make appropriate scanning patterns that conform to the geometries and sizes of hulls of ships and initiate scanning of hulls with sonars and or electro optic array . Each ship passes at the required speed between and past both sonars and over and past electro optic scanning array . Representative scan signals and from sonars and array are connected to control module and RF transceiver transmits RF signals that are representative of signals to a distant Coast Guard facility or designated authority for evaluation. If no object is found each ship proceeds through and out of survey system with no interruption. If a suspicious object is detected or if dangerous hull anomalies are found the affected ship is directed to a safe area for further more detailed inspection and appropriate action.

Referring to the method of surveying or inspecting hulls of ships calls for the step of defining an inspection channel in water by support structure having a base portion connected at opposite ends to first and second side portions . The step of defining can include the step of floating support structure on water with buoyancy ballast chambers in first and second side portions and base portion of support structure to define inspection channel in water .

The step of defining permits the steps of receiving passage of ship through inspection channel during inspection and transmitting acoustic signals from a sonar mounted on first and second side portions that faces upward toward a center of inspection channel onto each hull of each ship as each ship passes through inspection channel . Next the step of receiving reflected acoustic signal portions of the transmitted acoustic signals that are representative of each hull and objects on each hull at each sonar permits the step of converting reflected acoustic signal portions into electromagnetic acousto signals corresponding to each hull and objects on each hull . The steps of transmitting receiving and converting of acoustic signals includes the step of providing at least one acoustic transducer at each sonar .

The step of transmitting optical signals from an electro optic scanning array mounted on base portion that faces upward toward the center of inspection channel onto each hull as each ship passes through inspection channel allows the step of receiving reflected optical signal portions of transmitted optical signals that are representative of each hull and objects on each hull at array . The step of transmitting optical signals includes providing at least one laser at array The steps of transmitting and receiving assure the step of converting reflected optical signal portions into electromagnetic opto signals corresponding to each hull and objects on hull at array . The steps of receiving and converting include providing at least one optical detector at array .

The step of receiving corresponding electromagnetic acousto signals and corresponding electromagnetic opto signals at a control module permits the step of transmitting corresponding electromagnetic acousto signals and corresponding electromagnetic opto signals as amplified RF signals .

The step of receiving amplified RF signals at a remote station permits the steps of evaluating amplified RF signals for objects on hulls and controlling operation of sonars and electro optic scanning array from remote station .

The method and survey system of the invention can be implemented with a major savings in manpower and time as compared to the current dangerous method of using divers. Survey system makes a complete 100 hull survey that was not possible before and the inspection is in a fraction of the time of the hit or miss inspections by divers. The rapid inspection by survey system does not hold up the departure or arrival of ship and minimizes the impact on operations of ship or port facilities. Survey system increases the safety of the port area since the inspections of ships can be performed away from the actual port in the event a hazardous device is indeed located. Due to the reduced time required to survey with survey system hulls of more ships can be surveyed than present methods allow to additionally enhance safety.

Having the teachings of this invention in mind modifications and alternate embodiments of survey system may be adapted without departing from the scope of the invention. In accordance with this invention sonars could be replaced with additional electro optic scanning arrays on one or both side portions or array on base portion could be replaced by sonar . Survey system could have different configurations and locations on waterways to allow rapid effective hull inspections that might additionally indicate that marine organisms and other marine contamination should be cleaned to reduce fuel wasting drag. If the necessity for survey system has passed it can be taken from one near harbor location and relocated at another where it is needed or placed in storage for use at a future time.

The disclosed components and their arrangements as disclosed herein all contribute to the novel features of this invention. Survey system can provide for quick thorough inspections of hulls of many ships at a safe distance away from harbors or other marine facilities to identify suspicious objects that may have been covertly attached and other anomalies on hulls for appropriate action. Therefore survey system as disclosed herein is not to be construed as limiting but rather is intended to be demonstrative of this inventive concept.

It should be readily understood that many modifications and variations of the present invention are possible within the purview of the claimed invention. It is to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described.

