---

title: Tags for management systems
abstract: Management related data is provided to a user. Tags are attached to the provided management related data upon user instruction. A tag is way to identify a piece of management. The tags that correspond with the management related data are stored in a database of the management system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07912933&OS=07912933&RS=07912933
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07912933
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051129
---
Management systems for example management systems that manage a network of computing devices typically catalog information such as events alert and tickets for different managed objects of a system. For example the job of the management system is to find problems like operating system problems application failures website failures active directory failures database or SQL Structured Query Language server problems etc. In general a management system surfaces these problems to a user through a console located on a user accessible device.

Surfacing problems to a console can be problematic. For example a user must have the console open and running as well as being viewed constantly. If a user has the console closed or if the user is not looking at the console then the user does not know that there has been a problem with one of the managed objects. In addition the user can receive problems in the console that they do not care about. Therefore looking at a console which does not include relevant information is a wasteful form of communication to the user.

In addition a management system can surface problems to a user through email notifications. However email notifications can be said to push data to a user. Data that is pushed to the user can include information that a user may not be interested in and again can be a wasteful form of communication.

Really Simple Syndication Rapid Site Syndication and Rich Site Syndication all refer to an emerging technology called RSS used on the Internet. RSS has the ability to access a vast amount of information that exists on the world wide web. Instead of a user browsing websites for information of interest RSS data feeds send information of interest to a user directly. In general RSS feeds data such as a news syndications or weblogs using a RSS feed. A user of the RSS feeds can install a RSS aggregator to periodically poll and retrieve information when the RSS feed finds new feed items. After the RSS aggregator retrieves information from a RSS feed new feed items are displayed to a user. This can be called pulling information to a user that a user cares about. For example if a user has a subscription to a New York Times RSS feed the user s RSS aggregator will retrieve feed item found by the RSS feed to be displayed to a user. Tagging is also an emerging technology on the Internet. Tags are used to add metadata to websites and components in a website for example a news article.

The discussion above is merely provided for general background information and is not intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

This Summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the Detailed Description. This Summary is not intended to identify key features or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter. The claimed subject matter is not limited to implementations that solve any or all disadvantages noted in the background.

Communicating management related data provided by a management system to a user using a data feed allows for the simplistic searching and processing of management related data as well as the collating of management related data into a single place. A data feed is defined with a data type and criteria. Each data type corresponds to a type of management related data provided by the management system. The management system is searched for all management related data that corresponds with the data type and the criteria. The management related data that corresponds with the data type and the criteria is collected into an aggregator. The management related data is rendered on a display for viewing by a user.

Tagging management related data provided by a management system to a user allows for the simplistic searching and processing of management related data. Management related data is provided to a user. The user attaches the tags to management related data upon user instruction. The tags attached to the management related data are stored in a database of the management system.

The following description is described in the context of a management system for managing a networked environment or enterprise system. The following description is also described in the context of a management system for managing an operating system of a computing device.

In a LAN networking environment managed objects management system and user devices are connected to a LAN through a network interface or adapter. In a WAN networking environment managed objects management system and user devices typically include modems or other means for establishing communications over a WAN such as the Internet. It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communication link between managed objects management system and user devices may be used.

Management system is configured to manage operations of the plurality of managed objects find problems and provide knowledge of the problems or management related data to users of the networked environment or system . Embodiments include networked environment or system communicating management related data provided by management system to a user through a data feed. For example the data feed can be a RSS Really Simple Syndication Rich Site Syndication or Rapid Site Syndication data feed. However before describing further aspects it may be useful to first describe exemplary computing devices or environments that can implement the description provided below.

Embodiments are operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with various embodiments include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers telephony systems distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

Embodiments may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Those skilled in the art can implement the description and or figures herein as computer executable instructions which can be embodied on any form of computer readable media discussed below. Some embodiments are designed to be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules are located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing some embodiments includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard a microphone and a pointing device such as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer is operated in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a hand held device a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on remote computer . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Memory is implemented as non volatile electronic memory such as random access memory RAM with a battery back up module not shown such that information stored in memory is not lost when the general power to mobile device is shut down. A portion of memory is preferably allocated as addressable memory for program execution while another portion of memory is preferably used for storage such as to simulate storage on a disk drive.

Memory includes an operating system application programs as well as an object store . During operation operating system is preferably executed by processor from memory . Operating system in one preferred embodiment is a WINDOWS CE brand operating system commercially available from Microsoft Corporation. Operating system is preferably designed for mobile devices and implements database features that can be utilized by applications through a set of exposed application programming interfaces and methods. The objects in object store are maintained by applications and operating system at least partially in response to calls to the exposed application programming interfaces and methods.

Communication interface represents numerous devices and technologies that allow mobile device to send and receive information. The devices include wired and wireless modems satellite receivers and broadcast tuners to name a few. Mobile device can also be directly connected to a computer to exchange data therewith. In such cases communication interface can be an infrared transceiver or a serial or parallel communication connection all of which are capable of transmitting streaming information.

Input output components include a variety of input devices such as a touch sensitive screen buttons rollers and a microphone as well as a variety of output devices including an audio generator a vibrating device and a display. The devices listed above are by way of example and need not all be present on mobile device . In addition other input output devices may be attached to or found with mobile device .

Referring back to management system is configured to catalog different types of management related data such as alerts events tickets or incidents problems and other types of management related data. The different types of management related data are different ways for management system to present to users of system that something is happening with at least one of the managed objects . In one embodiment a ticket or incident is a work list or a to do list for remedying a problem. Each time there is a problem a ticket or incident is created. Different portions of the ticket can be routed to different users of the management system and can be tracked. After each item on the ticket is accomplished the ticket is closed. Closing the ticket requires inputting information on the ticket relating to how the problem was solved. In general problems can be collections of similar incidents that have a root cause. In one embodiment tickets or incidents can be managed by an application that is outside of management system as well as used to manage workflow processes for making changes to system . In another embodiment events can be used to determine problems which result in alerts. In this embodiment alerts can be used to form a ticket.

All of the management related data i.e. alerts events tickets and problems include properties. Example properties include the severity of the management related data the priority of the management related data who the management related data is assigned to when the management related data was created the resolution state of the management related data and what managed object or group of objects the management related data refers to. This list of properties is a representative list and not an exhaustive list. As management related data gets processed triaged and handled by a user the management related data may change in resolution state. For example the resolution states can include investigated escalated escalated to a tier resolved and other types of resolution states.

Management system can provide other functions other then providing the specific types of management related data already described to a user. Management system can formulate new reports on specific managed objects or groups of managed objects. Management system can include tasks. Tasks can be run by a user to fix a problem with part of the networked infrastructure. For example a user can run a task to reboot one of the managed objects . Management system can include help information. Help information instructs a user how to troubleshoot a problem. Management system can include performance data or summaries of performance data about a particular computing device or component in a particular computing device. Performance data can be provided in a tabular representation or in a graphical representation. Management system can include health status states for each of the computing devices . For example if there is a problem with one of the computing devices management system can change its state from a healthy state to an unhealthy state. Management system can also provide key performance indicators. Key performance indicators are factors of which users of enterprise system are evaluated against. For example key performance indicators can keep track of the average handling time of an incident or ticket or how quickly an incident or ticket is resolved from when it is issued.

In accordance with an embodiment management system includes a database . Database includes a plurality of data feed records . Each data feed record includes a data type and criteria . Each data type corresponds with a type of management related data provided by management system . Each data type can correspond with an alert an event a ticket incident a problem or other type of management related data as previously discussed in detail above. Criteria can be at least one of the properties of management related data as discussed in detail above. Each data feed record is defined by a user and specifies information that the user desires from the management system.

Publisher in the embodiment illustrated in can be a web server or other type of server accessible or not accessible over hypertext transfer protocol HTTP connection. Using a server not accessible over an HTTP connection eliminates reliance on a HTTP server as well as eliminates reliance on a trusted environment where authentication solutions are not possible. In cases where authentication solutions are not possible other suitable ways to periodically transport the data feed from the publisher to management system can be used. For example a data type and criteria previously mentioned above and will be discussed below in detail can be exposed to a file sharing system. It would be much more simplistic to create and manage an existing file share system as opposed to maintaining a HTTP server and its associated security settings.

In publisher communicates with management system and user devices over a network such as the Internet or an intranet. Publisher is configured to access data feed records receive specific management related data i.e. specific alerts tickets problems and etc. and create a corresponding data feed item that is sent to the user. The data feed item can be created as an Extensible Markup Language XML file or be created dynamically through an Active Server Page ASP file. An example XML data feed item file based on the exemplary data feed record and where the specific alert is a hard disk drive running low on space is as follows 

In one embodiment criteria can be specified or added directly into a URL Typically this requires the criteria to be in a generic format. In this case by identifying an ASP file publisher can decide to expose a static management system to a Dynamic HTML DHTML page that would allow the construction of these URLs through simple user interface operations instead of needing a dedicated server user interface. This dynamic URL model typically requires a dedicated ASP file and typically will not work if there is a file share system included.

The following is an example ASP file that can be used to create a data feed item. This example ASP file accesses management system for all management related data that corresponds with the data type alerts and the criteria of resolution state in a specified state.

User devices each include an aggregator and a display . User device can be a computing system or device that is accessible to a user. For example user devices can be any one of the computing environments discussed above. In one embodiment user device can receive data feed items when sent by publisher . In another embodiment a user can view the data feed item by pointing aggregator at the uniform resource locator URL to the XML or ASP file on publisher to subscribe to a particular data feed. In yet another embodiment aggregator is configured to collect or poll all the management related data that corresponds with the data type and the query or criteria of the data feed record of the data feed which the user has subscribed. In the example illustrated in aggregator collects all alerts in management system that have a high or a number one priority and are assigned to the user.

The collected management related data is then published or viewed on display . illustrates an exemplary display showing the rendered management related data or feed items . A list of all the feed items and a summary for each can be provided as illustrated. By clicking on a selected summary feed item additional details are rendered at on display . If desired additional details can be rendered in a web page at a URL that can include links for the user to take action as provided by management system .

Similar data feeds records can be created for many different types of management related data besides alerts incidents problems and etc. As highlighted in detail above such other types of management related data can be created to feed other types of management related data then those already described.

Data feed records can be created to notify a user when management system formulates a new report. The data feed record includes a data type being a new report and criteria related to a particular managed object or group of managed objects. In addition to notifying the user of a new report the data feed item can also include the report. The report can be sent as an attachment in the data feed item. Example attachments to feed items can include a spreadsheet document a word processing document a portable document e.g. pdf a photograph or picture or link to the same.

Data feed records can also be created to notify a user when a pack or collection of information is available that describes how management system is to manage a particular application of system . These packs or collections of information are generally published on the Internet. A data feed can notify a user when a pack is available.

Data feed records can include types of management related data which can be encoded with embedded links. In one example a data feed item can include an embedded link for running a task. As previously discussed a task can be run by a user to fix a problem with part of the networked environment. The user can click on the embedded link and run the appropriate task. In another example a data feed item can include an embedded link to open a view in user device . The view can include for instance help information for troubleshooting the problem.

Data feed records can also be created to send performance data or report snapshots summaries of a particular managed object . In particular a user can define a data feed record to send a summary of the performance of a managed object such as a processor through a data feed item. As previously discussed the performance of the managed object can be a tabular representation or graphical representation.

Data feed records can also be created to send health status updates of a particular managed object . When management system decides that a managed object has a problem the management system changes the health of the managed object to an unhealthy state.

Data feed records can be created to notify a user about a new incident or problem. In addition data feeds can be created to send notifications when management related data is updated such as when a notification of a new alert incident report and etc. For example a user can subscribe to a data feed record to receive alerts having a severity of high priority. If after the user receives a high priority alert a different user designates that particular alert as a low priority then a data feed can notify a user that the severity of the alert has changed to a low priority.

Data feed records can also be created to notify users that their participation is required in a workflow of a ticket as managed by an application that manages tasks. For example when a new server is being implemented in a networked system one of the steps of the associated ticket is to have an order for a new server approved by a manager. A data feed record can be created to notify the manager that he she needs to approve the order of the new server. In addition a data feed record can be created to notify a user who actually ordered the implementation of a new server to track the status of the ticket.

Data feed records can also be created to show a performance indicator. Performance indicators are management related data that a user is evaluated against. For example performance indicators can include how quickly an incident is resolved from the time that it is opened. In general a manager could subscribe to these data feeds to evaluate users of system .

Data feed records can also be created that shows similar managed objects that have similar incidents that may indicate a root problem that has these incidents. Management system can include an application that analyzes many incidents and looks for similarities in the incidents. For example if five people called in with an outage on their computer of a similar application but different symptoms the application would categorize these five calls as being similar. The data feed would include a possible root problem as well as the 5 incidents that have been reported.

In addition to system including a data feed item functionality for communicating management related data to a user in another embodiment system includes metadata or tagging functionality. The tagging functionality does not require that system also include a data feed item functionality nor does the data feed item functionality require that system also include a tagging functionality. In the tagging embodiment when a user comes across management related data whether or not via a data feed or conventionally viewed in a console the user can choose to tag i.e. identify store directly or indirectly and selectively access at a later time that piece of management related data such as an alert an incident a problem and etc. using a keyword or words meaningful to the user. In tagger is a module that performs the functionality described above. However new management related data presented to a user can also be automatically tagged by tagger based on a set of rules created by the user. For example all new management related data that includes information about a particular server in the network can be automatically tagged. If desired tags can be at least temporarily stored on user device but also be stored in database of management system as indicated at . Tags can be centrally managed and optimized by an administrator. Tags can also be made global across system made accessible for many users and can be personalized per user. Typically each tag includes attributes that at least includes the keyword or identifier of the tag.

Tags can be used in criteria in a data feed record. For example a user could tag a specific alert using a keyword. The keyword s can be received as a data feed item or locally generated on the user device . Such a tag would be assigned a keyword s . The keyword s can be used in the criteria to create and subscribe to a data feed record that will communicate all management related data related to an identified alert. In this manner a supervisor can find tune his her data feed records for particular information.

In one embodiment an administrator can also centrally manage and optimize tags by publishing the tags to an accessible central location or clearing house in management system that is accessible to all users of system to ensure consistent tagging by all the users. In another embodiment management system can rate tags and assign a weight of useful information to a tag. In still another embodiment a user can tag views of help information. Tagging help information provides a system of searching for useful knowledge articles for troubleshooting problems with a management system.

At block all management related data that corresponds with the data type and the criteria is queried for in management system . At block the management related data that corresponds with the data type and the criteria is collected into aggregator . The method illustrated in flowchart can optionally as indicated by dashed lines proceed to block or . In block the collected management data can be rendered with an embedded link. As previously discussed management related data can include an embedded link for running a task or an embedded link to open help information to aid in troubleshooting the problem. In block a document can be associated with the collection of management related data. As previously discussed documents such as spreadsheet documents word processing documents portable documents pictures and links can be associated with data feed items. At block the collected management related data is rendered for a display .

The method illustrated in flowchart can optionally as indicated by dashed lines proceed to block or . At block user subscriptions can be exported using a OPML file. An OPML Outline Processor Markup Language file can present exported subscriptions in a hierarchial format and can be generated based on a known managed object and management related data provided by the management system. The following is an example OPML XML file 

At block in the embodiment illustrated in the subscribed data feed items can be sent to locations remote to user device. For instance this enables simple integration solutions between two management applications located on the network. For example one application want to publish event to another application. The publishing application creates a data feed at a common access point between the two server type applications for example either a file share or a FTP folder which is synchronized offline . The consuming server application can periodically read from the data feed without knowing or caring when the publishing application will publish a new version of the data feed. Such an embodiment does not require the applications to communicate directly through a network protocol. For example the publishing application can be a script that periodically refreshes the data feed with the most recent events. The consuming application can periodically read the data feed file and identifies the most recent events. Based on this information the consuming application can reconstruct the complete list of events that were recorded in the past even if the data feed only contained the most recent events at any point in time.

Although the subject matter has been described in language specific to structural features and or methodological acts it is to be understood that the subject matter defined in the appended claims is not necessarily limited to the specific features or acts described above. Rather the specific features and acts described above are disclosed as example forms of implementing the claims.

