---

title: Automatically targeting notifications about events on a network to appropriate persons
abstract: Automatically notifying, in response to an event associated with a particular server and/or application on a network, only appropriate person(s) such as, for example, only the IT member(s) responsible for supporting the server and/or application. The work schedules and the work schedule exceptions of one or more persons may be taken into account when determining whom to notify of an event on a network. Event information may be received. In response, subscription information for a plurality of subscribers may be accessed, which may include any of: one or more applications for which the subscriber is responsible; one or more servers for which the subscriber is responsible; a work schedule of the subscriber for receiving notifications, and one or more exceptions to this schedule. At least one subscriber may be selected by comparing this information to the event information, and a notification may be sent to the at least one subscriber.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07743137&OS=07743137&RS=07743137
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07743137
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050207
---
Efficiently utilizing Information Technology IT resources e.g. personnel of a business enterprise is becoming increasingly difficult as the organizational structure of enterprises and supporting network infrastructures become more complex. As used herein a network is a group of two or more network elements interconnected by one or more segments of transmission media on which communications may be exchanged between the elements. Each segment may be any of a plurality of types of transmission media including one or more electrical or optical wires or cables made of metal and or optical fiber air e.g. using wireless transmission over carrier waves or any combination of these transmission media. As used herein plurality means two or more. It should be appreciated that a network may be as simple as two network elements connected by a single wire bus wireless connection or other type of segments. Further it should be appreciated that when a network is illustrated in a drawing herein as being connected to an element in the drawing the connected element itself is considered part of the network.

Business enterprises often have several business units such as for example finance accounting sales human resources research and development R D customer support etc. and each business unit may have its own server s on the enterprise s network. Each business unit also may have one or more proprietary applications e.g. that run on it s own servers including monitoring applications residing at different layers of the server architecture such as for example hardware firmware and software applications. Further one or more of the business units may employ their own IT group e.g. operations staff where each group member has technical expertise with respect to the servers and or applications of the business unit.

When problems arise with a business unit s application or server such as for example software errors and or hardware errors or failures the appropriate IT member needs to be notified so the problem can be addressed. Some enterprises still rely at least in part on manual notification of problems where a user contacts one or more IT group members by telephone e mail pager or otherwise. Obvious drawbacks to manual notification are the unreliability of users to learn of a problem and or report it to the IT group and the inherent delays and consumption of user resources in relying on users to do so.

For these reasons many enterprises have turned to automated notification systems that automatically detect problems as events and notify IT members of these events. However known automated notification systems typically do not account for the complexities of today s business enterprises and the networks that support them. For example when a problem with a server or an application running on a server is discovered known systems do not consider the business unit s responsible for the application or server when generating notifications. As a result notifications are generated and sent to IT personnel irrespective of whether the IT personnel are responsible for supporting or have expertise with respect to the server or application. For example in response to a sales group s SQL server crashing a notification system may send notifications of the failure to IT personnel e.g. members of the R D accounting and human resources IT groups other than those employed by and or responsible for the sales department e.g. the sales department s IT group . These other IT personnel may disregard the notification e.g. treat it as a sort of spam or perhaps coordinate with the appropriate IT group members to respond to the notification. In either case IT personnel time is wasted such that the Enterprise s IT resources are inefficiently utilized.

Thus there is a need for an automated notification system that makes more efficient use of an Enterprise s IT resources. That is a system is needed that in response to certain events e.g. associated with a particular server and or application on the Enterprise s network does not unnecessarily notify the wrong persons such as for example IT personnel not responsible for supporting the server and or application.

Described herein are systems and methods for automatically notifying in response to an event on the Enterprise s network e.g. a problem associated with a particular server and or application only the appropriate person s such as for example only the IT member s responsible for supporting the server and or application. That is an automated notification system and method that notifies the right person s in response to an event is described herein.

In some embodiments the work schedules and the work schedule exceptions of one or more persons may be taken into account when determining whom to notify of an event on a network. Considering persons schedules and exceptions to these schedules may further improve the targeting of notifications which may in turn increase the efficiency of Enterprise resource e.g. technical resource utilization.

In an embodiment of the invention at least one person is notified of an occurrence of an event associated with a first application and or a first server. Event information specifying the event is received the event information including an indication of the first application and or and indication of the first server. Subscription information is accessed from one or more data sources that store information about a plurality of subscribers subscribed to receive notification of certain events. For each subscriber the subscription information specifies one or more applications and or servers for which the subscriber is responsible. At least one of the plurality of subscribers is selected including for each of the plurality of subscribers determining whether one of the applications and or servers specified by the subscription information for the subscriber is the first application and or first server respectively. A notification of the event is sent to the at least one subscriber.

In an aspect of this embodiment the at least one subscriber is a person responsible for providing technical support for the application and or the server.

In another aspect of this embodiment schedule information for one or more of the plurality of the subscribers is accessed. The schedule information includes for each of the one or more subscribers a work schedule of the subscriber and one or more work schedule exceptions for the subscriber. Selecting the at least one subscriber includes basing the selection at least in part on the work schedule and the one or more work schedule exceptions of one or more subscribers.

In yet another aspect of this embodiment selecting the at least one subscriber includes for each of the one or more subscribers comparing the work schedule and the one or more work exceptions of the subscriber to a current time corresponding to a time at which the at least one subscriber is selected.

In another aspect of this embodiment the event information includes one or more of the following pieces of event information a server group to which the server belongs a severity of the notification a description of the notification and a source of the event. The subscription information includes for each subscriber of the plurality of subscribers one or more of the following pieces of subscription information one or more server groups for which the subscriber is responsible a threshold level of severity of an event for which to notify the subscriber one or more event descriptions for which to notify the subscriber and one or more event sources for which to notify the subscriber. Selecting the at least one subscriber includes selecting the at least one subscriber from the plurality of subscriber based at least in part on comparing for each of the plurality of subscribers at least one of the one or more pieces of subscription information to a corresponding one of the pieces of event information.

In yet another aspect of this embodiment a user interface is provided enabling a user to enter subscription information for one or more subscribers into the one or more data sources.

In another aspect of this embodiment the subscription information is received from one or more users.

In another aspect of this embodiment the embodiment of the invention described in the preceding paragraphs and or one or more aspects thereof is implemented using SQL Notification Services available from Microsoft Corporation.

In another embodiment of the invention a computer program product is provided. The product includes a computer readable medium and computer readable signals stored on the computer readable medium defining instructions that as a result of being executed by a computer instruct the computer to perform the method of the embodiment of the invention described in the preceding paragraphs and or one or more aspects thereof described in the preceding paragraphs.

In another embodiment of the invention a system is provided for notifying at least one person of an occurrence of an event associated with a first application and or a first server. The system includes a subscriber selection module to select at least one subscriber from a plurality of subscribers subscribed to receive notifications of certain events. The subscriber selection module is operative to receive event information specifying the event the event information including an indication of the first application and or and indication of the first server. The subscriber selection module is operative to access subscription information from one or more data sources that store information about the plurality of subscribers. For each subscriber the subscription information specifies one or more applications and or servers for which the subscriber is responsible. The subscriber selection module is further operative to determine for each of the plurality of subscribers whether one of the applications and or servers specified by the subscription information for the subscriber is the first application and or the first server respectively. The system further includes a notification distribution module to send a notification of the event to the at least one subscriber.

In an aspect of this embodiment the subscriber selection module includes means for selecting the at least one subscriber.

In another aspect of this embodiment the at least one subscriber is a person responsible for providing technical support for the application and or the server.

In another aspect of this embodiment the subscriber selection module is operative to access schedule information for one or more of the plurality of the subscribers. The schedule information includes for each of the one or more subscribers a work schedule of the subscriber and one or more work schedule exceptions for the subscriber. The subscriber selection module is operative to base the selection at least in part on the work schedule and the one or more work schedule exceptions of one or more subscribers.

In yet another aspect of this embodiment the subscriber selection module is operative to compare for each of the one or more subscribers the work schedule and the one or more work exceptions of the subscriber to a current time corresponding to a time at which the selection is made.

In another aspect of this embodiment the event information includes one or more of the following pieces of event information a server group to which the server belongs a severity of the notification a description of the notification and a source of the event. The subscription information includes for each subscriber of the plurality of subscribers one or more of the following pieces of subscription information one or more server groups for which the subscriber is responsible a threshold level of severity of an event for which to notify the subscriber one or more event descriptions for which to notify the subscriber and one or more event sources for which to notify the subscriber. The subscriber selection module is operative to select the at least one subscriber from the plurality of subscriber based at least in part on comparing for each of the plurality of subscribers at least one of the one or more pieces of subscription information to a corresponding one of the pieces of event information.

In another aspect of this embodiment the system further includes a subscription management module that provides a user interface enabling a user to enter subscription information for one or more subscribers into the one or more data sources.

In yet another aspect of this embodiment the system further includes a subscription management module to receive the subscription information from one or more users.

In another aspect of this embodiment the subscriber selection module and or the notification module include at least part of a SQL Notification Services architecture available from Microsoft Corporation.

In another embodiment of the invention at least one person is notified of an occurrence of an event associated with a communications network. Event information specifying the event is received. Schedule information is accessed from one or more data sources that store information about a plurality of subscribers subscribed to receive notification of certain events. For each of one or more of the plurality of subscribers the schedule information specifies a work schedule of the subscriber and one or more work schedule exceptions for the subscriber. At least one of the one or more subscribers is selected based at least in part on the work schedule and the one or more work schedule exceptions of the one or more subscribers. A notification of the event is sent to the at least one subscriber.

In an aspect of this embodiment selecting the at least one subscriber includes for each of the one or more subscribers comparing the work schedule and the one or more work exceptions of the subscriber to a current time corresponding to a time at which the comparison is made.

In another aspect of this embodiment the at least one subscriber is a person responsible for providing technical support for the application and or the server.

In another aspect of this embodiment a user interface is provided enabling a user to enter schedule information for one or more subscribers into the one or more data sources.

In yet another aspect of this embodiment the schedule information is received from one or more users.

In another aspect of this embodiment the embodiment of the invention described in the preceding paragraphs and or one or more aspects thereof is implemented using SQL Notification Services available from Microsoft Corporation.

In yet another embodiment of the invention a system is provided for notifying at least one person of an occurrence of an event associated with a first application and or a first server. The system includes a subscriber selection module to select at least one subscriber from a plurality of subscribers subscribed to receive notification of certain events. The subscriber selection module is further operative to receive event information specifying the event the event information including a time indication corresponding to a time at which the event occurred. The subscriber selection module is further operative to access subscription information from one or more data sources that store information about the plurality of subscribers. For or each of one or more of the plurality of subscribers the subscription information specifies a work schedule of the subscriber and one or more work schedule exceptions for the subscriber. The subscriber selection module is operative to select at least one of the one or more subscribers based at least in part on the work schedule and the one or more work schedule exceptions of the one or more subscribers. The system further includes a notification distribution module to send a notification of the event to the at least one subscriber.

In an aspect of this embodiment the subscriber selection module is operative to compare for each of the one or more subscribers the work schedule and the one or more work exceptions of the subscriber to a current time corresponding to a time at which the comparison is made.

In another aspect of this embodiment the at least one subscriber is a person responsible for providing technical support for the application and or the server.

In another aspect of this embodiment the system further includes a subscription management module to provider a user interface enabling a user to enter schedule information for one or more subscribers into the one or more data sources.

In another aspect of this embodiment a subscription management module to receive the schedule information from one or more users.

In another aspect of this embodiment the subscriber selection module and or the notification distribution module include at least part of a SQL Notification Services architecture available from Microsoft Corporation.

Other advantages novel features and objects of the invention and aspects and embodiments thereof will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention including aspects and embodiments thereof when considered in conjunction with the accompanying drawings which are schematic and which are not intended to be drawn to scale. In the figures each identical or nearly identical component that is illustrated in various figures is represented by a single numeral. For purposes of clarity not every component is labeled in every figure nor is every component of each embodiment or aspect of the invention shown where illustration is not necessary to allow those of ordinary skill in the art to understand the invention.

Although some embodiments of the invention are described in relation to targeting a notification of an event to one or more technical support providers e.g. IT personnel the invention is not so limited. Automatically targeting notification of an event to any person regardless of the person s occupation or responsibilities is intended to fall within the scope of the invention. As used herein a technical support provider is a person who provides technical support for any of certain software hardware and firmware or a combination thereof such as for example one or more computer systems e.g. a server and or one or more applications. Technical support providers may include but are not limited to IT team members who typically provide support internally for an enterprise persons who provide external support on behalf of an enterprise to customers of an enterprise and technical support persons who provide technical support to customers of an enterprise but are not employees or agents of the enterprise.

As used herein a server is a computer system or a portion thereof residing on a network that provides one or more services for users. Such services may be embodied as one or more applications at least a portion of each application residing on the server. For example a server portion of the application may reside on the server while the client portion of an application may reside on one or more user devices. As used herein a user device is a communication and or computational device from to which a user may send receive communications and which may serve as an endpoint to communications on a communications network. User devices include but are not limited to workstations personal computers e.g. PCs laptop computers notebook computers telephones e.g. landline or mobile pagers Blackberry brand devices PCS devices personal digital assistants PDAs two way radios e.g. walkie talkies other types of user devices and any suitable combination of the foregoing.

Although some embodiments of the invention are described as being implemented using the SQL Notification Services NS architecture available from Microsoft Corporation the invention is not so limited. Other suitable architectures including known architectures may be used and are intended to fall within the scope of the invention.

The function and advantage of these and other embodiments of the present invention will be more fully understood from the examples described below. The following examples are intended to facilitate a better understanding and illustrate the benefits of the present invention but do not exemplify the full scope of the invention.

As used herein whether in the written description or the claims the terms comprising including carrying having containing involving and the like are to be understood to be open ended i.e. to mean including but not limited to. Only the transitional phrases consisting of and consisting essentially of respectively shall be closed or semi closed transitional phrases as set forth with respect to claims in the United States Patent Office Manual of Patent Examining Procedures Eighth Edition Revision 2 May 2004 Section 2111.03.

Network system may represent an enterprise s network or a portion thereof and may include any of communications network one or more user devices e.g. any of user devices and one or more servers e.g. any of accounting server sales server notification server and R D server one or more data sources e.g. accounting database sales database notification database and R D database and one or more other network devices. Although illustrates only three user devices it should be appreciated that network system may include any number of user services such as for example tens hundreds or even thousands of user devices. Further system may include several other servers and or data sources. It should also be appreciated that one or more servers may reside on a same network device as a user device. For example notification server and user device may reside on a same network device such that communications between the two do not need to travel across any network media of network . Further one or more data sources may reside on a same network device as one or more servers and or one or more user devices.

Each of servers and may provide access to and services relating to the data residing in its respective database and . Although illustrates one to one relationships between servers and databases a single server may provide access and or provide services relating to the data residing in multiple data sources. Further multiple servers may provide access to and or services relating to the data residing in a single data source.

Accounting server may provide services for and or be owned by an accounting group of an enterprise and sales server and R D server may provide services for and or be owned by a sale group and an R D group respectively.

Notification server may be configured to send notifications to user devices e.g. user devices and in response to events that occur on the network for example events relating to any of servers and . Events relating to or associated with a server include but are not limited to software errors and or hardware errors or failures on the server including those relating to applications residing on the server any of its corresponding data sources or any connections between the server and other network components e.g. its corresponding data source s peripheral devices other servers user devices printers etc. and a change or addition to any information e.g. change of a state of a variable on the server or any of its corresponding data sources.

According to some embodiments of the invention the notification server may be configured to target notifications of events to one or more persons e.g. users or others . The notification server may be configured by one or programmers and or one or more users as will be described below in more detail and may include storing certain data in one or more notification databases.

System may include any of communications network targeted notification application TNA schedule database and subscription database . TNA may reside on a notification server e.g. server of and each of schedule database and subscription database may be part of a same database e.g. notification database . Each of the databases shown in A and B may be any of a plurality of type of database such as for example a relational database an object oriented database a file system another type of database or any suitable combination of the foregoing. TNA may be configured to store schedule information and subscription information based on one or more user inputs to select one or more subscribers based on subscription information schedule information and event information and or generate and send one or more notifications to the selected one or more subscribers . TNA may include any of subscription management module SMM subscriber selection module SSM and notification distribution module NDM .

TNA may be implemented using any of a variety of architectures such as for example the SQL NS architecture available from Microsoft Corporation. Information regarding the SQL NS architecture is available at the website having the URL www.microsoft.com sql NS default.asp the contents of which a hereby incorporated by reference. Other known architectures may be used. Further TNA may be implemented without using any known architecture. That is it may be created from scratch. 

SMM may be configured to enable one or more users to provide user input for one or more subscribers and to generate subscription information and schedule information from the user input. Although SMM is illustrated as being part of TNA it may be a separate application from SMM or a portion of such an application. For example module may be a web based application configured to interface with the browser of one or more user devices to enable a user to enter information and or may be a server portion of an application having a client portion residing on one or more user devices.

As used herein a subscriber is a person subscribed i.e. registered or signed up to be eligible to receive notifications of events associated with a network e.g. network . Subscribing a user to be eligible to receive notification may include entering information for the user in a database e.g. notification database . Such information is referred to herein as subscriber information. A subscriber may be subscribed to receive notifications for one or more particular notification applications e.g. TNA . As used herein subscription information is information defining a subscriber s subscription to one or more particular notification applications e.g. TNA subscribing the user to receive a notification for one or more particular events associated with a network for example events associated with one or more servers and or applications. A subscriber for a particular application can be but is not necessarily a user of the application. For example a subscriber may be a technical support provider who supports the application but does not actually use the application aside from addressing technical issues .

The user input and subscription information may include for each subscriber any of the following information one or more applications for which the subscriber is responsible one or more servers e.g. computers for which the subscriber is responsible one or more server groups e.g. computer groups for which the user is responsible a severity threshold of an event for which to notify the subscriber one or more event descriptions for which to notify the subscriber and one or more event sources for which to notify the subscriber.

The one or more applications included in the subscription information may be specified in any of a variety of ways. For example an identifier e.g. a name and or location of an application may be specified. Further if system is a system capable of using management packs e.g. a system that is implemented using an SQL NS architecture an application may be specified by specifying a management pack corresponding to the application. As used herein a management pack is a set of one or more rule groups where a rule group is a set of one or more rules. Each event which may result in a notification being sent to one or more subscribers may be triggered by a rule. Thus a management pack can be configured to include a particular set of rule groups which in turn include a particular set of one or more rules that are specific to a particular application. Accordingly by specifying a particular management pack in the subscription information for a subscriber a particular application is specified.

In some embodiments a management pack may be selected from a preexisting list of management packs such as for example management packs available from a OnePoint database or one or more other Microsoft Operations Management MOM databases available from Microsoft Corporation. For example in some embodiments a management pack may be selected and or entered by a user through a user interface display such as for example user interface display described below in relation to . Such a user interface display may be provided by SMM .

The one or more servers and or one or more server groups of the subscription information together may be classified as host information. The host information specifies the one or more servers e.g. computers to be monitored for the occurrence of events. A server group is a collection of one or more servers which may be configured to communicate with TNA for example across communications network . For example a computer group may define a group consisting of two or more of accounting server sales server and R D server . Further the one or more servers specified in the subscription information may include any of these servers. Servers and server groups for which a subscriber can subscribe may be made available by a notification database such as for example a database available within a SQL NS architecture. One or more servers may be entered and or selected by a user through a user interface display such as for example user interface display . Such a user interface display may be provided by SMM .

Each of the one or more events sources for which to notify the subscriber may specify an entity responsible to generate an indication of the event. For given subscription information the entity specified by the event source may be any entity residing on one of the servers or server groups specified by the subscription information or another network device on a communications network e.g. network . Any of a variety of other types of entities also may be specified by each event source.

An event description provides a description of a specific event to be monitored and a severity threshold specified a threshold level of severity of an event for which to notify a subscriber. The severity threshold may be specified using a number e.g. 1 5 or a character string e.g. information warning or error or low medium or high another type of symbol or any suitable combination thereof depending on the threshold system implemented for system .

Event sources even descriptions and severity thresholds may be selected and or entered by a user through a user interface display such as for example display . Such a display may be provided by SMM . The available event sources event descriptions and severity thresholds may be those made available through a notification database such as for example OnePoint or another MOM database available from Microsoft Corporation.

As an example the subscription information of a subscriber may define that the subscriber is responsible to support a database management application e.g. Microsoft SQL Server that manages a marketing database e.g. part of sales database for a sales group and is responsible to support the server e.g. sales server that provides access to and services for the database application. Further subscription information may define that the subscriber is to be notified of any events described as a data integrity error where the marketing database is the source of the event and having a severity of at least medium .

As used herein schedule information is information defining a subscriber s work schedule for receiving notifications and one or more exceptions to this schedule. Schedule information may be specific to a particular subscription or may apply to all subscriptions for a given subscriber. A subscriber s work schedule may specify a start time and an end time for which a subscriber intends to receives notifications for a selected day of the week. Further for a given day of the week the subscriber s work schedule may specify that the user intends to receive notifications all day e.g. 24 hours . In addition the subscriber s work schedule may specify that the user is free to receive notifications all the time e.g. 24 hours a day 7 days a week regardless of the date day or time.

A work schedule exception may specify exceptional conditions to the subscriber s work schedule for which the subscriber is not to receive notifications. Thus a work schedule exception overrides a work schedule specified for a subscriber. A work schedule exception may specify a date start time and end time for the exception and may specify a reason for the exception. For example the schedule information for a subscriber may specify that the subscriber has a work schedule of Monday through Friday 9 00 a.m. to 5 00 p.m. and specify a work schedule exception indicating that the subscriber does not work the Friday after Thanksgiving. Schedule information may be entered and or selected by a user through any of a variety of types of user interface displays e.g. a GUI display which may be provided by SMM .

SMM may be configured to provide a user interface that enables users to enter subscription information and or schedule information which may provide one or more user interface displays e.g. display described below in relation to . As used herein a user interface is an application or part of an application i.e. a set of computer readable instructions that enables a user to interface with an application during execution of the application. A user interface may include code defining how an application outputs information to a user during execution of the application for example visually through a computer screen or other means audibly through a speaker of other means and manually through a game controller or other means. Such user interface also may include code defining how a user may input information during execution of the application for example audibly using a microphone or manually using a keyboard mouse game controller track ball touch screen or other means.

The user interface may define how information is visually presented i.e. displayed to the user and defines how the user can navigate the visual presentation i.e. display of information and input information in the context of the visual presentation. During execution of the application the user interface may control the visual presentation of information and enable the user to navigate the visual presentation and enter information in the context of the visual presentation. Types of user interfaces range from command driven interfaces where users type commands menu driven interfaces where users select information from menus and combinations thereof to GUIs which typically take more advantage of a computer s graphics capabilities are more flexible intuitive and easy to navigate and have a more appealing look and feel than command driven and menu driven visual user interfaces. As used herein the visual presentation of information presented by a user interface or GUI is referred to as a user interface display or a GUI display respectively.

In contrast to a typical notification system in which only a select few users e.g. a network administrator have the ability to enter subscription information for subscribers SMM may be configured so that users may enter their own subscriber and schedule information and or subscriber and schedule information for others. Such a configuration de centralizes the data entry workload on system . In some embodiments SMM may be configured e.g. as a security feature or otherwise to permit only select users to enter subscription information and or schedule information for a subscriber. For example a user and or a person to whom the user reports or is otherwise above the user in an enterprise hierarchy may be the only person s permitted to enter subscription and or schedule information for the user.

SSM may be configured to receive event information subscription information and schedule information and to generate selected subscriber information based on this received information. Event information may include any of a variety of information relating to the occurrence of an event on communications network including information corresponding to subscription information . For example for each event specified by event information the event information may include any of an application associated with the event one or more servers e.g. computers associated with the event one or more server groups e.g. computer groups associated with the event a severity of the event a description of the event and a source of the event.

Although shows event information originating from communications network the invention is not so limited. In some embodiments the event information may be received from an event database to which the TNA may be directly connected for example on a same network device. Such event information may be generated from information received from communications network stored locally and then accessed by SMM . Further one or more other event databases providing event information may reside on communications network .

SSM may be configured to compare event information to subscription information for example in response to receiving event information . SSM also may be configured to compare time information to schedule information for one or more users. Based on these one or more comparisons SSM may select one or more users to whom to send a notification and output selected subscription information to NDM . SSM may be part of a notification generator that generates notification information and sends the notification information to NDM for example as described below in relation to . The selected subscriber information may be included in notification information sent to NDM .

SSM may be configured to compare one or more pieces of information included in event information for a particular event to a corresponding one or more pieces of information for a given subscriber from subscription information . For example for one or more subscribers SSM may be configured to compare any of the following pieces of event information for a particular event an application associated with the event a server associated with the event a server group associated with the event a severity of the event a description of the event and a source of the event to a respective one of any of the following pieces of subscription information of a subscriber one or more applications for which the subscriber is responsible one or more servers for which the subscriber is responsible one or more server groups for which the subscriber is responsible a severity threshold of an event for which to notify the subscriber one or more event descriptions for which to notify the subscriber and one or more event sources for which to notify the subscriber.

SSM may configured to determine that a subscriber is eligible to receive a notification about the event if one or more e.g. all of the pieces of subscription information match the corresponding pieces of event information. After or during this determination SSM may determine a current time and compare the current time to the schedule information of the subscriber i.e. the work schedule and any work schedule exception of the subscriber. For example SSM may be configured to compare for each eligible subscriber the determined current time to the work schedule information and the work schedule exception information included within schedule information . The current time may be recorded according to time standard such as for example Coordinated Universal Time UTC .

SSM may select the one or more subscribers of the eligible subscribers for whom the current time falls within the subscriber s work schedule and does not satisfy a schedule exception for the user. From these selected subscribers SSM may generate selected subscriber information . It should be appreciated that SSM may first compare the current time to the schedule information to determine eligible subscribers and then compare the subscription information of the eligible subscribers to the event information. Further the subscription information and schedule information may be combined and to selected subscribers to whom to send a notification the combined information for each subscriber may be compared to the event information and current time.

NDM may be configured to receive selected subscriber information e.g. included within one or more notification generate one or more notifications and send them to the one or more selected subscribers. As is described in more detail below in relation to NDM may be configured to re format notifications received from SSM which may be part of a notification generator into notifications having a suitable format e.g. e mail a telephone or pager signal an instant messaging IM message etc. for delivery to one or more subscribers. Each received and generated notification may include any of a variety of information including any of subscriber information for the subscriber subscriber device information described below for the subscriber schedule information for the subscriber event information and subscription information relating to the subscriber and event.

In some embodiments of the invention system may be implement using an existing architecture such as for example an SQL NS architecture available from Microsoft Corporation.

System may include any of target notification application TNA notification services NS engine subscriber database subscription database schedule database event database and notification database . It should be appreciated that databases and may be integrated as one or more databases.

TNA may include any of subscription management application SMA event provider notification generator and distributor . SMA may be configured to collect subscriber subscription subscriber device and schedule information from a user and pass this information to an NS Application Programming Interface API see . As used herein an application programming interface or API is a set of one or more computer readable instructions that provide access to one or more other sets of computer readable instructions that define functions so that such functions can be configured to be executed on a computer in conjunction with an application program. An API may be considered the glue between application programs and a particular computer environment or platform e.g. any of those discussed below and may enable a programmer to program applications to run on one or more particular computer platforms or in one or more particular computer environments.

The NS API may be configured to transfer the data entered by a user into an appropriate one or more NS databases such as for example any of databases and for example as described below in relation to .

Event provider may be configured to generate one or more events based on changes to information on a network such as for example anywhere on network . Event provider may include a SQL server provider configured to collect receive information including changes to information from one or more network devices on a network e.g. in accordance with an SQL query language such as for example from one or more SQL databases. Event provider including SQL server provider may be configured to generate events e.g. in event batches as one or more event objects and store the events in an event database which will be described in more detail below in relation to . Event provider may include other types of event providers.

Notification generator may be configured to generate one or more notifications for example by matching event information and or current time information to subscription information and or schedule information respectively. Notification generator may include one or more notification rules . Rules may be applied by generator e.g. an EventRule component of a Generator of an SQL NS architecture to determine subscriber s to whom a notification should be sent. For example rules may specify an SQL query to be performed on event information to determine matches between event information and subscription and or matches between current time information and schedule information. Notification generator may be configured to perform the functions of SSM module described above and will be described in more detail below in relation to .

Distributor may be configured to send notifications to one or more subscribers in accordance with one or more formats such as for example as an e mail in accordance with the Simple Mail Transport Protocol SMTP . Distributor may include XSLT CS module XSLT module and SMTP e mail module . XSLT module may be configured to transform XML documents into other XML documents in accordance with Extensible Stylesheet Language Tranformations XSLT and module may be configured to transform XML documents into other documents. Thus module and may be configured to transform notifications from one XML format to another XML format. Distributor may include other modules for converting notifications to one or more other notification formats.

Notification Services Engine NSE may configure one or more components of TNA and or one or more components of databases and based on information e.g. metadata included within targeted notification application definition file ADF . Such configuration may be performed when system is initially installed e.g. at a client site . The ADF may include any of a variety of information including any of one or more data structures for events information that SMA may receive the data structure of notification information generated by notification generator one or more notification rules the entity that will provide events for event provider e.g. SQL server provider configuration details of distributor and other information. ADF may include information defining a number of schemas each of which may be used to define one or more data structures of any of databases and .

Targeted notification ADF may be configured in accordance with a markup language such as for example the extensible markup language XML . ADF may specify a plurality of schemas e.g. in accordance with a markup language such as XML including any of schemas and described below in relation to . NSE may be configured to use the schema definitions to define data structures for any of databases and . Further NSE may use these definitions to configure any of the components of TNA .

ADF may define a subscription schema from which one or more subscription data structures e.g. tables may be configured in subscription database . These data structures may make use of existing data structures provided by a notification architecture e.g. SQL NS such as for example NSAlertSubscriptionSubscriptions. As will be described in more detail below in relation to subscription information entered by user can be stored as one or more records e.g. table entries in accordance with one or more subscription data structures .

Schema may include a plurality of fields each field having a field name and a field type . Schema may include any of the following fields server field for specifying a server e.g. a computer associated with an event description field for specifying a description of an event severity field for specifying a severity of an event source field for specifying a source of an event application field for specifying an application e.g. by indicating a management pack identifier associated with an event and a server group field for specifying a server group e.g. computer group associated with an event.

Notification schema may include a plurality of fields each field including a field name and field type . Schema may include any of the following fields server field for specifying a server e.g. a computer associated with an event description field for specifying a description of an event severity field for specifying a severity of an event source field for specifying a source of an event application field for specifying an application e.g. by indicating a management pack identifier associated with an event and a server group field for specifying a server group e.g. computer group associated with an event.

It should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to schemas illustrated in and any of numerous other implementations of these schemas for example variations of schemas are possible and are intended to fall within the scope of the inventions. Further each of the schemas may include additional rows and or columns and the arrangement of the rows and columns may be different than the arrangements shown in .

As described above SMA may be configured to enable on or more users to provide user input for one ore more subscribers. SMA may pass this information to notification API which may generate any of subscriber information subscriber device information subscription information and schedule information and store them as one or more subscriber records subscriber device records subscription records and schedule records respectively. Subscriber information schedule information and subscription information may include any of the information described above in relation to . Subscriber device information may include information relating to the user device on which a subscriber is to receive notifications. Through SMA a subscriber may specify one or more devices where each device may have a unique name. Subscriber device information also may include for each specified device a type of the device such as for example a device that supports receiving e mail using SMTP. For this type of device subscriber device information may include a valid e mail address. Subscriber device information also may include an indication that for a particular device a subscriber wishes to receive a limited text notification. A limited text notification may include an abbreviated amount of notification information as opposed to all of the notification information typically included in a notification e.g. as specified by one or more notification configuration structures .

In some embodiments NS API may be configured to use abstractions e.g. classes or other type definitions available from a notification architecture to enter update and or delete subscriber devices from subscriber database . For example SMA may be configured to utilize SubscriberDevice and SubscriberDeviceEnumeration classes available from an SQL NS architecture.

For schedule information SMA may be configured e.g. by NSE to utilize ActiveX Data Objects ADO of the .NET technology i.e. ADO.NET to exchange information with schedule database .

Digressing briefly from is a screen shot illustrating an example of a user interface display for adding and or changing subscription information for a user. Display is merely an illustrative embodiment of a display enabling a user to enter subscription information and is not intended to limit the scope of the invention. Any of numerous other implementations of such a display for example variations of display are possible and are intended to fall within the scope of the invention. For example display may be configured to allow display of more or less information than that shown in . Further the size location and type of each element in the display and the arrangement of elements in the display can be different than as shown in .

Display may be configured to enable a user to enter any of a variety of subscriber and subscription information including any of the subscription information described above. Display may include any of application field server group field server field device field severity threshold field notification source field notification description field and other types of fields. Application field may be a combobox enabling a user to select one or more applications for which the user is to be responsible. For example field may enable a user to select one more management packs each management corresponding a particular application. Field may be any other plurality of other types of fields and may enable an user to enter one or more applications in addition or as an alternative to selecting one or more applications. In some embodiments field may enable a user to enter a wildcard symbol indicating that the subscriber is to be responsible for all eligible applications.

Server group field may be a combobox enabling a user to select one or more servers e.g. computers from an existing list of servers for which the subscribers is to be responsible. Field may be any other variety of other types of fields and may enable a user to enter one or more server groups as an alternative or in addition to selecting one or more server groups. Field may be configured to enable a user to indicate that a subscriber is to be responsible for all eligible servers. For example field may enable a user to enter a wildcard symbol such as an asterisk.

Server field may be a combobox or other type of field enabling a user to enter and or select one or more servers e.g. computers for which a subscriber is to be responsible. Field may enable a user to indicate that a subscriber is to be responsible for all available computers for example by enabling a user to enter a wildcard symbol such as an asterisk.

Device field may be a combobox or another type of field that enables a user to enter and or select one or more devices on which the user is to receive notifications. Severity threshold field may be a combobox or another type of field enabling a user to enter and or select a severity threshold of an invent for which notify a subscriber. Field may be configured to enable a user to indicate that a subscriber is to be notified of an event irrespective of its threshold for example by enabling a user to enter a wildcard symbol such as an asterisk.

Alert field may be a combobox or another type of field that enables a user to enter and or select one or more event sources for which to notify a subscriber. Field may be a configured to enable a user to specify that a subscriber is to be notified of events irrespective of the source of an event for example by enabling a user to enter a wildcard symbol such as an asterisk.

Event description field may be a text box or another type of field that enables a user to select and or enter one or more event descriptions for which to notify a subscriber. Field may be configured to enable a user to indicate that a subscriber is to be notified of an event irrespective of its description for example by enabling a user to specify a wildcard symbol such as an asterisk.

One or more user interface displays similar to display may be provided to enter subscriber information subscriber device information and or schedule information.

Returning to event provider may be configured to receive information e.g. changes to one or more pieces of information on network and generate event information to be stored in event database as one or more event records . The event provider may be configured to generate event information to be stored as one or more event records in accordance with one or more events data structures . Event provider may be configured to monitor e.g. periodically one or more network devices on network to determine if any information has changed since it was last checked.

Notification generator may be configured to monitor event database e.g. periodically to determine if there are any new event records indicating the occurrence of a new event. If it is determined that there are new events e.g. since the last time it was checked notification generator may retrieve event information from event database and compare event information to subscription information for one or more subscribers for example as described above in relation to . Notification generator also may determine a current time and compare the current time to schedule information for one or more subscribers. Based on the results of one or both of these comparison notification generator may generate notification information specifying one or more notifications to be sent to one or more subscribers. This notification information may be stored as one or more notification records in accordance with notification configuration data structures described above.

Distributor may be configured to monitor notification database e.g. periodically to determine if there are any new notification records . If it is determined that there are new notification records distributor may retrieve notification information from these notification records and transmit one or more notifications to the one or more subscribers indicated in the notification information. As discussed above distributor may configure each of the notifications in accordance with one or more formats and may be configured to convert the notification information to the one or more formats.

In embodiments in which system is implemented using an SQL NS architecture and information is received from a OnePoint database or one or more other MOM databases available from Microsoft Corporation system may include a Data Transformation Service DTS module not shown configured to synchronize information with information stored in one or more of the databases shown in .

Each of systems and and components thereof may be implemented using any of a variety of technologies including software e.g. C C C Java or a combination thereof hardware e.g. one or more application specific integrated circuits firmware e.g. electrically programmed memory or any combination thereof. For example SMM and SMA may be configured using any of the plurality of technologies such as for example Microsoft.NET technology which may involve using Active Server Pages ASP available from .NET ASP.NET and or C . One or more of the components of systems and may reside on a single device e.g. a computer or one or more components may reside on separate discrete devices. Further each component may be distributed across multiple devices and one or more of the devices may be interconnected.

Further on each of the one or more devices that include one or more components of systems and each of the components may reside in one or more locations on the system. For example different portions of the components of these systems may reside in different areas of memory e.g. RAM ROM disk etc. on the device. Each of such one or more devices may include among other components a plurality of known components such as one or more processors a memory system a disk storage system one or more network interfaces and one or more busses or other internal communication links interconnecting the various components. Each of systems and and components thereof may be implemented using a computer system such as that described below in relation to .

In Act subscription information for a plurality of subscribers may be received from one or more users. Subscription information may specify for each subscriber one or more applications and or servers for which the subscriber is responsible and or any of the subscription information described above. Act may be performed in accordance with any of the embodiments of the invention described above. For example the information may be received using any of SMM SMA and or user interface display .

In Act the subscription information may be stored in one or more databases such as for example any of databases and described above in relation to and .

In Act schedule information may be received for a plurality of subscribers from one or more users. The schedule information may specify for each subscriber a work schedule of the subscriber one or more exceptions to the work schedule and other information. Act may be performed according to any of the embodiments of the invention described above. For example schedule information may be received using SMM and or SMA .

In Act the schedule information may be stored in one or more databases such as for example any of notification database schedule database and or schedule database described above in relation to and .

In Act event information about an occurrence of an event may be received where such an event may be associated with an application and or a server such as for example any of servers and described above in relation to . This information may be received in accordance with any of the embodiments described above. For example this information may be received from a remote source e.g. on network by SSM of system and or may be received from an event database e.g. event database by a notification generator e.g. notification generator . In some embodiments Act includes an event provider receiving information and storing event information generated from this information in an event database. The stored event information may be extracted by a notification generator for example as described above in relation to .

In Act subscription information may be accessed from one or more data sources for example in response to receiving the event information. Further schedule information may be accessed from one or more data sources for example in response to Act . The one or more data sources from which the subscription and or the schedule information may be accessed may be any of a plurality of types of data sources for example notification database subscription database subscription database schedule database and or schedule database .

In Act at least one of the plurality of subscribers for which information was accessed may be selected based on the accessed subscription information schedule information and or event information. Other information may be used to select subscribers as well. As described above in relation to A and B the event information may be compared to subscription information and or scheduling information. Based on the selection notification information may be generated that includes an indication of the one or more selected subscribers along with other information regarding the notification such as for example event information and subscriber device information. Act or parts thereof may be performed by one or more of the components described above such as for example SSM and or notification generator .

In Act a notification of the event may be sent to the at least one subscriber for example as described above in relation to notification distribution module and or distributor .

Method may include additional acts. Further the order of the act performed as part of method is not limited to the order illustrated in as the acts may be performed in other orders and or one or more of the acts may be performed in series or in parallel at least partially . For example Acts and may be performed before and or in parallel to Acts and .

Method acts thereof and various embodiments and variations of this method and these acts individually or in combination may be defined by computer readable signals tangibly embodied on or more computer readable media for example non volatile recording media integrated circuit memory elements or a combination thereof. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by a computer. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices other types of volatile and non volatile memory any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can accessed by a computer and any suitable combination of the foregoing.

Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media other types of communication media and any suitable combination of the foregoing.

Computer readable signals embodied on one or more computer readable media may define instructions for example as part of one or more programs that as a result of being executed by a computer instruct the computer to perform one or more of the functions described herein e.g. method or any acts thereof and or various embodiments variations and combinations thereof. Such instructions may be written in any of a plurality of programming languages for example Java Visual Basic C C or C Fortran Pascal Eiffel Basic COBOL etc. or any of a variety of combinations thereof. The computer readable media on which such instructions are embodied may reside on one or more of the components of any of systems and described herein may be distributed across one or more of such components and may be in transition therebetween.

The computer readable media may be transportable such that the instructions stored thereon can be loaded onto any computer system resource to implement the aspects of the present invention discussed herein. In addition it should be appreciated that the instructions stored on the computer readable medium described above are not limited to instructions embodied as part of an application program running on a host computer. Rather the instructions may be embodied as any type of computer code e.g. software or microcode that can be employed to program a processor to implement the above discussed aspects of the present invention.

It should be appreciated that any single component or collection of multiple components of a computer system for example the computer system described in relation to that perform the functions described herein can be generically considered as one or more controllers that control such functions. The one or more controllers can be implemented in numerous ways such as with dedicated hardware and or firmware using a processor that is programmed using microcode or software to perform the functions recited above or any suitable combination of the foregoing.

Various embodiments according to the invention may be implemented on one or more computer systems. These computer systems may be for example general purpose computers such as those based on Intel PENTIUM type processor Motorola PowerPC Sun UltraSPARC Hewlett Packard PA RISC processors any of a variety of processors available from Advanced Micro Devices AMD or any other type of processor. It should be appreciated that one or more of any type of computer system may be used to implement various embodiments of the invention.

A general purpose computer system according to some embodiments of the invention may be configured to perform any of the functions described above. It should be appreciated that the system may perform other functions and the invention is not limited to having any particular function or set of functions.

For example various aspects of the invention may be implemented as specialized software executing in a general purpose computer system such as that shown in . The computer system may include a processor connected to one or more memory devices such as a disk drive memory or other device for storing data. Memory is typically used for storing programs and data during operation of the computer system . Components of computer system may be coupled by an interconnection mechanism which may include one or more busses e.g. between components that are integrated within a same machine and or a network e.g. between components that reside on separate discrete machines . The interconnection mechanism enables communications e.g. data instructions to be exchanged between system components of system . Computer system also includes one or more input devices for example a keyboard mouse trackball microphone or touch screen and one or more output devices for example a printing device display screen or speaker. In addition computer system may contain one or more interfaces not shown that connect computer system to a communication network in addition or as an alternative to the interconnection mechanism .

The storage system shown in greater detail in typically includes a computer readable and writeable nonvolatile recording medium in which signals are stored that define a program to be executed by the processor or information stored on or in the medium to be processed by the program. The medium may for example be a disk or flash memory. Typically in operation the processor causes data to be read from the nonvolatile recording medium into another memory that allows for faster access to the information by the processor than does the medium . This memory is typically a volatile random access memory such as a dynamic random access memory DRAM or static memory SRAM . It may be located in storage system as shown or in memory system not shown. The processor generally manipulates the data within the integrated circuit memory and then copies the data to the medium after processing is completed. A variety of mechanisms are known for managing data movement between the medium and the integrated circuit memory element and the invention is not limited thereto. The invention is not limited to a particular memory system or storage system .

The computer system may include specially programmed special purpose hardware for example an application specific integrated circuit ASIC . Aspects of the invention may be implemented in software hardware or firmware or any combination thereof. Further such methods acts systems system elements and components thereof may be implemented as part of the computer system described above or as an independent component.

Although computer system is shown by way of example as one type of computer system upon which various aspects of the invention may be practiced it should be appreciated that aspects of the invention are not limited to being implemented on the computer system as shown in . Various aspects of the invention may be practiced on one or more computers having a different architecture or components that that shown in .

Computer system may be a general purpose computer system that is programmable using a high level computer programming language. Computer system may be also implemented using specially programmed special purpose hardware. In computer system processor is typically a commercially available processor such as the well known Pentium class processor available from the Intel Corporation. Many other processors are available. Such a processor usually executes an operating system which may be for example the Windows 95 Windows 98 Windows NT Windows 2000 Windows ME or Windows XP operating systems available from the Microsoft Corporation MAC OS System X available from Apple Computer the Solaris Operating System available from Sun Microsystems Linux available from various sources or UNIX available from various sources. Many other operating systems may be used.

The processor and operating system together define a computer platform for which application programs in high level programming languages are written. It should be understood that the invention is not limited to a particular computer system platform processor operating system or network. Also it should be apparent to those skilled in the art that the present invention is not limited to a specific programming language or computer system. Further it should be appreciated that other appropriate programming languages and other appropriate computer systems could also be used.

One or more portions of the computer system may be distributed across one or more computer systems not shown coupled to a communications network. These computer systems also may be general purpose computer systems. For example various aspects of the invention may be distributed among one or more computer systems configured to provide a service e.g. servers to one or more client computers or to perform an overall task as part of a distributed system. For example various aspects of the invention may be performed on a client server system that includes components distributed among one or more server systems that perform various functions according to various embodiments of the invention. These components may be executable intermediate e.g. IL or interpreted e.g. Java code which communicate over a communication network e.g. the Internet using a communication protocol e.g. TCP IP .

It should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to executing on any particular system or group of systems. Also it should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to any particular distributed architecture network or communication protocol.

Various embodiments of the present invention may be programmed using an object oriented programming language such as SmallTalk Java J J Sharp C Ada or C C Sharp . Other object oriented programming languages may also be used. Alternatively functional scripting and or logical programming languages may be used. Various aspects of the invention may be implemented in a non programmed environment e.g. documents created in HTML XML or other format that when viewed in a window of a browser program render aspects of a graphical user interface GUI or perform other functions . Various aspects of the invention may be implemented as programmed or non programmed elements or any combination thereof. Further various embodiments of the invention may be implemented using Microsoft.NET technology available from Microsoft Corporation.

Having now described some illustrative embodiments of the invention it should be apparent to those skilled in the art that the foregoing is merely illustrative and not limiting having been presented by way of example only. Numerous modifications and other illustrative embodiments are within the scope of one of ordinary skill in the art and are contemplated as falling within the scope of the invention. In particular although many of the examples presented herein involve specific combinations of method acts or system elements it should be understood that those acts and those elements may be combined in other ways to accomplish the same objectives. Acts elements and features discussed only in connection with one embodiment are not intended to be excluded from a similar role in other embodiments. Further for the one or more means plus function limitations recited in the following claims the means are not intended to be limited to the means disclosed herein for performing the recited function but are intended to cover in scope any equivalent means known now or later developed for performing the recited function.

Use of ordinal terms such as first second third etc. in the claims to modify a claim element does not by itself connote any priority precedence or order of one claim element over another or the temporal order in which acts of a method are performed but are used merely as labels to distinguish one claim element having a certain name from another element having a same name but for use of the ordinal term to distinguish the claim elements. Similarly in the written description above use of an ordinal term to modify an element does not by itself connote any priority precedence or order of the modified element over another element or the temporal order in which acts of a method are performed. Ordinal terms are used merely as labels to distinguish one element from another unless otherwise indicated.

