---

title: Hypothesized range and depth sonar processing method
abstract: A method for determining the likely range and depth of an acoustically radiating source in which characteristics are used from hypothetical ranges and depths. A received sonar signal is compared with modeled ranges and depths. The correlation between the received signal characteristics and the modeled characteristics gives the likely range and depth. In a preferred embodiment this is presented as a contour plot.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07307914&OS=07307914&RS=07307914
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07307914
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051130
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

The present invention relates generally to sonar processing and more particularly to a post processing method for estimating range and depth for one or more acoustically radiating sources by correlation processing between the passively received signal and an environmentally modeled signal.

Many traditional sonar systems provide only an estimation of the bearing from a platform to one or more radiating underwater acoustic sources of interest. It would be advantageous to obtain range and depth information to the one or more acoustic sources of interest. If for no other reason the performance of a sonar system can be enhanced by rapid estimation of range and depth to a radiating underwater acoustic source. Prior art techniques for obtaining range and depth are discussed below and may typically require knowledge about the depth of the source or involve the use of vertical sensor arrays with beamforming techniques or variable depth sonars or the like.

The following U.S. patents describe various prior art systems that may be related to the above and or other telemetry systems 

U.S. Pat. No. 4 312 053 issued Jan. 19 1982 to Lipsky discloses a method and apparatus for computing the range to and depth of a submerged object that either emits or reflects pulses of acoustic energy wherein a detecting array and related data handling apparatus measure as a function of time the apparent angles of arrival of the acoustic energy associated with each such pulse. This data is then translated into actual multipath arrival angles and multipath travel time differences which are utilized to solve mathematical equations the solutions of which result in the calculation of the range to and depth of the submerged source of acoustic energy.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 420 827 issued May 30 1995 to Feintuch discloses a variable depth sonar which is adapted to provide passive multipath target ranging and depth estimates. The sonar employs a novel estimation procedure which is adapted to sonars with relatively small sensors and limited computing power. A novel feature of the invention is the introduction of a change of depth of the sonar receiver mounted on a mobile platform into the estimation process. Measurements at the two different depths are combined to provide target range and depth. Other features and improvements are disclosed.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 455 806 issued Oct. 3 1995 to Hutson discloses a multi dimensional acoustic data processing and display system that arranges acoustic data in a three dimensional matrix. The three dimensional matrix is compressed using singular value decomposition into singular vectors and singular values. A historical database is created and maintained and is also concatenated with the three dimensional data. This database allows reverberation and noise to be diminished and other weaker features in the data to be enhanced. Once the data is compressed the data can be analyzed efficiently. The singular vectors are partitioned into one or more groups on the basis of their singular values or other criteria. Certain of the compressed data elements are enhanced or diminished by modifying the singular values within each of the groups of singular vectors. Selected singular vectors are processed further by other techniques for further enhancement detection isolation feature extraction and classification. The compressed and enhanced data is then expanded back into three dimensional form for display or for other processing.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 481 505 issued Jan. 2 1996 to Donald et al discloses a method and apparatus for detecting processing and tracking sonar signals to provide bearing range and depth information that locates an object in three dimensional underwater space. An inverse beamformer utilizes signals from a towed horizontal array of hydrophones to estimate a bearing to a possible object. A matched field processor receives measured covariance matrix data based upon signals from the hydrophones and signals from a propagation model. An eight nearest neighbor peak picker provides plane wave peaks in response to output beam levels from the matched processor. A five dimensional M of N tracker identifies peaks within the specified limit of frequency bearing change over time range and depth to specify an object as a target and to display its relative range and depth with respect to the array of hydrophones.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 914 912 issued Jun. 22 1999 to Yang discloses a sonar array post processor that employs an adaptive processing known as matched beam processing in the beam domain which takes analog or digital conventional beamforming outputs from a sonar array multiplies them by a set of adaptive weighting coefficients and produces a new set of beams. The new output beam of highest intensity yields the ideal maximum signal gain and correct target bearing. Continuous target tracking provided by the sonar array post processor in the endfire direction of a horizontal line array minimizes the towing ships maneuvers and for a bottom mounted surveillance system a smaller number of arrays are required.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 009 045 issued Dec. 28 1999 to Yang et al discloses an advanced vertical array beamformer signal processor that accomplishes acoustic beamforming of an underwater vertical array used in shallow water utilizing matched beam processing to suppress generated noise and or ship radiated noise thereby increasing the detectability of a submerged source emitting only a low noise signal. The processor exploits the difference of the signal arrival angle of both active and passive signals with that of the wind generated noise and ship radiated noise which is prominent in downward refractive sound speed profiles. After filtering the undesired noise the processor uses the depth of the source as a clue for detection the processor is an energy detector focused on the returns of a deep source.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 096 085 issued Aug. 1 2000 to Sammelman discloses a computer readable software stored on a storage medium and executed on a computer to perform an integrated sonar simulation including a parameter definition code for defining a plurality of parameters of a sonar target and sonar environment and a SNR computation code for computing a SNR of the sonar as a function of range to target based upon the parameters defined by the parameter definition code. The parameters defined by the parameter definition code include ambient noise volume scattering strength of the sonar environment sound velocity profile of the sonar beam patterns of both projector and receiver of the sonar type of sonar range resolution of the sonar number of eigenrays striking the surface and bottom of the sonar environment number of eigenrays striking the target ray trajectories to the target and surface and bottom scattering strength as a function of angle. The software also includes a target strength model generating code for computing scattering from a selected complex target of a stored set of complex target selections to thereby generate a target strength model for the selected complex target.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 466 891 issued to Carter et al. on Oct. 15 2002 provides a system that provides a sonar operator with the most likely range to a target of interest. The system generates and displays a contour based on ship s parameters target parameters environmental data and operator parameters. The sonar operator can vary many of the parameters in what if scenarios so as to generate groups of contours for preselected probabilities of detection. Contours can be used to show the actions that should be taken to ensure a favorable outcome.

The above cited prior art does not disclose a system which is not limited to vertical arrays or tracking and beamforming or which is not an active sonar system which is operable for determining range and depth. Consequently those skilled in the art will appreciate the present invention that addresses the above and other problems.

An object of the present invention is to rapidly estimate range and depth to an acoustic source at a selected bearing of interest.

These and other objects features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent from the drawings the descriptions given herein and the appended claims. However it will be understood that above listed objects and advantages of the invention are intended only as an aid in understanding certain aspects of the invention are not intended to limit the invention in any way and do not form a comprehensive or exclusive list of objects features and advantages.

Accordingly the present invention provides a method for estimating an unknown range and an unknown depth of an underwater acoustically radiating source. The method may comprise one or more steps such as for instance calculating an environmentally modeled acoustic signal positioned at one or more hypothetical ranges and depths passively receiving a sonar signal and or post processing the passively received sonar signal by correlating the passively received sonar signal with the environmentally modeled acoustic signal. The step of calculating the environmentally modeled acoustic signal may further comprise utilizing measured ocean depth information measured ocean floor slope information and measured sound velocity profile information for computing a plurality of ray traces for a matrix of hypothesized depths and ranges.

The method may further comprise determining an output of the step of post processing as a function of range and depth and or may further comprise producing autocorrelation peaks and combining the autocorrelation peaks to produce a graph of acoustic power with respect to range and depth. The method may further comprise assuming a depth of the underwater acoustically radiating source for resolving an uncertainty.

In another possible embodiment the method may comprise producing an autocorrelation function from a beam output from an acoustic array produced by a sonar signal. Other steps may comprise producing a weighting function based on a matrix of hypothesized depths and ranges for the underwater acoustically radiating source using measured water depth and measured sound velocity profile information. The method may further comprise combining the autocorrelation function and the weighting function into one acoustic power measure that is suitable for display in terms of range and depth.

In a preferred embodiment the post processing method of the present invention extracts depth and range estimates from autocorrelation or cepstrum functions. The method provides a sonar system with a rapid i.e. computationally efficient method for passively estimating range and depth to an underwater acoustic source. This embodiment of the method provides a relatively easy to implement technique which is intended to provide a maximum likelihood method of mapping autocorrelation or cepstrum peaks into target range and depth estimates.

The method comprises hypothesizing a range and depth predicting peaks in the autocorrelation function based on ray tracing or normal mode calculations with measured sound velocity profile data and then combining the predicted peaks into one power measure that may be displayed in terms of range and depth. The present invention utilizes post processing to exploit the robustness of correlation processing between the passively received signal and the environmentally modeled signal in order to accurately estimate acoustic contact target position. In accord with one preferred embodiment of the invention an autocorrelation or cepstrum function A is computed squared weighted and integrated. There is a slight technical difference between square and magnitude squared. The proposed method could use either the A function or the A squared function or the A magnitude squared function. In the preferred embodiment A magnitude squared function is envisioned. However there are cases where either A or A squared functions might offer improved performance in terms of achieving the desired result.

The output of the sonar receiving array can be beamformed to give the bearing to the source however the range R and depth D are still unknown. The beam output is then processed to achieve a squared autocorrelation or cepstrum function A such as function sketched in . In function peaks A B C D E and F represent the acoustic power arriving at different times . These peaks A F correspond to signals received on different paths such as those shown in .

Utilizing the technique of the present invention a range R and depth D to some hypothetical source is used as a hypothetical range. Environmental characteristics such as sound velocity profile SVP depth and bottom type are obtained. For each hypothetical range R and depth D the method then calculates locations of hypothetical peaks from these measured environmental characteristics by ray tracing. Peaks are calculated based on transmission from source along a set of probable paths such as those shown at and .

In range Rand depth Dgive predicted peaks as shown by line having predicted peaks A B C D E and F. Because peaks A F correspond to predicted peaks A F then Rand Drepresent a good prediction. On the other hand range R and depth D giving line having predicted peaks A B C D E and F do not correspond with the actual peaks A F.

In a preferred embodiment the information about the autocorrelation peaks is combined into one piece of location information that is directly described in terms of range and depth as shown in . For the example of the power in the six predicted locations shown in the graph may be nominally added to form one number. The squared summed numbers are then displayed in a three dimensional or contour plot as shown in which describes acoustic power with respect to range and depth. We would normally expect the plot to peak at the location of a source or sources and not to peak where there is not a source. For example from we expect a peak at R D point in but no peak at R D point in . Accordingly is a sketch of the contours of acoustic power with respect to range and depth that could be expected for the autocorrelation cepstrum function . A display such as gives the user an indication of the most likely location of the source while still indicating less likely locations.

To formulate the contour plot of the autocorrelation function A is multiplied by a weighting function W and integrated over all delay times . The weighting function is developed from the predicted peaks at the likely range and depth as discussed below. The weighting function is explicitly a function of delay but implicitly it is a function of the depth D and range R to a hypothetical source because the speed of sound is known from the environmental variables and the hypothetical distance can be calculated. Thus the output of the post processing method of the present invention is a function of R D as described below. In particular we write that a source at range R and depth D would provide the power given by the equation 

For any particular hypothesized range and depth there may be an uncertainty in abscissa location for the predicted auto correlation peaks. Thus some inaccuracy may occur from simply adding as per the present example the six squared autocorrelation numbers. Instead each weighting function would tend to be more complicated than six delta functions that depended on hypothesized range and depth. In one solution for this example each weighting might consist of six bell shape pulses having to do with the anticipated strength and dispersion of the six correlation peaks shown in this example.

As an example two possible weighting functions plotted in which correspond at least nominally to the predicted autocorrelation peaks as indicated at and in . It will be noted that while in the strength of the third peak is greatest this does not imply this peak or any other peak is always more important. It is merely intended to illustrate that different peaks can be given different weights in a general scheme.

To obtain the weighting function accurate sound velocity profile SVP information is required as well as accurate ocean depth and slope information. It is also desirable to compute ray traces or the normal mode equivalent for a matrix of hypothesized depths and ranges. Under normal operating conditions this computation could be made once a day or more often if the SVP or ocean depth changes. Thus for 11 depths 0 to 300 meters in 30 meter increments and for 21 ranges 0 to 20 kilometers in 1 km increments calculation of the hypothesized depth and range matrix requires at least 231 ray trace sets periodically. It will be appreciated that the available computing time provides a limit of to the resolution that can be obtained.

Accordingly in the present invention the autocorrelation or cepstrum function is condensed into its fundamental parameters range R and depth D. The condensation is accomplished by squaring weighting and integrating the autocorrelation function for a variety of R D dependent weightings. The selection of the weightings is accomplished by ray tracing predictions based on measured oceanographic conditions sound velocity profile SVP ocean depth ocean floor slope and ocean floor roughness. While this weighting would be expected to be a series of impulses necessary to rake through the autocorrelation function in one possible embodiment the impulses may be smeared or spread out to make the technique more robust in the face of measurement uncertainty.

The present invention provides a sonar operator a useful display to assist in resolving multiple sources. The present invention reduces operator interaction and reduces the problem of determining range and depth to fundamental parameters to be measured. The present invention also displays inherent data ambiguities as discussed hereinafter.

In one embodiment the present invention permits the sonar operator to be presented with a simple display that does not require operator interactive identification of which peaks correspond to which paths. Multiple N sources targets will give rise to multiple N peaks in the R D plane of so that the operator does not have to identify which peaks correspond to which targets.

However in general the R D contour display may vary with time as well as bearing and therefore fades of individual autocorrelation peaks may be expected. The extent to which these fades or missing peaks result in a faded or ambiguous solution will be apparent on the display. For example the possibility of a single delay could occur due to surface target radiating energy received on a submerged sonar receiving array as per the situation shown in . In this case the sonar receiving array would receive energy from the bottom path and bottom surface path . The peak is then due to the time delay difference in the arrival between the bottom path and bottom surface path .

However in a fading situation there are other submerged targets that could give rise to this correlation peak. Hence there is an inherent ambiguity in a single peak which may be and preferably is displayed to the operator in the present method by a contour plot in the form of a ridge in the R D display. An example of ridge of uncertainty due to fading correlation peaks is shown in . The ambiguity can be resolved if one knows or assumes a depth as indicated by line D . The fact that the method displays an ambiguous solution is not a fault of the method and may be advantageous because it is a reflection of the fact that sources at other locations could possibly give rise to the observed correlation peak s .

The method may also attach some significance to several weak but present autocorrelation cepstrum peaks. If peaks are not present in the autocorrelation or cepstrum function all multipath methods including the present method will fail. It will also be understood that variations in the computational methods of the present invention may be utilized. For instance an alternative more computational method for achieving the desired results may utilize matched field processing.

Accordingly many additional changes in the details components steps algorithms and organization of the system herein described and illustrated to explain the nature of the invention may be made by those skilled in the art within the principle and scope of the invention. It is therefore understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described.

