---

title: Engine system having carbon foam exhaust gas heat exchanger
abstract: An engine system includes an engine such as a compression ignition internal combustion engine, including a heat exchanger in an exhaust system thereof. The heat exchanger including at least one carbon foam block for cooling exhaust gas with cooling air. An exhaust system segment includes a carbon foam based heat exchanger configured to exchange heat between exhaust gas and cooling air at least in part via the carbon foam.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07287522&OS=07287522&RS=07287522
owner: Caterpillar Inc.
number: 07287522
owner_city: Peoria
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051227
---
The United States Government has certain rights in the present patent application and any patent that may issue thereon under DOE Contract No. DE AC05 00OR22725.

The present disclosure relates generally to engine systems and more particularly to an engine system having an internal combustion engine with a carbon foam gas to gas heat exchanger disposed in an exhaust system thereof.

Operation of engines such as internal combustion engines produces a variety of exhaust gas emissions including carbon dioxide carbon monoxide unburned hydrocarbons and various nitrogen oxygen compounds known in the art collectively as NOx. In recent years certain jurisdictions have implemented plans to reduce allowable limits on the relative amounts of certain exhaust gas emissions of particular concern. The present and upcoming restrictions have prompted engineers to further research known engine and exhaust systems and have driven a search for new strategies for exhaust gas treatment and engine operation showing promise for a reduction in certain emissions.

Control over the relative amounts of various compounds in engine exhaust gas has been attempted in numerous different ways. In some four cycle engines for example the relative timing of intake exhaust compression and expansion strokes are varied to control combustion phasing within the engine cylinders and therefore affect the relative amounts of certain emissions. In other designs combustion exhaust is treated by chemical means in an aftertreatment system to generate a desired emissions profile.

One technology that has received increasing attention involves recirculation of exhaust gas back into the engine intake pathway known in the art as EGR. In such an approach a portion of the relatively inert exhaust gas from the engine s exhaust manifold is returned to the intake manifold. Among other things the addition of exhaust gas to the fuel and air mixture in an engine cylinder can provide an inert gas heat sink that allows combustion to proceed at a relatively cooler temperature than might otherwise be practicable. EGR related technologies have become increasingly prevalent in diesel engines in particular.

The exhaust gas recirculation apparatus commonly known as an EGR loop may include a valve controlled passage extending between an exhaust system of the engine and the intake manifold. In certain instances it has been found to be desirable to cool the recirculated exhaust gas prior to supplying it to the intake manifold. In turbocharged engines it may be desirable to combine exhaust gas with combustion air upstream from the compressor. When the exhaust gas and air mixture is compressed via the turbocharger compressor it will increase in temperature. Cooling the exhaust gas prior to compression allows the temperature of the mixture ultimately delivered to the intake manifold to be maintained at more manageable and more desirable levels than would occur where the exhaust gas arrives at the compressor without first being cooled.

Various exhaust gas cooling devices are known which are disposed within the EGR loop. One common device includes an apparatus known in the art as a tube in shell heat exchanger. A conventional tube in shell heat exchanger includes a passage for exhaust gas which is thermally coupled with one or more passages carrying cooling water or engine coolant. The engine coolant water is circulated through the heat exchanger exchanging heat with the exhaust gas passing therethrough and thenceforth returned to the engine radiator for cooling in a conventional manner.

While designs similar to those above have experienced a certain level of technical and commercial success there are limitations to the efficacy and durability of conventional heat exchangers. For instance a coolant or water cooled heat exchanger requires a relatively complex plumbing system connecting with the main radiator assembly of the engine. In addition a typical engine radiator can be limited in its capacity to dissipate heat from the engine. Adding a subsystem such as an exhaust gas cooler can increase the heat load of the radiator above that which is desirable. Heightened emissions regulations have further compounded this problem as in certain operating strategies it is actually desirable to reject more heat from the engine than was traditionally required. While some manufacturers have attempted to increase the size of engine radiators to provide more heat rejection capacity engines and associated cooling systems are commonly sized and positioned in such a way that they cannot readily be reconfigured to accommodate larger radiators. Moreover increasing the size of radiators as well as using overly large and heavy conventional exhaust gas coolers adds undesirable weight to a work machine using such an engine as its power source.

Yet another problem plaguing engineers is the tendency for conventional exhaust gas coolers to suffer degradation due to corrosive condensed exhaust gases. As exhaust gases are cooled a certain proportion of the gases may actually condense to an acidic liquid. Such liquids are known to be corrosive to metals and can reduce the effectiveness of a conventional exhaust gas cooler as well as reduce its operating life.

Another problem with engine coolant based EGR coolers are limitations on exhaust gas exit temperatures which may be imposed by the engine coolant. The engine coolant will often be maintained at a minimum temperature by an engine coolant thermostat often in the range of 85 C. to 90 C. This effectively limits the temperature of exhaust gas exiting the exhaust gas cooler to a range above about 90 C. An air based EGR cooler can provide lower temperatures for exhaust gases leaving the cooler and entering the turbocharger which can result in greater air density and hence better engine performance. Typical air cooled exhaust gas heat exchangers like an air to air aftercooler depend upon a cooling flow of 5 lb or more per 1 lb of hot gas to provide the required cooling function.

Still another problem with engine coolant based EGR coolers is the potential for engine coolant to leak into the exhaust gas passages or for exhaust gases to leak into the engine coolant passages. In either case leakage of one fluid into another passage can be detrimental to the life of the engine.

In one aspect the present disclosure provides an engine system including an engine and an exhaust system coupled with the engine. A heat exchanger is coupled with the exhaust system and includes a heat conducting carbon foam an exhaust gas passage and a second passage. The exhaust gas passage and the second passage are configured to exchanger heat between fluids therein at least in part via the foam.

In another aspect the present disclosure provides a combustion exhaust system segment including a housing with a first fluid passage and a second fluid passage. A heat conducting carbon foam is disposed within at least one of the first and second fluid passages and is configured to exchange heat with a fluid in the other of the first and second fluid passages.

In still another aspect the present disclosure provides a method of exchanging heat between a combustion exhaust gas and another fluid. The method includes passing high temperature combustion exhaust gas through a first passage and passing low temperature fluid through another passage. The method further includes exchanging heat between the high temperature combustion exhaust gas and the low temperature fluid at least in part via a heat conducting carbon foam.

Referring to there is shown a work machine having a work machine body . An engine system is coupled with work machine body and includes an engine and an exhaust system . Work machine may be virtually any type of conceivable work machine having an engine however it is contemplated that work machines such as on highway trucks off highway trucks loaders tractors excavators etc. will particularly benefit through the teachings of the present disclosure. Engine may be an internal combustion engine such as a compression ignition diesel engine however other engine types such as spark ignited gasoline or gaseous fuel engines and gas turbine engines are contemplated herein. In the embodiment shown in exhaust system will include a heat exchanger operable to exchange heat between a fluid such as cooling air and exhaust gas recirculated from an exhaust manifold of engine to an intake manifold thereof.

Heat exchanger may be disposed within an exhaust gas recirculation passage or loop connecting with an exhaust outlet passage which in turn connects with exhaust manifold . Heat exchanger includes an exhaust inlet and an exhaust outlet which may be understood as defining a segment of exhaust system . Although it is contemplated that the present disclosure will be particularly applicable to engine systems wherein exhaust gas is cooled during recirculation it is not thereby limited and could be implemented where exhaust gas is cooled for some other purpose. Further while much of the present description discusses cooling of exhaust gas those skilled in the art will appreciate that the air or other fluid which cools the exhaust gas will itself be heated. In certain contemplated embodiments the operation of interest could actually be the heating of air rather than the cooling of exhaust gas.

A control valve may be disposed between exhaust outlet passage and heat exchanger to selectively connect and or adjust the connection therebetween. Heat exchanger may comprise a plurality of separate units including exhaust gas and cooling air units arranged in a stacked alternating fashion. In the embodiment of for example heat exchanger includes two exhaust gas units and two cooling air units stacked together. Exhaust gas units and cooling air units each define an internal fluid passage such as an exhaust gas passage and a cooling air passage respectively as described herein. The respective exhaust gas and cooling air passages will typically be fluidly isolated from adjacent passages.

A first manifold assembly specific to heat exchanger is coupled therewith and may be configured to direct exhaust gas from inlet to each of exhaust gas units . First manifold assembly may further be configured to separately direct cooling air from a cooling air supply passage to each of cooling air units . The internal plumbing of first manifold assembly is not shown however suitable designs are well known to those skilled in the art. Cooling air may be provided to supply passage from a cooling air intake . Intake may include a supply fan not shown for example. Alternatively intake might be coupled with an intake air system of engine to supply ambient air or cooled air from a turbocharger for example. Further still a suitable fluid other than cooling air might be used. It is anticipated that the flow of cooling air may be varied either by the means of an external control valve or by varying the speed of the supply fan to both maintain the required exhaust gas outlet temperature and minimize the condensation of liquids in the heat exchanger. A second manifold assembly specific to heat exchanger may be coupled therewith and positioned opposite first manifold . Second manifold assembly may be configured similarly to first manifold assembly to direct cooled exhaust gases out exhaust outlet and to intake manifold via passage and to direct cooling air out of heat exchanger via a cooling air discharge passage .

Turning now to there is shown an exploded view in perspective of certain components of a heat exchanger similar to the heat exchanger shown in . Heat exchanger includes a first housing portion and a second similar or identical housing portion . Each of housing portions and may be fabricated from a plurality of metallic plates such as stainless steel plates to form an elongate box structure having an open side. Alternatively each of housing portions and could be formed from a flat metal sheet stamped or otherwise bent into the desired configuration. Although a generally rectangular configuration presents one practical implementation strategy the illustrated design is by no means limiting. End plates and also made from stainless steel or another suitable material may be disposed at each end of housings and respectively and affixed thereto by any suitable means. Each of housing portions and in combination with end plates and and a separator plate described herein may form a separate fluid passage extending therein one of which may serve as an exhaust passage with the other serving as a cooling fluid passage. A carbon foam will typically be disposed in at least one of the fluid passages to exchange heat between the fluids passed therethrough. In the embodiment of a generally rectangular carbon foam block may be slidably positioned within each of housing portions and

Separator plate may be disposed between housing portions and . Separator plate may be fabricated from a similar material to housing portions and or it might comprise another suitably thermally conductive material. The open sides of each of housing portions and may face separator plate as shown and the components stacked and secured via assembly mounting tabs and disposed on each of housing portions and and a plurality of fasteners not shown . A suitable thermally conductive adhesive a variety of which are known to those skilled in the art may be disposed on opposite sides of separator plate such that carbon foam blocks are adhered and thermally coupled therewith. Separator plate may thereby exchange heat between carbon foam blocks and correspondingly between fluids in each of housing portions and

Once assembled housing portion one of blocks end plates and separator plate define a first fluid passage through housing portion having an exhaust inlet and an exhaust outlet for example. Housing portion the other of blocks end plates and separator plate define a second fluid passage having a cooling air inlet and a cooling air outlet for example. The respective fluid passages may be fluidly isolated via separator plate . In alternative embodiments separator plate might be omitted from the design and some other means of fluidly sealing passages and as well as fluidly isolated passages and from one another might be used. In one practical implementation strategy cooling air and exhaust gas will be passed through passages and in counter flow a known strategy.

In other embodiments however the cooling air and exhaust gas could be passed through in the same direction or in orthogonal directions for example.

Although only two housing portions are shown in it should be appreciated that any number of housing portions each separated from adjacent portions with a separator plate or fluidly separated by another means may be used. In this manner a heat exchanger having a desired volumetric throughput capacity for relatively larger or relatively smaller engines may be assembled. In addition where more heat exchange surface area is desired to increase cooling efficacy for a given size engine additional housing portions modules could be used. In an embodiment having more than the two illustrated modules each housing portion could be constructed such that it is open on both a top side and a bottom side prior to assembly.

Carbon foams suitable for use in an engine system according to the present disclosure may be derived from pitch based graphite foams a variety of which are known and available from commercial sources known to those skilled in the art. In one contemplated configuration carbon foam blocks may be cut to shape from a larger piece of carbon foam. Alternatively carbon foam blocks may be molded to a desired configuration and specifications during manufacturing. In either event it is contemplated that it will be desirable to provide passages extending through blocks such that fluid may be passed through each respective block without a prohibitive pressure drop. Passages may be molded in the carbon foam manufacturing process or may be machined therein. In the case of exhaust gas for example too high a pressure drop through a heat exchanger may interfere with successfully supplying the recirculated exhaust gas to the intake system of the engine or generate other problems.

Although it is contemplated that the rectangular modular structures shown in represent one practical implementation strategy for a heat exchanger suitable for use in the context of the present disclosure it is not thereby limited. One alternative design for a heat exchanger is shown in and . The embodiment of may be used in a manner similar to that of the foregoing embodiments however there are several important differences. For instance rather than providing adjacent exhaust gas and cooling air passages heat exchanger provides two fluid passages extending in a coaxial arrangement as described herein. Rather than a stackable modular construction heat exchanger may be a unitary assembly that is plugged into an existing exhaust gas recirculation loop or other heat exchanger application different from exhaust gas and even internal combustion applications. In some applications more than one heat exchanger similar to heat exchanger might be arranged in fluid series to provide plural successive cooling or heating stages for a fluid of interest.

The fluid passages may be defined in part by the various housing portions of heat exchanger and also in part by a carbon foam as described herein. Heat exchanger will thus include a housing having a plurality of components configured to fit together into a unit as generally shown in the assembled version illustrated in . Housing includes an air inlet portion and an air outlet portion . Arrows A in illustrate an approximate direction of cooling air flow whereas arrows E identify a counter oriented exhaust gas flow although heat exchanger is not thereby limited. Housing further includes an exhaust inlet portion and an exhaust outlet portion configured to couple with air inlet and outlet portions and respectively. A tube is further provided and configured to couple with and between each of exhaust inlet and outlet portions and . Tube and the other portions of housing may be constructed from plastic metal or some other suitable material or composite.

Similar to the embodiment described with respect to heat exchanger may include a carbon foam disposed within at least one of its respective passages and configured to exchange heat between fluids therein. The carbon foam used in the embodiment of may comprise a carbon foam block disposed at least partially within tube . As also shown in carbon foam block may include a plurality of external curving ridges extending longitudinally. A plurality of channels are disposed between adjacent ones of ridges and also extend longitudinally. Carbon foam block may also include a plurality of internal longitudinal passages to reduce the pressure drop experienced by fluid as it passes through foam block .

Referring in particular to the first fluid passage of heat exchanger may consist of an outer passage defined in part by wall and also in part by tube . Ridges and thus extend within outer passage longitudinally allowing fluid passed therethrough to flow in a generally undulating path. The second fluid passage of heat exchanger may consist of an inner passage defined by wall and comprising the portion of carbon foam block enclosed thereby. Heat may be exchanged between fluid flowing in inner passage and fluid flowing in outer passage across wall . Although it is contemplated that inner passage may be an exhaust passage whereas outer passage may be a cooling air passage such a configuration is not critical. For example exhaust gas could be passed through outer passage and cooling air passed through inner passage . Further while it is contemplated that heat exchanger may be an exhaust gas and cooling air heat exchanger other cooling fluids such as water or engine coolant might be used. Similarly heat exchanger is not limited to use in an exhaust system at all merely contemplated as well suited for such an application.

Wall may be disposed approximately 3 mm inwardly from an outer periphery of foam block for example and may be an integral wall formed in a specialized process of manufacturing carbon foam block as alluded to above. Wall may comprise a closed cell layer of carbon foam material or a non cellular region of carbon foam material a mixture of the carbon types or a third material altogether as described herein. In one embodiment wall may be formed via a multi stage baking and curing process of a pitch based carbon foam. A pitch based starting material may be placed in a mold of the desired shape for example a cylindrical mold configured to mold passages therein. Once the initial mold is filled the starting material therein may be subjected to a relatively low temperature bake sufficient to cause the carbon foam in the mold to set sufficiently that it may be removed from the mold and manipulated without substantial deformation. The initial low temperature bake can cause the exterior of carbon foam material which contacts internal walls of the mold to form a fluid tight or substantially fluid tight skin of non cellular and or closed cell carbon.

Next the partially cured carbon foam block may be placed in a second larger mold and additional pitch based starting material for the carbon foam added around the exterior of the product produced in the first molding step. The second mold may be a cylindrical mold configured for example to mold ridges and channels into an exterior of the carbon foam block. Following filling of the second mold the entire product may be subjected to another relatively low temperature bake similar to the initial low temperature bake. Finally the block may be subjected to a high temperature bake in a final cure process and assembled with the other components of heat exchanger . It should be appreciated that rather than molding various features of foam block such as passages and ridges these features may be machined on block following the final cure.

When assembled with the other components of heat exchanger outer passage of carbon foam block in conjunction with portions and of housing forms a cooling air passage. Inner passage in conjunction with portions and of housing forms an exhaust gas passage. In particular a rim of each of portions and may be fluidly sealed with carbon foam block in the region of wall at opposite ends thereof for example via an adhesive. Engaging rim s with carbon foam block provides a fluid passage for exhaust gas through portion outer passage and portion which is fluidly separate from inner passage . Thus heat exchanger might be substituted for heat exchanger of and the appropriate connections made between exhaust gas recirculation passage and inner passage as well as between cooling air passages and and outer passage .

Returning to during operation of engine exhaust gas will flow from manifold through exhaust outlet passage . A portion of exhaust gas may be diverted via valve to heat exchanger and thenceforth via exhaust inlet through each of exhaust gas portions via manifold assembly . After passing through heat exchanger cooled exhaust gas may be returned to intake manifold via exhaust outlet and passage . Cooling air from intake may be simultaneously supplied to heat exchanger via passage and distributed among cooling air portions via manifold assembly . Cooling air may then be expelled to ambient via manifold assembly and outlet passage .

The use of cooling air rather than engine coolant allows heat exchangers according to the present disclosure to operate without increasing the heat load on an engine radiator. This provides advantages over known designs wherein exhaust gas is cooled by rejecting heat from the exhaust gas to engine coolant or water which is then returned to the engine radiator and cooled in a conventional manner. In addition not only may engine radiators be made smaller in certain applications or maintained at the same size where they would otherwise be enlarged but the plumbing formerly required to supply and return engine coolant or water from an exhaust gas cooler is not required. Moreover the overall size of heat exchanger is reduced as compared to earlier systems.

A further advantage relates to the use of carbon foam in heat exchanger rather than conventional metallic heat exchanger materials. As exhaust gas is cooled a proportion of the exhaust gas can condense to a liquid form comprising an acidic aqueous liquid. Such condensed exhaust gases have a tendency to corrode internal components of conventional metallic heat exchangers. Because carbon foam has been demonstrated to have at least some resistance to such corrosion its use herein provides an exhaust gas cooler having improved corrosion resistance.

The present disclosure further provides improvements over known gas to gas exhaust gas cooling strategies with respect to volumetric throughput requirements for a given cooling efficacy. A carbon foam based heat exchanger as described herein can provide acceptable exhaust gas outlet temperatures at flow ratios approaching 1 lb of cooling air per 1 lb of hot gas. This reduces the amount of cooling air flow required to be provided to the system as compared to conventional gas to gas exhaust gas coolers. Further still certain shortcomings of liquid cooled exhaust gas heat exchangers are overcome. This disclosure proposes to use air as the cooling medium in certain embodiments so leakage inside the heat exchanger tends not to be a detriment to the life of the engine.

The present description is for illustrative purposes only and should not be construed to narrow the breadth of the present disclosure in any way. Thus those skilled in the art will appreciate that various modifications might be made to the presently disclosed embodiments without departing from the intended spirit and scope of the present disclosure. For example while much of the present description discusses heat exchanger in the context of a gas to gas heat exchanger it should be appreciated that in certain applications a fluid other than a gas such as water could be used to cool exhaust gases passed through loop . Further still while carbon foam blocks are considered to represent a practical configuration for the carbon foam used to exchange heat between fluids in the heat exchanger alternatives are contemplated such as thin carbon foam sheets. Other aspects features and advantages will be apparent upon an examination of the attached drawings and appended claims.

