---

title: Methods and systems for computer based collaboration
abstract: An exemplary method for computer based collaboration between a plurality of participants communicating over a data network comprises steps of receiving communications data with the computer, using a text analysis tool to identify at least a plurality of k-words from the communications data and a plurality of relations linking at least a portion of the plurality of k-words, and displaying the k-words and relations to the plurality of participants over the computer network.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07904512&OS=07904512&RS=07904512
owner: The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
number: 07904512
owner_city: Urbana
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050502
---
The present application claims priority on U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 578 688 filed on Jun. 10 2004.

This invention was made with Government support under Contract Number N00014 01 1 0175 awarded by the Office of Naval Research ONR and Contract Number F49620 03 1 0129 awarded by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research AFOSR . The Government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention is related to methods systems and program products for computer based collaboration.

Modern times challenge organizations and their leaders to adapt quickly and well to complex fast moving circumstances under trying conditions. Data sources are numerous distributed and contradictory. Problems are difficult to detect and diagnose widely dispersed and constantly changing. Knowledge sources and expertise are distributed of varying quality and difficult to integrate. Moreover the tools available to address these problems are increasing in complexity computational intensity and require specialized hardware software and maintenance.

Against this backdrop large scale computer networks have developed at a rapid pace allowing organizations and individuals to interact through web portals e mail instant messaging and other tools. These tools have had immediate impact in allowing individuals to communicate with one another conveniently and efficiently. This has enabled the traditional means of human to human organizational collaboration to be carried out more effectively at a distance.

Due to factors such as the volume and distribution of available information number of collaboration participants rapidly changing circumstances and the like known collaboration methods and systems can be prone to inefficiency. For example discussions on known computer message boards where users post messages in response to previous messages can be superficial scattered and lack engagement. Groups communicating with one another to address a problem can drift off on tangents removed from the task at hand. These and other problems become more prevalent and troublesome as the number of participants the quantity of communications therebetween and the quantity of information being accessed increase. These problems are at least partially a result of a lack of focus and organization of the communications. Due to a large volume of communications data for instance users can have difficulty in seeing the big picture of a discussion.

The present invention includes methods computer program products and systems for computer based collaboration. An exemplary method for computer based collaboration between a plurality of participants communicating over a data network comprises the steps of receiving communications data using a text analysis tool to identify at least a plurality of k words from the communications data and a plurality of relations linking at least a portion of the plurality of k words and displaying the k words and relations to the plurality of participants over the computer network.

Before discussing the present invention in detail it will be appreciated that the invention may be embodied in a method a system and or in a computer program product. For example a method of the invention may be carried out by one or more users using computers and a program product of the invention may include computer executable instructions that when executed by one or more computers cause one or more computers to carry out a method of the invention. Further one or more computers that are executing a program product of the invention may embody a system of the invention. It will therefore be appreciated that in describing a particular embodiment of the present invention description of other embodiments may also be made. For example it will be understood that when describing a method of the invention a system and or a program product of the invention may likewise be described.

Turning now to the drawings is a schematic of an exemplary data network that may be useful for practice of embodiments of the invention. The network includes at least one computer and is connected to a plurality of computers . The computers may be used by participants such as individuals or groups or the like. Herein the computers may be referred to as participants to indicate that one or more people are using the computers to communicate with the network . Also the computers are intended to broadly represent processor based devices useful to communicate with the network and may be by way of example phones personal digital assistants handheld processor based devices and the like.

The network may be any suitable communications network with examples including a digital data network a PSTN a digital phone network a wireless network or a combination of one or more of these. The network may be for instance the Internet. The network is useful to communicate digital data and may be using a packet based protocol such as internet protocol to operate. The participants may communicate with the network and the computer via wired or wireless connections as are generally known. The network may also be connected to one or more data storage mediums which may be a computer a memory device or the like. The network is also preferably linked for communicating with one or more individuals that have been collectively illustrated as the plurality of individuals . The network is also connected to other outside real world sources that have collectively been illustrated for convenience as the city . The individuals are intended to broadly represent any people that are able to be communicated with over the network . They may be for example a plurality of centralized or distributed customers employees survey participants experts in a particular field students focus groups or the like. The city is intended to broadly represent real world data sources which may include for example media such as radio TV newspaper wire sources and periodicals government agencies trade groups and the like.

Having now described an exemplary environment for practicing an embodiment of the invention exemplary program products methods and systems for computer based collaboration may now be described. As used herein the term computer based is intended to be broadly interpreted as including the use of a processor based device such as a computer. A method for computer based collaboration of the invention may include for example the participants communicating with one another over the network to share ideas or to solve a problem. This may take the form of the participants sharing text messages that are received by the computer and displayed over the network with all of the participants .

Other embodiments of the invention may involve the participants collaborating to analyze or otherwise discuss data that is being communicated over the network . Incoming data from the real world for example may describe one or more events occurring in substantially real time which may be analyzed by the participants through collaborative communication over the network . For example data may be communicated from the real world describing the unfolding event and the participants may collaboratively communicate to analyze the incoming real world data and make predictions regarding how it will proceed.

Exemplary methods program products and systems of the invention may be further described through consideration of the flowchart of in combination with the schematic of . At block communications data is received at the computer from one of the participants . The communications data may be for example text data typed in at a keyboard by any of the participants . In addition to text data the communications data may be in other forms with speech being an example. Speech may be input into telephones or microphones connected to a participant s computer that is then converted to text. In this manner methods of the invention may be practiced during phone or video conferences between participants .

The exemplary method of next includes a step of using a text analysis tool to analyze the communications data to identify k words and relations. block . As used herein the term k word is intended to be broadly interpreted as a word phrase of two or more words symbol or other non alphabetic character or the like from the communications data that summarizes a meaningful aspect of the data. That is a k word summarizes or gives an indication of the meaning of a passage in which it occurs. A passage of multiple words may be more briefly summarized through only a few k words. By way of a simplistic illustration the sentence W hen Mary went to the fruit store Mary bought six pieces of fruit might include the k words mary bought fruit and Mary bought fruit. K words may be identified for example based on statistical significance. In the above simplistic example Mary and fruit each occur twice and are therefore statistically significant. The term relation is intended to be broadly interpreted as meaning a logical connection. Referring again to the simplistic example a relation may exist between the k words mary and bought and between the k words fruit and bought. Relations may be identified through statistical and other methods. With reference to the simplistic example above for instance the proximity in the original text of the k words Mary and fruit may suggest that there is a relation between the two.

It is noted that in some invention embodiments k words may alternately be referred to as keywords. Exemplary invention embodiments discussed herein however may include use of Keygraphs as text analysis tools. As indicated herein below the term keyword has a specific meaning within Keygraphs so for clarity herein the term k word is used in the scope of the larger invention and the term keyword is limited to its specific meaning within a Keygraph.

The term text analysis tool is intended to be broadly interpreted as meaning a tool or a method that may be embodied in computer code for analyzing data to identify k words and relations. Those knowledgeable in the art will appreciate that there are a wide variety of text analysis tools suitable for use in methods and program products of the invention. Examples include numerical statistical adaptive optimization heuristic artificial intelligence and language processing methods useful to perceive frequencies patterns sequences regularities and other features of text data. Many useful text analysis tools employ statistical analysis to identify the frequency of occurrence of words or phrases in a given text. Words or phrases that occur more frequently are concluded to have a higher probability of being relevant to the subject matter and are identified as k words. Metrics may be applied such defining k words as some portion e.g. the top X of the most frequently appearing words or terms in the communications.

As used herein text analysis tools are not limited to use with analyzing purely textual data. They may be used to identify for instance non textual k words such as numbers or non alphabetic symbols that are used in a textual manner. Symbols or numbers for instance may be used in place of words within a text passage or to identify locations on a map or visual image. Text analysis tools may identify these numbers or non alphabetic symbols of significance. A particular example may be the identification of common image features k words from communications data comprising a plurality of photographic images.

Some text analysis tools also analyze word or term placement or position in the communications data to identify relevance and or relations between words or phrases. For example words or phrases that are found to occur in a high frequency closely proximate to one another may be concluded to have a higher probability of being related to one another thereby suggesting a relation. The positional closeness of the words to one another in the communications data may be useful to identify a relation. Relations between k words could be identified for instance linking k words that appear adjacent to one another within some number X of words to one another within the same sentence within sequential sentences within the same paragraph etc. Relative placement or positional closeness of k words may also be useful to estimate relative strength of the relation.

Text analysis tools may also employ filters to filter out words not likely to be relevant e.g. filter out all pronouns prepositions etc. may use grammatical analysis to identify nouns and verbs and perform other similar steps. Some text analysis tools are directed to identifying the underlying meaning of text through semantic analysis or other steps.

It has been discovered that steps of using particular text analysis methods offer distinct advantages and benefits in practice of the invention for some applications. In particular methods including steps of chance discovery are preferred for some applications.

Many text analysis tools employ statistical techniques that implicitly rely on sufficiently large data samples to give the researcher confidence that the knowledge mined is statistically significant. While in many applications this leads to satisfactory results it has been discovered that in some applications such techniques can lead to superficial and otherwise unsatisfactory outcomes. Human mining of data as opposed to purely statistical techniques often relies on few samples and a heightened sensitivity to and interpretation of unusual occurrences or chance events. The literature of scientific discovery is filled with poignant examples the discovery of penicillin being one . Methods systems and program products of the invention that use of text analysis tools that perform chance discovery to identify k words and relations take advantage of this human like heightened sensitivity and identification of unusual or chance events of significance.

As used herein the term chance discovery is intended to be broadly interpreted as meaning identifying a k word and or relation through means other than high frequency of occurrence. Put another way chance discovery does not rely only on statistical significance alone. A chance discovery can be for example an event or a situation with significant impact on human decision making. Chance discovery can lead to an awareness of and explanation of the significance of a chance especially if the chance is rare and its significance has been unnoticed. In other words chance discovery can be used to provide means for inventing or surviving in the future rather than predicting the future.

Steps of chance discovery can include identifying k words that occur with a low frequency in text but have a relatively high probability of being important. A step of chance discovery may include identifying a k word that although it fails to meet the statistical cut off for otherwise identifying k words e.g. not in the top X of frequency it is discovered that each of the few instances that the k word appears are closely proximate to one or more high frequency k words. Random selection of low frequency words or phrases is another example step of performing chance discovery.

Referring again to the flowchart of after identifying the k words and relations they are displayed in a graphical format. block . The graphical format may include for instance graphs such as bar graphs and the like charts such as pie charts and the like diagrams such as logic diagrams and the like as well as any other suitable graphical format. Preferably the graphical display illustrates k words as nodes and relations as links that connect relevant k word nodes to one another. In some exemplary steps the graphical format attaches significance to the relative spatial position of the k words on the graph. Other embodiments of the invention may display k words and relations in formats other than a graphical one with an example being an outline format.

These and other exemplary steps of using text analysis tools to identify k words and relations block and displaying them in a graphical format block are useful to look beneath the surface of text data. Subtle and not otherwise readily apparent concepts can come to light. Also steps of employing chance discovery in the identification of k words and relations can be particularly useful in some applications to identify rare but relevant k words and relations to understand points of view that are otherwise not easily discerned from the text.

One exemplary method displaying k words and relations block as well as for identifying k words and relations that can include steps of chance discovery block is the so called Keygraph method. Those knowledgeable in the art appreciate that Keygraph methods lead to graphical representations called Keygraphs of text and other delimited data that group 1 statistically prominent words k words and their relations to others and 2 statistically less frequent words also k words and their relations to clusters of the prominent words. In a Keygraph k words are displayed as nodes and relations as lines linking nodes to one another. Herein the term Keygraph may be used to describe a particular format of graphical display in which as well as to describe the steps used to produce the output graphical display from the input data. For example applying a Keygraph analysis to a set of data results in the output Keygraph.

While statistically prominent words are often the focus of traditional data mining humans familiar with the situations represented by the data often find statistically prominent clusters to be obvious or superficial. An important advantage of chance discovery is to dig beneath the prominent clusters and mine less prominent but possibly meaningful terms. Text analysis tools using chance discovery with a preferred example being the Keygraph analysis provides a method for doing so.

Those knowledgeable in the art appreciate that Keygraph analysis steps and Keygraph outputs are generally known. The following summary describes exemplary steps of one Keygraph analysis useful in practice of the invention. Other particular Keygraph analysis steps are likewise useful in practice of the invention.

Assume a document D is composed of sentences and each sentence is composed of words. In a first step of performing a Keygraph text analysis the document D is preprocessed in two steps 

As described below the Keygraph analysis will identify two kinds of k words high frequency terms and low frequency terms. Low frequency terms link clusters of high frequency terms to one another and may be referred to as keywords or key terms. Two kinds or relations are identified links and key links. Links connect high frequency terms to one another and key links connect low frequency terms keywords to high frequency terms. Key links may be displayed on a Keygraph using a dashed line and links using a solid line. Also either of low or high frequency terms may be identified as keywords within the following keygraph analysis depending on the links and key links connected to that term. Keywords connect clusters of terms to one another.

High frequency terms are first extracted. Terms in D are sorted by their frequency of occurrence and top nodes of high frequency terms are retained. These high frequency terms may be later be represented as nodes in a graph G. A set of the high frequency terms is denoted by N.

Links are then extracted. Statistically a link may be thought of as representing co occurrence term pairs that often occur in the same sentence. A measure for co occurrence of terms wand wis defined as 

Low frequency or key terms are then extracted. Key terms are terms that connect clusters of high frequency terms together. To measure the tightness with which a term w connects a cluster the following function is defined 

Qualitatively key w gives a measure of how often a term w occurs near a cluster of high frequency terms. The key values are computed for all the terms in D and ntop key terms are taken as high key terms. These high key terms are added as to the output graph G as nodes if they are not already present and are elements of a set K.

Key links are then extracted. For each high frequency term w Nand each high key term w K the assoc w w is calculated. Links touching ware sorted by their assoc values for each high key term w K. A link with highest assoc values connecting wto two or more clusters is chosen as a key link. Key links are represented by edges if they are not already present in the output graph G.

Extracting Keywords Either of high or low frequency terms may be identified as keywords depending on the links and key links connected to it. Keywords link clusters of terms to one another. To extract keywords nodes in G are sorted by the sum of assoc values associated with the key links touching them. Terms represented by nodes of higher values of these sums than a certain threshold are extracted as keywords for the document D.

It will thereby be appreciated that exemplary methods program products and systems of the invention are useful to perform computer based collaborations. Through steps of the invention collaboration participants are able to communicate between one another and to view a graphical summary of their shared communications that keeps the collaboration focused and provides direction for advancing it. Embodiments of the invention may include additional steps to further the collaboration and to for instance identify suitable solutions to a problem being collaboratively discussed. Exemplary steps include using tools such as genetic algorithms knowledge management tools modeling tools predictive tools and the like.

The flowchart of illustrates some exemplary additional steps. Referring now to in combination with during the collaboration the participants may use the displayed k words and relations to develop one or more candidate solutions to a problem. block . The candidate solution s may then be communicated over the network to the group of individuals for evaluation. block . The individuals may be a consumer focus group for example whose opinions may be asked of a proposed new product. The individuals may be provided with individual computers or other devices in communication with the network for communicating their evaluation so that the evaluation can be viewed in substantially real time by the participants over the network . As illustrated in the participants may continue to communicate with one another and further evolve solutions based on the continuous feedback of the individuals . The collaboration may continue until a suitable solution is identified.

It has also been discovered that steps of using a genetic operator can provide benefits and advantages in combination with other steps of the invention. For example the steps of formulating a solution block and evaluating it block may benefit through use of a genetic operator to evolve a satisfactory solution over several iterations.

Genetic operators and their use to alter solution sets over iterative application are generally known and for sake of brevity need not be discussed herein in great detail. By way of general summary subparts of solutions are referred to as gene with a group of genes making up one solution referred to as a chromosome. Genetic operators may be applied to the chromosomes and or the genes to generate new solutions. Some subjective or objective scoring criteria is used to evaluate the solutions and choose which are good and which are bad. The process may continue over multiple iterations until a satisfactory solution set is evolved. As used herein the term solution set is intended to be broadly interpreted as including one or more solutions. The term solution is likewise intended to be broadly interpreted. Examples of solutions include proposals to solve a problem textual expressions of ideas product designs terms images symbols and the like.

By way of further summary is a flowchart illustrating one set of exemplary steps of applying a genetic operator that will be useful in practice of embodiments of the invention. Referring to in combination with a solution set is initially created. block . The step of initially creating a solution set may comprise for example the participants formulating solutions using k words and relations discovered through a Keygraph.

The solution set is then evaluated. block . This may comprise for instance communicating the solution set over the network to the individuals for subjective evaluation e.g. which solutions are good which are bad which is best which is worst . The individuals may be for instance a focus group using computers connected to the network over which they view the solutions and input their evaluations. The step of evaluating the solutions block may also comprise submitting the solution set to a computer with the computer or any of the participant computers being examples for application of an objective scoring metric e.g. score using measuring criteria on a scale of 1 100 .

If final criteria are satisfied block then a final solution has been evolved and the process is stopped. block . The final criteria may be subjective or objective. Exemplary subjective evaluation criteria may simply be that the solution s or some proportion of a solution set has been evaluated as good while an exemplary objective criterion is that the solution or some proportion of a solution set has been evaluated to have a numerical score above some threshold. If the solution criteria are not satisfied a genetic operator is applied to generate a new solution set. block . Exemplary genetic operators include crossover mutation replacement or other like operators for estimating and sampling a probability distribution and the like. Through application of a mutation operator for instance one solution might mutate into a different form. Application of a crossover operator might replace sub parts genes of one solution chromosome with those of another. Replacement might replace a low scoring solution with a high scoring one. Iterations of evaluation and application of a genetic operator are then repeated until the completion criteria are satisfied. blocks .

It will be appreciated that the steps of are exemplary only and many additional and equivalent steps may be performed. For example prior to application of a genetic operator it may be useful to remove the lowest scoring of the solutions from the solution set. Also the sequence of the steps of can be altered. Also it will be appreciated that steps of evolving an improving solution in methods systems and program products of the invention are not limited to use of a genetic operator.

Once again referring to in combination with the steps of may be performed by one or more of the participants other individuals and or by computers such as the computers or . For example the step of formulating a solution set block may be performed by a participant s the individuals or by a computer or . Likewise the steps of determining whether completion criteria have been satisfied block and of applying a genetic operator block may be performed by a participant s or the individuals using k words and relations identified through steps of the invention. Or those k words and relations may be used by a computer to formulate one or more solutions. Similarly one or more of the participants or individuals can apply a genetic operator to these solutions to evolve a new solution set. This new solution set may be evaluated by the participants the individuals or a computer to identify promising new solutions.

Referring to methods and program products of the invention may also include one or more steps of using data mining or text analysis tools to interpret and process data from the data storage medium the real world sources and or the individuals . As used herein the term data mining is intended to be broadly interpreted as including methods for analyzing data using statistical or other means to summarize the content of data or to identify correlations patterns sequences regularities develop models including predictive models and the like. One of the participants for example may perform a step of data mining to further explore issues surrounding one or more k words identified during collaborative discussion.

Exemplary methods program products and systems of the invention may be useful with applications such as computer message boards or computer bulletin boards. Message or bulletin boards practiced through embodiments of the present invention include many steps heretofore unknown and provide many benefits and advantages not previously available.

The method of proceeds to determine whether a search command block or a graph command block has been received. If not the method loops to receive additional discrete text messages from the same or others of the participants . Discrete messages may be sent as a reply to one or more previous messages and may be displayed in a format that indicates their relation to one another with exemplary formats including as organized groups and as threads of discrete messages. In this manner the participants may collaborate with one another over the network to share ideas strategies or suggestions for a wide variety of purposes. As an example the participants may collaborate to solve a particular problem that has been presented to them. Collaboration may occur in real time with the participants talking or writing to one another live or may occur over a more prolonged time with individual participants picking up the discussion at different times as their respective schedules allow.

If a search command is received a step of searching a selected term or phrase may be performed block . The term may be selected through highlighting with a culsor may be manually entered through typing or can be selected through other steps. As used herein the term search is intended to be broadly interpreted as meaning using a search term to identify relevant information. It will be appreciated that a wide variety of searches can be performed using a wide variety of information sources.

Referring by way of illustration to a search may be performed for example of any data capable of being stored on the storage device . Examples include a dictionary treatise technical reference literature database survey results catalogs or the like. Also the search may be performed by searching the World Wide Web or source available thereon or other secondary network that may be connected to the network . These secondary networks may provide access to a wide variety of information sources. Data sources available from the real world may likewise be accessed for searching. Referring once again to results of the search are displayed block . The display may be made over the network for viewing by all of the participants . Search results may be displayed by a priority ranking and may include hyperlinks or other access to further information whereby a participant can quickly access further information if desired.

The method of further includes a step of determining whether a graph command has been received block . If not the method loops back to block to receive additional communications. If a graph command has been received a step of analyzing a text message to identify k words and relations is performed. block . The k words and relations may be identified using one or more text analysis tools and are preferably identified using a Keygraph analysis. The identified k words and relations from one or more of the discrete text messages are then displayed in a graphical format block . Preferably the graphical display illustrates k words as linked to one another by links that represent relations. A preferred graphical display is a Keygraph.

These and other steps can be further illustrated by reference to the exemplary display screen of that displays discrete text messages that have been input by participants of . In this example the participants are collaborating over the network to develop a strategy for marketing wireless phones to women. Each discrete message may have been input by one of the participants and as illustrated may be displayed in a hierarchical e.g. indentation used to represent relation to above message or other organized format that makes clear which message has been communicated in response to which previous message .

The Sr button displayed on the screen may be selected by a user using a mouse keyboard or the like to generate a search command. blocks and . A k word or other word or phrase may be selected by highlighting entering or the like in combination with selecting the Sr button to identify the term to be searched. Selection of the displayed graph button Gr using a keyboard mouse or other selector can cause the graph command to be generated blocks and . This command causes the text analysis to be performed to identify k words and relations.

In exemplary embodiments of the invention a user may select what text to apply text analysis to. For example a user may desire to graph an individual selection of text e.g. one particular message input by a particular user or may desire to graph several text messages in combination e.g. the overall collection of all input messages . Accordingly methods of the invention contemplate providing a graphical representation of k words and relations from only one message or from a collection of related messages. The desired text may be selected by use of a keyboard mouse or other selector.

If applied to multiple of the messages the text analysis tool examines the collective text of all of the messages to identify k words and relations in the collective text. When measuring frequency of occurrence of terms or phrases in the overall collective discussion for example all of the text messages are combined and treated as a single block of text. It has been discovered that it is often beneficial to perform steps of identifying and displaying k words and relations of the overall discussion as opposed to discrete messages so an evolving graph display illustrates the history and Current status of the overall discussion.

When identifying k words and relations from more than one text message application of the text analysis tools to the collection of the text messages preferably results in identifying relations that link a k word from a first message to one from a second message. That is k words and relations are preferably identified that tie the multiple messages to one another.

These steps may be further illustrated through consideration of . illustrates an exemplary Keygraph display of a first message of . This might result for instance after one of the participants input the first message or highlighted the first message selected the Gr button . The Keygraph of represents k words and relations from the first and second messages of combined. This might be generated for instance when one of the participants highlighted the first and second messages and selected the Gr button . Relations or links connecting k words from the two different messages are shown thereby representing the overall discussion and how the second message relates to the first.

The Keygraph of illustrates the result after several messages have been exchanged. K words from different of the messages are linked to one another by relations. Also the k words and links may differ somewhat from those of earlier Keygraphs as the participants focus on particular issues and or areas and the discussion accordingly evolves.

Exemplary screens displayed through methods of the invention may display a Keygraph on a first portion of the screen with the text messages displayed on a second portion of the screen . The first portion may be a portion of the screen that pops up when a graph command is issued. The relative sizing and position of the screen portion may be varied as desired. Other exemplary screens include a dedicated first portion for displaying k words and relations and a dedicated second portion for displaying the underlying communications data. For example the top half of a screen may display underlying communications data and the bottom half the graphical display or k words and relations.

Although selective application of k word and relation identification and display through use of a graph command has been found to be useful in some exemplary embodiments of the invention other embodiments include steps of substantially real time graphing as communications data are received i.e. no graph command need be issued . Referring again to by way of illustration as the participants make contributions to the collaboration by communicating text messages to the computer this may have the effect of the participants being able to see in substantially real time how the text they are entering changes the graphically displayed k words and relations. As each participant makes a contribution to the on line discussion for example the overall frequency of occurrence of various terms may change and therefore the k words may change some previous k words may be replaced with new ones. This can be useful for example to keep the collaboration focused and to identify promising directions and concepts for furthering the discussion.

Embodiments of the invention will find utility and offer benefits in many different applications. With reference to by way of illustration the exemplary invention embodiments described hereto generally include a collaboration occurring between the participants . They may be sharing communications directed to solving a posed problem for instance over an on line message board. Methods may include steps of the participants using resources in addition to themselves including communicating with the exemplary outside sources of data such as the data repository the individuals or the real world . In the exemplary invention embodiments described hereto however these outside data sources are generally communicated with to support the collaboration between the participants . Steps of using the data sources and may be performed for instance to research ideas being exchanged between the participants or to evaluate potential solutions.

Other exemplary embodiments of the invention are directed to computer based collaborations wherein data from one or more outside data sources play a more central role in the collaboration. Data may be gathered and input to the network that is the focus of the collaboration. For example instead of the collaboration being focused on a static problem with outside sources communicated with for support or evaluation the collaboration is directed to analyzing a dynamic event summarized by data being communicated to the network . When describing these embodiments herein for clarity the term primary communications or primary data will be used to refer to the data input to the network that is the focus of the collaboration while the communications data shared between the participants in analyzing or discussing the primary data will be referred to as secondary data or secondary communications. 

Referring now to in combination with the method of may find utility in an application wherein the participants are intelligence analysts collaborating to identify credible terrorist targets in a rapidly unfolding terrorist attack scenario. Primary communications data may be received from the real world block . The real world data sources and primary data may be widely distributed including international media reports intelligence reports from intelligence agencies and police forces around the world signal intelligence from the National Security Agency CIA and FBI and heterogeneous reports from defense and counter intelligence reports. Embodiments of the present invention are useful to provide effective analysis of such varied and high volume data on a real time basis.

Text analysis may be performed on this primary data being received from the outside world to identify primary k words and primary relations. block . The text analysis tools may include Keygraphs and or others. The text analysis may be applied to individual of the discrete primary data communications being received e.g. to individual agent reports and news reports or collectively to multiple of the discrete primary data communications e.g. collect all CIA and FBI agent reports and perform text analysis . The text analysis tool may likewise be applied to identify numerical and non alphabetic k words that correspond to portions of interest of satellite imagery.

A graphical display of the primary k words and primary relations is then displayed to the analysts to support their collaborative analysis of the data. block . The graphical display may comprise a chart graph outline or the like with a Keygraph preferred. The analysts review the displayed primary Keygraph and also may review the underlying primary data. They then share secondary communications data with one another over the network to collaboratively develop a list of potential targets and threats using the graphically displayed primary k words and primary relations generated from the step of applying text analysis to the primary communications data. block .

A step of using text analysis to identify secondary K words and secondary relations from the secondary communications is performed block as well as a step of displaying the identified secondary k words and secondary relations graphically using a chart graph or the like. block . Preferably this occurs through application of a Keygraph analysis and display of the resulting Keygraph. Through their collaborative sharing of secondary communications data the analysts may use the k words and relations to formulate a solution set of potential terrorist targets and timelines of attack. block .

For clarity and ease of use the graphical display of the primary k words and relations may be made in a first portion of a screen and the secondary k words and relations in a second portion of the screen. The first and second portions of the screen may be moved and resized as may be desirable. Also a third portion of the screen may be used to display any desired portion of the primary communications and a fourth portion of the screen to display any desired portion of the secondary communications.

The solution set is then presented to the individuals over the network for evaluation. block . The individuals may comprise evaluative stakeholders such as front line users of intelligence analysis such as military commanders intelligence officers embedded operatives municipal fire officials aviation administration officials and police officials. While they might not have the benefit of the big picture perspective that the analysts enjoy the individuals may be close to the action and have a better intuitive feel for evaluating which proposed targets and threats are credible.

The individuals evaluate the submitted list by rating for instance each proposed target threat as credible or not. block . They may also provide additional scoring such as potential severity or timeliness of the threat. The individuals communicate their evaluation over the network to the computer and to the analysts . Based on the received evaluation the list of threats targets may either be concluded to be final blocks or may be further evolved. Concluding the solution set is final may require for example that some high percentage of the individuals e.g. 75 score all listed threats as credible potentially severe and timely. 

If final criteria are not satisfied further evolution preferably occurs through application of a genetic operator block although other steps are contemplated. The analysts for instance may review the evaluation provided by the stakeholders may collaborate and then improve or otherwise alter the solution set. The step of applying a genetic operator may be performed by a computer such as computer or by one or more of the analysts .

Methods and program products of the invention such as that illustrated by may be useful to quickly and effectively process widely distributed and voluminous primary data to identify credible and probable outcomes. In the example hypothetical terrorism application for instance chance discovery may identify k words and relations from the incoming primary communications data that upon application of a Keygraph analysis identifies the possibility of a dirty bomb threat against U.S. troops on the continental U.S.

Through additional steps of the invention this potential threat is further explored and defined. The Keygraph output may be presented as a Pareto trade off curve to the analysts who then share secondary communications to collaboratively discuss the threats. Keygraphs of their secondary communications show low frequency secondary k words that link critical high frequency secondary k words. Secondary k words include several potential dirty bomb targets. When further evolved through application of a genetic algorithm a dirty bomb threat designed to jeopardize major troop and ship movements from Norfolk Va. in the coming month of August is identified. This is passed on to the individuals for evaluation and they conclude the threat to be credible.

Methods of the invention may also include further steps. For example steps of using other tools to further narrow the solution set may be performed. Exemplary steps include application of modeling simulation or predictive methods or software to predict the likely consequences of the dirty bomb threats. Referring again to the terrorism application for illustration the analysts may use data mining to analyze classified signal intelligence that has been stored in the data repository to search the k words August Norfolk and Virginia . Suspicious signals are identified from the stored data which are then confirmed and decrypted. The results of the data mining steps are displayed to the analysts who then may share further secondary communications to discuss this information. As a result of these additional steps the likelihood of the threat is further confirmed potential perpetrators of the threat identified and its potential date is further narrowed.

Embodiments of the present invention will also be useful and beneficial in a wide variety of marketing applications. Referring again to by way of illustration the participants may be one or more of advertisers marketing managers product developers and manufacturing engineers. These participants may be collaborating to identify new marketing and product opportunities. The individuals may be a consumer focus group communicated with over the network to survey their likes and dislikes. Opinion data or responses to survey questions referred to as primary data may be communicated by the individuals over the network to the participants . A step of applying text analysis to the primary data may be performed with identified primary k words and primary relations then displayed to the participants . They may then share secondary communications data to collaboratively identify marketing opportunities and new product ideas.

Proposed products developed through the collaboration can be presented to the individuals over the network with their response to these proposed new products being primary data communicated back to the participants . The participants may view in substantially real time primary k words and primary relations in a graphical format identified in the primary data. Iterations of this may be performed to evolve a suitable new product.

Other exemplary marketing applications may simply use the opinions of the individuals without application of text analysis to it. By way of illustration attention is now directed to the flowchart of . Invention embodiments as illustrated by the flowchart of are generally consistent with those of with two differences being that the sequence of steps has been altered and additional steps have been included. In the flowchart of the individuals are consulted initially to provide an initial solution set that is then further evolved through collaborative discussion by the participants .

Referring now to in combination with by way of illustration assume that an international automaker is evaluating multiple aspects of its automobile products with hopes of developing features that are desirable to consumers around the world. The individuals represent multiple individual focus groups of auto consumers each in a different country. An initial solution set comprising aspects of the automaker s existing styling and features as well as its competitor s is developed block and communicated over the network to the consumers for evaluation. block . The solution set may comprise text e.g. minivan with two sliding doors and a sunroof images e.g. a photograph of a minivan with a drastically sloping hood and protruding headlights or the like. The consumers react to the solutions in the solution set by scoring them on a scale of 1 10 and this evaluation data is communicated over the network for reception by the computer and the participants block .

A step of applying a genetic algorithm is performed to evolve a new set of features. block . The scoring provided by the individuals may be used in applying the genetic operator. This step may include for instance substitution of the headlights and hood from one high scoring car model put onto a low scoring model or the mutation of a low scoring car s shape into a more desirably scored higher and boxier shape. The new solution set showing new features generated through application of one or more genetic operators is presented to the focus groups for evaluation block .

These steps of evaluation and evolution of new features are repeated over multiple iterations as may be desired. The results of the evaluation are communicated over the network as they evolve in substantially real time to the participants who may be the automaker s senior managers marketers and manufacturing engineers for instance. The initial solution generations may track current market share data but as iterations continue new solution sets may show the automaker s current product line falling farther and farther outside of what is desired by the individuals . The iterative evolution of newer solution sets may also identify opportunities for desirable products and features. For example the consumers may show a preference for SUV like vehicles that have the speed and handling of a sports car and higher gas mileage than current SUV s. Minivans recast as large SUV like vehicles are also surprisingly popular.

As the participants view the solutions sets being evolved by the individuals in real time they may share communications data over the network to collaboratively discuss the evolving solution sets. block . A step of using a text analysis tool may be performed to identify k words and relations in the shared communications with the k words and relations then displayed graphically. blocks . The participants use the graphical output to identify opportunities for global integration of three of seven auto platforms and identify likely locations for cost effective production.

Additional steps may also be performed to further evolve the solutions. For example a step of using a genetic algorithm may be performed where the participants or the computer may apply a genetic operator s to the initially identified platforms and likely manufacturing facilities to further narrow the potential solutions. An additional exemplary step may also be performed of using data mining to analyze consumer preference data stored in the data storage to build a new consumer preference predictive model that can then be used to design an advertising campaign for the new line of vehicles. The developed advertising campaign may be presented to a new set of consumers who suggest modest modifications in three areas to bolster appeal across the consumer spectrum.

Some exemplary invention embodiments that include primary and secondary data may follow the general sequence of 1 gathering primary data and communicating it to the network 2 collaborative sharing of secondary data between participants to discuss the primary data 3 the participants defining a particular problem 4 the participants proposing a solution set to the problem and 5 the solution set being evaluated by the individuals . In such circumstances it has been discovered that it can be useful for the sequencing of steps to be controlled by a moderator. For example it may be useful for one of the participants to be designated a moderator and given the authority to determine when a step is completed and the next step begun. Without a moderator with this authority it has been discovered that collaborations can become bogged down and cumbersome. For instance too much time may be spent gathering an inordinate amount of primary data or on collaborating to discuss the primary data. Accordingly methods systems and program products of the invention may include a step of designating one of the participants as a moderator with the authority to determine completion of various steps of the invention.

It will be appreciated that the present invention when used in any of a variety of applications thereby provides valuable benefits and advantages related to computer based collaborations. Methods systems and program products are provided which enable users to effectively use even voluminous and varied data. While specific embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that other modifications substitutions and alternatives will be apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

For example while exemplary methods of the invention have been described herein as including steps in a particular sequence it will be understood that methods of the invention are not limited to these particular sequences and that other methods of the invention may be practiced using the same or similar steps in an alternate sequence. Also while particular sets of steps have been discussed and illustrated as making up a particular exemplary embodiment of the invention it will be appreciated that one or more steps may be omitted from the set of steps. Likewise one or more additional steps could be provided.

