---

title: Network repository for voice fonts
abstract: A method, system, and machine-readable medium are provided for utilizing a network repository having stored voice font data. A request for a response, including the voice font data stored in the network repository; is received via a network. The voice font data stored in the network repository is accessed. The response, including the voice font data, is sent via the network.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07987244&OS=07987244&RS=07987244
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property II, L.P.
number: 07987244
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051220
---
This application claims the benefit of Provisional U.S. Patent Application 60 640 933 filed in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office on Dec. 30 2004 and incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

The present invention relates to utilization of voice fonts for speech synthesis applications and more particularly to creation and availability of a network based voice font platform for use by network subscribers.

Compression of speech data is an important problem in various applications. For example in wireless communication and voice over IP VoIP effective real time transmission and delivery of voice data over a network may require efficient speech compression. In entertainment applications such as computer games reducing the bandwidth for transmitting player to player voice correspondence may have a direct impact on the quality of the products and the experience of the end users. One well known family of speech compression coding schemes is phoneme based speech compression. Phonemes are the basic sounds of a language that distinguish different words in that base language. To perform phoneme based coding phonemes in speech data are extracted so that the speech data can be transformed into a phoneme stream which is represented symbolically as a text string in which each phoneme in the stream is coded using a distinct symbol.

With a phoneme based coding scheme a phonetic dictionary may be used. A phonetic dictionary characterizes the sound of each phoneme in the base language. It may be speaker dependent or speaker independent and can be created via training using recorded spoken words collected with respect to the underlying population either a particular speaker or a predetermined population . For example a phonetic dictionary may describe the phonetic properties of different phonemes in terms of expected rate tonal pitch and volume. When based on American English there are a set of 40 different phonemes according to the International Phoneme Association 24 consonants and 16 vowels .

What is known as a voice font may be the phoneme patterns for all 40 phonemes stored in the phoneme dictionary. However for higher quality voice fonts sub phoneme units such as for example bi phones or even smaller units are typically stored as the voice font. Thus there can be an essentially unlimited number of voice fonts that can be created by modifying one or more of the phoneme or sub phoneme patterns in a stored set.

There may arise situations where an individual may desire to select a voice font other that his her natural voice for a speech signal transmission. Some systems exist that store a limited number of different voice fonts in a memory associated with an individual s communication device e.g. cell phone computer etc. . However as the number of voice fonts increases the ability to store and or update a listing of voice fonts has become problematic.

Additional features and advantages of the invention will be set forth in the description which follows and in part will be obvious from the description or may be learned by practice of the invention. The features and advantages of the invention may be realized and obtained by means of the instruments and combinations particularly pointed out in the appended claims. These and other features of the present invention will become more fully apparent from the following description and appended claims or may be learned by the practice of the invention as set forth herein.

In a first aspect of the invention a method for utilizing a network repository having stored voice font data is provided. A request for a response including the voice font data stored in the network repository is received via a network. The voice font data stored in the network repository is accessed. The response including the voice font data is sent via the network.

In a second aspect of the invention a machine readable medium having instructions recorded thereon for at least one processor is provided. The machine readable medium includes instructions for receiving via a network a request for a response including voice font data stored in a network repository instructions for accessing the voice font data stored in the network repository and instructions for sending the response including the voice font data via the network.

In a third aspect of the invention a system is provided. The system includes at least one processor a memory storage arranged to store voice font data for voice synthesis a network communication device arranged to communicate via a network and a bus for connecting the at least one processor the memory the storage and the network communication device. The at least one processor is arranged to receive a request via a network for the voice font data stored in the storage access the voice font data stored in the storage and send the response including the voice font data via the network.

In a fourth aspect of the invention an apparatus is provided. The apparatus includes means for receiving via a network a request for a response including voice font data stored in a network repository means for accessing the voice font data stored in the network repository and means for sending the response including the voice font data via the network.

Various embodiments of the invention are discussed in detail below. While specific implementations are discussed it should be understood that this is done for illustration purposes only. A person skilled in the relevant art will recognize that other components and configurations may be used without parting from the spirit and scope of the invention.

Network may include one or more networks such as for example an Internet Protocol IP network capable of carrying voice over IP VoIP packets or other types of networks capable of carrying synthesized voice messages as well as other data. Network may also include a public switched telephone network PSTN and may include a wireless telephone network not shown .

User device may be a conventional telephone connected to PSTN a processor device such as for example a personal computer a handheld computer a cell phone with a processor a conventional telephone or other device capable of receiving voice font data playing synthesized voice based at least partly on the received voice font data or receiving a signal corresponding to synthesized voice and reproducing the corresponding synthesized voice.

Server may be a processing device such as for example a personal computer or other processing device capable of receiving voice font data and text and generating synthesized voice data based at least in part on the voice font data and the text.

Network repository may include a processing device with meta table which has information describing multiple features of one or more voice fonts stored in voice font database .

Voice font database may be a database that includes storage for data with respect to multiple voice fonts and may also include information pertaining to a fee for use of a particular voice font as well as access restriction data pertaining to use of one or more voice fonts.

Subscriber database may include information pertaining to a subscriber such as for example userID password default voice font etc. Further subscriber database may include more than one default voice font for a user s use. For example a user may have a default voice font for personal messages and a default voice font for business messages.

Processor may include at least one conventional processor or microprocessor that interprets and executes instructions. Memory may be a random access memory RAM or another type of dynamic storage device that stores information and instructions for execution by processor . Memory may also store temporary variables or other intermediate information used during execution of instructions by processor . ROM may include a conventional ROM device or another type of static storage device that stores static information and instructions for processor . Storage device may include any type of media such as for example magnetic or optical recording media and its corresponding drive as well as memory such as RAM. In some implementations consistent with the principles of the invention storage device may store and retrieve data according to a database management system.

Input device may include one or more conventional mechanisms that permit a user to input information to system such as a keyboard a mouse a pen a voice recognition device a microphone a headset etc. Output device may include one or more conventional mechanisms that output information to the user including a display a printer one or more speakers a headset or a medium such as a memory or a magnetic or optical disk and a corresponding disk drive.

Communication interface may include any transceiver like mechanism that enables processing device to communicate via a network. For example communication interface may include a modem or an Ethernet interface for communicating via a local area network LAN . Alternatively communication interface may include other mechanisms for communicating with other devices and or systems via wired wireless or optical connections.

Processing device may perform such functions in response to processor executing sequences of instructions contained in a computer readable medium such as for example memory a magnetic disk or an optical disk. Such instructions may be read into memory from another computer readable medium such as storage device or from a separate device via communication interface .

When processing device is used as user device processing device may be for example a personal computer PC a handheld computer a cell phone or any other type of processing device. When processing device is used as server or network repository processing device may be a personal computer or other processing device.

In alternative implementations such as for example a distributed processing implementation a group of processing devices may communicate with one another via a network such that various processors may perform operations pertaining to different aspects of the particular implementation.

With respect to each of the exemplary features of meta table GENDER may have a value of MALE or FEMALE AGE may have a value corresponding to a particular age in years or an age range language may have a value indicating language spoken accent may have a value indicating a particular accent such as for example a regional accent or an accent pertaining to a particular country TONE may have a value indicating an emotional tone such as for example HAPPY ANGRY etc. QUALITY may have a value indicating a quality of synthesized voice to be produced based on the particular voice font such as for example High Medium or Low or any other suitable set of values RESTRICTIONS may have a value indicating whether certain user restrictions are placed on who may use the particular voice font or whether the voice font may be used only upon payment of a fee NAME may be a name for the voice font and may be an alphanumeric value and POINTER may be a pointer to the particular voice font in voice font database .

Entry of exemplary meta table describes a voice font for a synthesized voice of a male in his 20 s who speaks English with a southern accent. The tone of the font is energetic and can be used to produce a high quality synthesized voice with no restrictions on use. The voice font name is DREW and pointer 1 points to the corresponding voice font data in voice font database .

Entry describes a voice font for a synthesized voice of a female child of about 6 years of age who speaks English with a Midwestern accent and with a happy tone. The quality of the synthesized voice to be produced using the voice font is medium with no restrictions on use. The voice font has a name of LILY and pointer 2 points to the corresponding voice font data in voice font database .

Entry describes a voice font for a synthesized voice of a female in her 30 s who speaks English with a French accent and with a playful tone. The quality of the synthesized voice to be produced using the voice font is high and may be used by paying a fee. The voice font has a name of CELEB1 and pointer 3 points to the corresponding voice font data in voice font database .

Entry describes a voice font for a synthesized voice of a male in his 40 s who speaks Spanish with a Mexican accent and with an angry tone. The quality of the synthesized voice to be produced using the voice font is medium and use of the font is subject to user access restrictions. The voice font has a name of USER1 and pointer 4 points to the corresponding voice font data in voice font database .

Assuming that user device is a processing device the process may begin with user device requesting a particular voice font based on a user selection a previously defined user preference or via another means act . In one implementation a user may browse information in meta table via for example a browser or other means and may select a voice font from the meta table via any one of a number of input means such as for example making a selection from a display using a pointing device such as a computer mouse an electronic stylus or a user s finger on a touch screen display. Other means of indicating a desired voice font may also be used such as for example a microphone and a speech recognizer whereby a user may provide a verbal indication of a desired voice font.

User device may then send a request for the desired voice font to network repository via network act . User device may then determine whether the requested voice font is received act . If the voice font is not received which may be determined by a timeout event or an error notification user device may provide a notification to a user that the desired voice font is currently not available act . This may be achieved via a displayed message an audio signal or another suitable means.

If the voice font is received by user device the voice font may be stored in memory or storage device act . User device may then receive a text message act . The text message may be for example an e mail message an instant message a text document keyboard input or other textual input. User device may then generate synthesized voice data based on the text message and the received voice font act . The received voice font data may be in any known voice font data format or may be in a voice font format not yet developed. User device may play a synthesized voice corresponding to the voice font data via output device act such as for example a speaker or a headset and the user will hear a synthesized voice speaking the text message.

A variation of the exemplary process of may also be implemented in a processing device such as server . In this example we assume that user device is a conventional telephone. Acts may be performed by server essentially as discussed above with respect to the previous example. Server may then play the synthesized voice data act through a connection from server via network including PSTN to user device a conventional telephone in this example where a user will hear the synthesized voice speaking the text message. The connection may be established by a user of user device making a call to a message retrieval application or other application.

In a variation of the above mentioned second example the exemplary process of may be implemented in a processing device such as server . However in this example we assume that user device is a stationary processing device or a portable processing device such as for example a cell phone a handheld computer with a speaker earphone or headset or another portable processing device capable of outputting a voice.

Acts may be performed essentially as discussed above with respect to the previous examples. Server may then send the generated synthesized voice data to user device act which may play the synthesized voice data so that a user may hear the corresponding synthesized voice speak the test message. Alternatively server may play the synthesized voice data act through a connection from server via network to user device via for example a wireless connection. The user will subsequently hear the synthesized voice speaking the text message via user device . The connection may be established by a user of user device making a wireless call to a message retrieval application or other application.

If network repository determines that the requested voice font is restricted act then network repository may determine if the restriction concerns charging a fee for use of the voice font act . If the restriction does concern charging a fee for use of the voice font network repository may access subscriber database to determine whether the particular subscriber who may have previously been identified by entering a userID password combination or by another identification means is authorized to access a pay for use voice font and may add the particular fee to the subscriber s account act before obtaining the particular voice font act and delivering the voice font act .

If network repository determines that the requested voice font is restricted act and that use of the voice font does not include charging the subscriber a fee act then network repository may determine whether the subscriber is permitted to use the requested voice font act . This may be achieved by referring to voice font database which may include access restriction data with respect to particular voice fonts. If network repository determines that the subscriber is not permitted access to the voice font then network repository may provide a restriction notification to the requesting device act .

Implementations consistent with the principles of the invention may permit a fee to be charged for use of certain ones of the voice font data. For example a fee may be charged for voice font data that can be used to synthesize a celebrity voice. The fee a subscriber may be charged may be based on the number of times the particular voice font data is requested the particular individual or celebrity whose voice is to be synthesized and or a quality associated with the synthesized voice to be produced using the voice font. Further network repository may provide some voice font data such as for example pay for use voice font data such that it can be used only a predetermined number of times such as for example one time or a specific number of times based on for example an amount of a fee to be paid by a subscriber.

In implementations consistent with the principles of the invention network repository may receive new voice font data from a device and may store the voice font data in voice font database . The voice font data may be received via network or may be received locally along with configuration data such as for example access restrictions pay for use data and feature information as well as other information for a new meta table entry.

Although the above description may contain specific details they should not be construed as limiting the claims in any way. Other configurations of the described embodiments of the invention are part of the scope of this invention. For example hardwired logic may be used in implementations instead of processors or one or more application specific integrated circuits ASICs may be used in implementations consistent with the principles of the invention. Further implementations consistent with the principles of the invention may have more or fewer acts than as described or may implement acts in a different order than as shown. For example with respect to the exemplary process described in the voice font may be stored after receiving a text message instead of before receiving the text message or the text may be received at some other point in the process. Accordingly the appended claims and their legal equivalents should only define the invention rather than any specific examples given.

