---

title: Floor stripper/cleaner containing organic acid-base pair
abstract: Floor finishes are stripped or deep scrubbed using a floor stripper/cleaner composition containing sparingly water-soluble floor finish solvent; water; sulfonic acid, sulfate acid, phosphonic acid, phosphate acid or aromatic acid coupler in an amount sufficient to provide a homogenous aqueous liquid phase and no or low foaming during shaking; and sufficient organic amine so that the composition pH is about 2 to about 11.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07674760&OS=07674760&RS=07674760
owner: Ecolab Inc.
number: 07674760
owner_city: St. Paul
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051018
---
This invention relates to floor stripping to the non destructive removal of floor finishes and to floor finish scrub and recoat procedures.

Floor strippers are used to remove worn or discolored floor finishes from flooring substrates e.g. vinyl composition tiles so that a new finish may be applied. Floor scrub and recoat materials are used to carry out a procedure sometimes referred to as deep scrubbing so that a fresh layer of floor finish may be applied atop an existing floor finish. References relating to various stripping or cleaning agents some of which are said to be floor strippers or floor cleaners include U.S. Pat. No. 3 993 804 McReady et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 187 191 Simpson Jr. U.S. Pat. No. 5 080 831 VanEenam 831 U.S. Pat. No. 5 342 551 Ruckle U.S. Pat. No. 5 419 848 VanEenam 848 U.S. Pat. No. 5 637 559 Koreltz et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 728 666 Vitomar 666 U.S. Pat. No. 5 744 440 Liu U.S. Pat. No. 5 849 682 VanEenam 682 U.S. Pat. No. 5 851 972 Distaso et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 465 405 B1 Vitomar 405 U.S. Pat. No. 6 544 942 B1 Smith et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 583 101 B1 Wiseth et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 586 380 B2 Marquis et al. U.S. Patent Application Publication No. US 2003 0125226 A1 Lewis Published PCT Application Nos. WO 98 17734 Brent International PLC and WO 2004 090085 A1 Vocfree Inc. Henkel Surface Technologies Technical Process Bulletin No. 238828 Form Revised 4 Jun. 2001 and available on the Internet at http p2library.nfesc.navy.mil P2 Opportunity Handbook 59.html Revision Date 8 03 .

Many floor strippers and floor scrub and recoat materials have a high pH may irritate a user s skin or may stain or otherwise damage linoleum and other substrates. Some strippers or scrub and recoat materials dewet appear to bead up upon or otherwise insufficiently wet a floor shortly after being applied and may continue to dewet until the user swabs the applied material back and forth a few times. Some floor finishes e.g. crosslinked floor finishes are especially difficult to remove and may require multiple applications of a floor stripper formulation or long dwell times.

The present invention provides in one aspect a floor finish stripper or scrub and recoat composition comprising 

The invention provides in another aspect a method for stripping or deep scrubbing a floor finish comprising 

The disclosed compositions and methods facilitate stripping or cleaning floor finishes. Preferred embodiments of the disclosed compositions and methods have a reduced pH and may be less irritating to skin or less likely to stain substrates such as linoleum. Additional preferred embodiments of the disclosed compositions and methods are substantially free of inorganic salts and may be greener or more environmentally friendly than conventional compositions containing salts of acids as couplers.

The phrase hardenable floor finish refers to an applied liquid coating that through a chemical or physical process including solvent evaporation or other drying processes photochemical reactions electrochemical reactions radical processes thermal processes ionic processes moisture cure processes or multiple component e.g. two or three component crosslinking processes can become dried crosslinked or otherwise cured in situ to form a tack free film on a floor. The phrase hardened floor finish refers to such a dried cross linked or otherwise cured floor finish.

The phrase stripping a floor finish refers to removing at such time as it may be desired to do so a hardened floor finish from an underlying installed flooring substrate without removing substantial portions of the flooring substrate. Such stripping preferably employs minimally abrasive measures such as mop or spray application of the disclosed stripper followed after a brief standing time by rinsing using e.g. water or a detergent solution. Stripping may if desired be accompanied by more abrasive but flooring safe measures such as abrading the finish during the standing time using e.g. a nonwoven floor scrub pad but may be carried out without requiring a flooring damaging finish removal step such as sanding.

The phrases deep scrubbing and scrubbing and recoating refer to applying at such time as it may be desired to do so a composition containing a floor finish solvent to a hardened floor finish atop an underlying installed flooring substrate without removing all of the hardened floor finish and cleaning the hardened floor finish surface sufficiently so that an additional layer or layers of hardenable floor finish may be applied thereto and hardened.

The word concentrate refers to a composition intended to be diluted with water before use. The phrase substantially nonchlorinated refers to a concentrate that does not contain objectionable quantities of chlorinated solvents e.g. methylene chloride whose presence might pose a health or environmental hazard. The phrase floor finish solvent refers to an organic liquid that can dissolve soften or otherwise assist in removing a hardened floor finish from a floor and includes organic cosolvents that assist in dissolving a solvent in a concentrate help maintain the concentrate in a desirable physical state during storage ease dilution of the concentrate with water reduce cost reduce odor or provide some other desirable packaging storage or use benefit. The phrase sparingly water soluble refers to a material that when mixed by itself with water at room temperature and pressure at a mixing ratio less than 1 20 will not form a clear homogenous solution but which can form a clear homogenous solution in the presence of sufficient acidic coupler.

The phrase not corrosive to skin refers to a composition which when tested with the CORROSITEX in vitro skin corrosion assay from InVitro International does not break through the assay membrane in less than sixty minutes of contact.

The phrase homogenous aqueous liquid phase and no or low foaming during shaking refers to a composition that contains or is diluted to contain at least 75 wt. water and which when 7.5 ml of such composition or diluted composition is placed in a 50 ml Erlenmeyer flask manually shaken for one minute and allowed to stand for one minute will not completely separate into two or more phases and will not exhibit more than 10 ml of visible foam.

A variety of sparingly water soluble floor finish solvents may be employed in the disclosed compositions and methods. The solvent desirably has a flash point greater than about 60 C. low odor and low toxicity and preferably has at least 0.1 wt. water solubility. Representative floor finish solvents include 2 3 or 4 acetamidophenol 

Tap water deionized water distilled water or water in any other suitable form may be used in the disclosed compositions and methods. The use of softened water or of water having a low overall hardness level may facilitate application of the disclosed compositions to a hardened floor finish and limit dewetting. When the disclosed compositions are formulated as a concentrate water may represent for example at least 5 at least 10 at least 20 at least 30 at least 40 at least 50 at least 60 at least 70 or at least 80 of the total concentrate weight.

A variety of sulfonic acid sulfate acid phosphonic acid phosphate acid and aromatic acid couplers may be employed in the disclosed compositions and methods. The acid coupler may contain carbon atoms e.g. from about 2 to about 11 carbon atoms may contain heteroatoms e.g. nitrogen or sulfur and may be substituted with various moieties e.g. hydroxyl ester aldehyde or alkyl groups so long as such carbon atoms heteroatoms and moieties do not interfere with solubilization of the floor finish solvent or cause excessive foaming during shaking. As shown below in Examples 16 and 17 when a linear alkylbenzene sulfonic acid such as dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid is used as the acid agitation can lead to excessive foam formation. If a stripper cleaner prone to such excessive foam formation is applied using a swing machine or other motorized application device the foam can cause pump cavitation and otherwise slow the removal process when using an autoscrubber or other suction device to remove the residual stripper cleaner and softened or stripped finish.

Exemplary acid couplers include hydroxyethane sulfonic acid cumene sulfonic acid toluene sulfonic acid xylene sulfonic acid methyl naphthalene sulfonic acid amino tri methylene phosphonic acid 1 hydroxyethylidene 1 1 diphosphonic acid n butyl acid phosphate phenyl acid phosphate dimethylpyrophosphoric acid 2 phosphonobutane 1 2 4 tricarboxylic acid benzoic acid hydroxybenzoic acids e.g. 2 hydroxybenzoic acid dihydroxybenzoic acids e.g. 3 5 dihydroxybenzoic acid pyridinecarboxylic acids e.g. 2 pyridinecarboxylic acid pyridinedicarboxylic acids e.g. 2 6 pyridinedicarboxylic acid and sulfosuccinic acid. The acid coupler may have any suitable purity level. Preferably however an acid coupler of at least 50 purity is employed. When the disclosed compositions are formulated as a concentrate the acid coupler may represent for example about 0.1 to about 20 about 0.1 to about 10 or about 0.1 to about 5 of the total concentrate weight. The acid coupler may be accompanied by other acids e.g. mineral acids or by salts of aromatic aliphatic or mineral acids e.g. sodium benzene sulfonate . However the inclusion of such other acids or acid salts may make the stripper cleaner less environmentally friendly. Preferably the acid coupler is at least 50 of the total weight of acids and salts of acids in the disclosed compositions. Acid couplers as described in copending application Ser. No. 11 254 235 filed even date herewith the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference may also be employed in the disclosed compositions and methods.

A variety of organic amines may be employed in the disclosed compositions and methods. Representative organic amines include low molecular weight e.g. C organoamines and substituted organoamines e.g. alkanolamines such as monoethanolamine diethyl ethanolamine triethanolamine 1 2 diaminoethane 1 2 diaminopropane N benzylethanolamine 2 aminomethylpropanol furfurylamine tetrahydrofurfurylamine and mixtures thereof. When the disclosed compositions are formulated as a concentrate the organic amine may represent for example about 0.1 to about 20 about 0.1 to about 10 or about 0.1 to about 5 of the total concentrate weight. The amine amount may also be expressed in terms of the molar equivalent ratio of acid to amine. For example acid amine molar equivalent ratios of about 0.7 1 to about 1.3 1 may be employed. Often it will be desirable to adjust the amine amount to obtain a desired pH in the final concentrate or use solution. For example the pH may be about 2 to about 11 about 4 to about 10 or about 5 to about 9. The use of excessive amine in the floor stripper cleaner concentrate or use solution can make the composition corrosive to skin and can subject a concentrate having such corrosive properties to much more stringent packaging requirements. The organoamine may be accompanied by other amines e.g. inorganic amines or by salts of organic of inorganic amines. However the inclusion of amine salts may make the stripper cleaner less environmentally friendly and the inclusion of inorganic amines may make the composition more prone to dewetting. Preferably the organoamines are at least 50 of the total weight of amines and salts of amines.

The disclosed compositions may also contain one or more surfactants. Representative surfactants will be familiar to those skilled in the art and include anionic cationic amphoteric and nonionic surfactants and mixtures thereof. Exemplary surfactants are described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 544 942 B1. The amount of surfactant may vary depending on factors such as the types and amounts of other ingredients in the disclosed composition the desired dilution level and other factors that will be familiar to those skilled in the art. As a general guide the amount of surfactant may be about 0.1 to about 20 about 0.1 to about 15 or about 0.1 to about 10 of the total concentrate weight.

The disclosed compositions may contain other adjuvants including biocides abrasive particles chelants builders defoamers fragrances dyes indicators colorants thickeners anticorrosion additives antirust additives light stabilizers and antioxidants. The types and amounts of such adjuvants will be apparent to those skilled in the art.

The disclosed stripper cleaners may be manufactured as water containing concentrates intended to be diluted with additional water prior to use or as ready to use aqueous solutions that may be employed without dilution. Desirably the floor stripper cleaner forms a single phase when freshly stirred and maintains that single phase while stored in the container in which it will be sold or at least for sufficient time e.g. for one minute or more two minutes or more or five minutes or more so that the composition may be stirred or otherwise mixed and then applied to a floor at the intended point of use before phase separation occurs. The concentrate may contain for example about 5 to about 85 wt. solvent about 1 to about 93 wt. water about 1 to about 25 wt. acid coupler and about 1 to about 25 wt. organic amine. A ready to use solution may contain for example about 0.05 to about 25 wt. solvent about 25 to about 99 wt. water about 0.1 to about 10 wt. acid coupler and about 0.1 to about 10 wt. organic amine. The disclosed stripper cleaners may be manufactured by mixing the ingredients in any convenient order. For example the water organic amine surfactant if employed floor finish solvent acid and any other desired ingredients e.g. dyes fragrances chelating agents etc. may be mixed together. The disclosed stripper cleaners may be packaged in any convenient form including bottles drums dispensers intended to be carried by a user during stripper cleaner application and dispensers intended to be replaceably installed in a mixing or dispensing device e.g. a wall mounted freestanding or benchtop dispensing station . The types and design of suitable packaging will be familiar to those skilled in the art.

A variety of flooring substrates may be stripped using the disclosed method. Exemplary flooring substrates include resilient flooring substrates such as vinyl composition tiles vinyl sheet flooring linoleum rubber sheeting rubber tile cork synthetic sports flooring and vinyl asbestos tile and non resilient flooring substrates such as terrazzo concrete wood flooring bamboo wood laminate engineered wood products e.g. wood epoxy blends permanently coated substrates such as those available under the names PERGO and PARQUET stone marble slate ceramic tile grout and dry shake flooring. Such flooring substrates may be installed at a variety of jobsites including indoor and outdoor sites involving new or existing residential commercial and government or agency owned sites.

A variety of hardened floor finishes may be stripped or deep scrubbed using the disclosed method. Representative commercially available floor finishes include PADLOCK GEMSTAR LASER GEMSTAR POLARIS RIVET and TAJ MAHAL acrylic floor finishes GLOSSTEK 100 and ORION polyurethane floor finishes and COURTMASTER II ISI STAR TUKLAR MEDICAL floor finishes all from Ecolab Inc. CORNERSTONE and TOPLINE acrylic floor finishes from 3M BETCO BEST floor finish from Betco Corp. HIGH NOON acrylic finish from Butchers CITATION and CASTLEGUARD acrylic finishes from Buckeye International Inc. COMPLETE SIGNATURE TECHNIQUE and VECTRA acrylic floor finishes from SC Johnson Professional Products OVER AND UNDER floor sealer from S. C. Johnson Professional Products SPLENDOR DECADE 90 PRIME SHINE ULTRA and PREMIER acrylic finishes and FIRST ROUND and FORTRESS urethane acrylic finishes from Minuteman International Inc. ACRYL KOTE Seal and Finish and PREP Floor Seal from Minuteman International Inc. ULTRA TC and UV I FINISH UV curable finishes from Minuteman International Inc FLOORSTAR Premium 25 floor finish from ServiceMaster Inc. and UPPER LIMITS acrylic finish and ISHINE optically brightened floor finish from Spartan Chemical Co. Other suitable floor finishes may be based on film formers including No. AD200C1 polyester polyurethane formulation from Air Products and Chemicals Inc. LAROMER PE 22 WN polyester acrylate emulsion LAROMER LR 8949 aqueous radiation curable aliphatic polyurethane dispersion and LAROMER LR 8983 aqueous radiation curable aromatic polyurethane dispersion all from BASF Corp. No. MG98 040 polyester polyurethane formulation from Bayer AG MEGATRAN 205 zinc crosslinked acrylic dispersion and SYNTRAN 1580 zinc crosslinked acrylic dispersion from Interpolymer Corp. MORGLO zinc crosslinked acrylic dispersion and MORGLO2 acrylic styrene polymer emulsion both from Omnova Solutions Inc. STAY CLAD 5900 hydroxyl functional acrylic polymer dispersion from Reichhold Inc. DURAPLUS 2 modified acrylic low odor mixed metal crosslinked polymer DURAPLUS 3 zinc crosslinked acrylic dispersion DURAGREEN MF1 metal free acrylic polymer emulsion PRIMAL B 336AFK modified acrylic zinc crosslinked polymer PRIMAL B 924ER zinc crosslinked all acrylic polymer emulsion PRIMAL E 2483 metal crosslinked acrylic polymer PRIMAL E 3188 waterborne acrylic polymer dispersion PRIMAL NT 2624 metal free polymer PRIMAL NT 6035 metal free polymer RHOPLEX B 924 all acrylic metal crosslinked floor polish polymer RHOPLEX 1421 zinc crosslinked acrylic dispersion RHOPLEX B 1604 metal crosslinked modified acrylic polymer RHOPLEX NT 2624 metal crosslinker free modified acrylic polish RHOPLEX 3479 low foaming metal crosslinked modified acrylic polymer ROSHIELD 3120 UV curable acrylate coating and UHS Plus metal crosslinked modified acrylic polymer all from Rohm Haas Co. VIAKTIN VTE 6155 aliphatic urethane acrylate VTE 6165 aromatic urethane acrylate and VTE 6169 aliphatic polyester urethane radiation curing resins all from Solutia Inc. Nos. 979 1 and 980 3 polyester polyurethane formulations from U.S. Polymers Inc. the ZVOC series of UV curable coatings from UV Coatings Limited No. G 2029 acrylic polyurethane formulation and NEORAD NR 3709 UV curable aliphatic urethane coating from Zeneca Resins 98 283W urethane acrylate from Hans Rahn Co. and materials such as those described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 517 330 4 999 216 5 091 211 5 319 018 5 453 451 5 773 487 5 830 937 6 096 383 6 197 844 6 228 433 6 316 535 B1 6 544 942 B1 U.S. Patent Application Publication No. US 2002 0028621 A1 and in the patents cited therein. The floor finishes may include water soluble or water dispersible film formers such as metal free acrylic finishes acid containing polymers crosslinked using transition metals and water soluble or water dispersible multicomponent e.g. two component polyurethanes. The floor finish may contain mixtures of film formers.

If in concentrated form the stripper cleaner should be diluted with water prior to use e.g. at an intended use location. Ordinary tap water softened water or process water may be employed. The concentrate water dilution ratio usually will be at least 1 1 by volume for example at least 1 2 at least 1 3 at least 1 4 at least 1 5 at least 1 6 at least 1 8 at least 1 10 or more. A variety of mixing methods may be employed. Mixing in a mop bucket is one such method and may be preferred. The hardened floor finish can optionally be abraded with a suitably mild abrasive e.g. a green or black SCOTCH BRITE Floor Maintenance pad from 3M prior to applying the stripper cleaner. The stripper cleaner may be applied using techniques that will be familiar to those skilled in the art e.g. using a flat or string mop squeegee roller or towel . The applied stripper cleaner should be allowed to stand for a suitable time e.g. for a minute or more and typically up to about 5 up to about 10 or up to about 20 minutes while it softens or deep scrubs the floor finish. The composition and where stripping is intended the softened finish may be removed using a variety of techniques that will be familiar to those skilled in the art including vacuuming mopping scrubbing or wiping. The stripped floor or deep scrubbed floor finish may be allowed to dry and a layer or layers of floor finish applied thereto and caused or allowed to harden.

The invention is further illustrated in the following non limiting examples in which all parts and percentages are by weight unless otherwise indicated.

A concentrate was made using the ingredients and weight percentage amounts shown below in Table 1. Monoethanolamine benzyl alcohol surfactant and ethylene glycol n butyl ether were all added with stirring to the majority of the water. The mixture formed two phases. Cumene sulfonic acid was added with stirring until the mixture formed a single phase concentrate followed by addition of the remaining water.

The resulting concentrate was diluted with tap water at a 1 3 ratio by volume to form a floor stripper cleaner use solution having a pH of about 2 as measured using pH strips. The use solution was clear when mixed and initially remained clear after mixing but if allowed to stand for about 2 3 minutes exhibited pseudo stability and separated into two phases. The floor stripper cleaner was remixed to reform a single phase use solution and used to strip a vinyl composite tile coated with 2 coats of aziridine crosslinked TUKLAR MEDICAL floor finish from Ecolab Inc. which had been applied at a 50 m L 2000 ft gallon coating rate. The use solution applied easily and did not appear to dewet. The applied use solution was allowed to stand for a 10 or 20 minute contact time then scrubbed by hand using a green SCOTCHBRITE pad from 3M Co. and rinsed with water. All coats of the finish were completely removed after either a 10 or 20 minute contact time.

Ready to use pH 2 and pH 6 versions of the Example 1 floor stripper cleaner were made by mixing together the ingredients in the percentage amounts shown below in Table 2.

The resulting stripper cleaners were used to strip tiles coated as in Example 1 with 2 layers of crosslinked floor finish. Foam rings were adhered to the tiles to provide four similar enclosed circular areas. The Run 2 1 and 2 2 stripper cleaners were placed inside the rings for 10 minute or 20 minute contact times. The foam rings were removed and the tiles scrubbed by hand with a green SCOTCHBRITE pad and rinsed with water. The Run 2 1 and 2 2 stripper cleaners were also spread using a flocked pad on 76 mm 76 mm square areas of another similarly coated tile allowed to stand for 10 minute or 20 minute contact times then scrubbed by hand with a green SCOTCHBRITE pad and rinsed with water. For both the foam ring and coated square area tests the Run 2 1 floor stripper cleaner removed more finish than did the Run 2 2 floor stripper cleaner. For the coated square area test the Run 2 2 floor stripper cleaner wet the tile surface better than did the Run 2 1 floor stripper cleaner.

Concentrated versions of the Run 2 1 and Run 2 2 stripper cleaners and a higher pH approximately pH 9 concentrate were made by mixing together the ingredients in the percentage amounts shown below in Table 3.

Using a variety of applicators a vinyl tiled hallway area was coated with 3 basecoats of PADLOCK finish from Ecolab Inc. applied at a 50 m L 2000 ft gallon coating rate and overcoated with ORION two part urethane topcoat from Ecolab Inc. applied at a 15 m L 600 ft gallon coating rate. Each of the concentrates shown above in Table 3 was mixed with water at a 1 3 by volume dilution ratio applied to a section of the hallway and allowed to stand for 15 minutes scrubbed using a swing machine equipped with a 3M HI PRO black nonwoven pad then successfully removed using an autoscrubber. All three stripper cleaners completely removed 100 of the multilayer finish with no dewetting and minimal foam formation.

Acidic Run 4 1 and basic Run 4 2 concentrates were made by mixing together the ingredients in the percentage amounts shown below in Table 4.

The resulting floor stripper cleaner concentrates were mixed with water at a 1 3 by volume dilution ratio to provide use solutions which retained a single phase and did not phase separate when allowed to stand. The use solutions were used to strip tiles coated as in Example 1 with 2 layers of crosslinked floor finish by distributing approximately 4 milliliters of use solution on a 10 cm 30 cm tile section using a flocked pad. Wetting was evaluated after a 30 second contact time. After a 4 minute contact time an additional 4 milliliters of use solution was similarly applied. After a 10 minute total contact time each tile section was hand scrubbed using a green SCOTCHBRITE pad and rinsed with water. Both stripper cleaners effectively stripped the finish with the Run 4 1 floor stripper cleaner appearing to work more quickly and slightly more effectively. No dewetting was observed.

A series of concentrates containing different monoethanolamine MEA cumene sulfonic acid CSA molar ratios was made by mixing together the ingredients in the percentage amounts shown below in Table 5a.

The Run 5 1 5 2 and 5 3 concentrates respectively had MEA CSA molar ratios of 1.5 1 1.25 1 and 1.05 1. Each concentrate was mixed with water at a 1 3 by volume dilution rate. The pH of each of the resulting use solutions was measured using a pH meter. The use solutions were used to strip a linoleum tile coated with 1 coat of uncrosslinked TUKLAR Medical floor finish followed by 2 coats of aziridine crosslinked TUKLAR MEDICAL floor finish. Each floor finish coat had been applied at a 50 m L 2000 ft gallon coating rate. Using the method of Example 2 a ring test was employed to evaluate stripping effectiveness at 5 min 10 min and 15 min contact times. Linoleum staining was visually evaluated to determine if browning occurred at the tile surface. As shown below in Table 5b all three stripper cleaners effectively stripped the finish with varying degrees of linoleum staining depending on the pH. Slight staining was observed below pH 9 and no staining was observed below pH 8.

A series of concentrates Run 6 2 through Run 6 7 containing varying amounts of diethyl ethanolamine DEEA was made by mixing together the ingredients in the percentage amounts shown below in Table 6a. Table 6a also shows the Run 4 2 concentrate and an additional concentrate Run 6 1 made using MEA as the amine.

The resulting floor stripper cleaner concentrates were mixed with water at a 1 3 Run 4 2 Run 6 5 Run 6 6 and Run 6 7 or 1 6 Run 6 1 Run 6 2 Run 6 3 and Run 6 4 volume dilution ratio. The use solutions were used to strip tiles coated as in Example 1 with 2 layers of crosslinked floor finish and evaluated using a ring test and 5 10 and 15 minute contact times as in Example 2. The use solution pH values were determined using pH strips. Stripping performance was evaluated using a 1 worst to 6 best scale with 1 representing no stripping and 6 representing complete stripping. The results are shown below in Table 6b. The number of phases in each use solution was determined by stirring the use solution until the ingredients were well mixed then allowing the use solution to stand for 2 3 visually examining the solution without agitation to determine if any phase separation could be observed.

As shown in Table 6b the DEEA containing stripper cleaner formulations tended to provide better stripping at a pH from 2.5 to neutral and when 2 phases were formed upon standing. The Run 6 2 and 6 3 formulations provided stripping performance comparable to that of the MEA containing stripper cleaner formulation in Run 6 1 but at a much lower pH.

Two ready to use stripper cleaners were made from the ingredients shown below in Table 7. The first four ingredients were added in the order listed and mixed. The next two ingredients were mixed together then added to the mixture of the first four ingredients and stirred until a homogenous mixture was obtained.

Both stripper cleaners were used to strip a tile coated as in Example 1 with 2 layers of crosslinked floor finish and evaluated by dividing the tile in half and applying 6 milliliters of the Run 7 1 stripper cleaner to one half and 6 milliliters of the Run 7 2 stripper cleaner to the other half. Both stripper cleaners were evenly distributed using a green flocked pad. An additional 6 milliliters of each stripper cleaner was similarly applied after 2 4 and 8 minutes total contact time. After 15 minutes total contact time the tiles were scrubbed by hand using a green SCOTCHBRITE pad and rinsed with water. Both stripper cleaners were effective at removing finish in contact with the stripper cleaner. However the Run 7 1 stripper cleaner which contained ammonium hydroxide was observed to dewet significantly throughout the experiment despite repeated application of additional stripper cleaner. Accordingly the stripped areas were small and localized when the Run 7 1 stripper cleaner was used. The Run 7 2 effectively wet the entire finish surface and stripped the entire tested area.

A series of floor stripper cleaner concentrates was made from a variety of organic acids by missing together the ingredients shown below in Table 8a.

The resulting floor stripper cleaner concentrates were mixed with water at a 1 3 volume dilution ratio. The use solutions were used to strip tiles coated as in Example 5 with 1 layer of uncrosslinked floor finish and 2 layers of crosslinked floor finish and evaluated using a ring test and 5 10 and 15 minute contact times as in Example 2. The use solution pH values were determined using a pH meter. Stripping performance and linoleum staining were evaluated as in Example 5. The results are shown below in Table 8b.

As shown in Table 8b all of the use solutions formed unstable emulsions but completely stripped the finish. Linoleum staining was observed for the Run 8 3 stripper cleaner which had a pH greater than 9.

Using the method of Example 8 a series of floor stripper cleaner concentrates was made from a variety of organic acids by missing together the ingredients shown below in Table 9a.

The resulting floor stripper cleaner concentrates were mixed with water at a 1 3 volume dilution ratio. The use solutions were used to strip tiles coated with 5 layers of GEMSTAR LASER floor finish from Ecolab Inc. which had been applied at a 50 m L 2000 ft gallon coating rate and evaluated using a ring test and 5 10 and 15 minute contact times as in Example 2. The use solution pH values were determined using a pH meter. Stripping performance was evaluated as in Example 5. The results are shown below in Table 9b.

The Run 9 5 stripper cleaner provided less stripping than the other formulations but also had a much lower pH. Raising the pH to about 7 10 for use on vinyl composite tiles or to about 7 9 for use on linoleum should improve the stripping performance of this formulation.

A series of ready to use stripper cleaners were made using a variety of amines in the amounts shown below in Table 10a. The Run 10 4 stripper cleaner was made by adding one drop of MEA to 14.9 g of the Run 10 1 stripper cleaner.

The pH of the each of the resulting use solutions was determined using a pH meter. The use solutions were used to strip tiles coated with 5 layers of GEMSTAR LASER floor finish applied at a 50 m L 2000 ft gallon coating rate or 5 layers of ISI STAR floor finish from Ecolab Inc. applied at a 50 m L 2000 ft gallon coating rate. After approximately 1 month at room temperature conditions sitting undisturbed the tiles were burnished with an ultra high speed UHS burnishing machine equipped with a 3M 4100 White Super Polish pad and operated using 4 back and forth passes. Several drops of each of the above use solutions were applied to 25 mm 25 mm square sections cut from the tiles and allowed to stand for 7 minutes or 13 minutes. After the standing time had elapsed the stripper cleaners were poured off the tile sections and the sections were submerged in water for several seconds. Each tile section was then removed from the water and gently rubbed with a paper towel to remove any loose finish. The results are shown below in Table 10b.

As shown in Table 10b the Run 10 4 stripper cleaner provided especially effective stripping on both GEMSTAR LASER and ISI STAR finishes.

A series of ready to use stripper cleaners were made using the ingredients and amounts shown below in Table 11a.

The pH of each of the resulting use solutions was determined using a pH meter. The use solutions were used to strip tiles coated with 2 layers of a standard acrylic finish basecoat and 1 coat of ORION two part urethane topcoat applied at a 15 m L 600 ft gallon coating rate. The stripper cleaners were applied for various contact times with results shown below in Table 11b.

A floor stripper cleaner concentrate was made using the ingredients and amounts shown below in Table 12.

The concentrate formula was diluted 1 3 by volume with water and used to strip up to and including 6 coats of GEMSTAR LASER floor finish in a single application.

A floor stripper cleaner concentrate was made using the ingredients and amounts shown below in Table 13a.

The resulting floor stripper cleaner concentrate was mixed with water at a 1 3 volume dilution ratio. A comparison use solution was prepared by mixing CARE STRIP LOW ODOR stripper concentrate from Ecolab Inc. with water at a 1 8 volume dilution ratio to for a use solution having a pH of 13.5. The use solutions were used to strip tiles coated with 4 layers of ZINC FREE FLOOR FINISH or 4 layers of GEMSTAR LASER floor finish both from Ecolab Inc. which had been applied at a 50 m L 2000 ft gallon coating rate and evaluated using a ring test and 5 and 10 minute contact times as in Example 2. Stripping performance was evaluated as in Example 5. The results are shown below in Table 13b.

The Example 13 floor stripper cleaner provided comparable stripping performance to CARE STRIP LOW ODOR floor stripper but employed a much less caustic formulation.

The Example 13 floor stripper cleaner was also used to strip a tile floor using a swing machine equipped with a 3M HI PRO black nonwoven pad and successfully removed using an autoscrubber. No dewetting was observed and minimal foam formation occurred.

Three floor stripper cleaner concentrates were made using the ingredients and amounts shown below in Table 14a 

The concentrates were tested with the CORROSITEX in vitro skin corrosion assay from InVitro International. In this assay a color changing fluid is placed beneath a biomembrane which provides a color change signal when a corrosive material degrades the membrane. Materials are considered corrosive if they break through the membrane in less than sixty minutes of contact. The assay uses a sodium hydroxide solution as a negative control. The assay results are shown below in Table 14b.

As shown in Table 14b the Run 14 1 floor stripper cleaner was not corrosive in the skin corrosion assay and could be shipped without requiring DOT approved packaging.

A floor stripper cleaner concentrate was made using the ingredients and amounts shown below in Table 15a 

The resulting concentrate was mixed with water at a 1 99 volume dilution ratio to make a light duty cleaning solution at a 1 19 volume dilution ratio to make a heavy duty cleaning solution at a 1 9 volume dilution ratio to make a pH test solution and at a 1 3 volume dilution ratio to make a floor stripper use solution. The pH test solutions were measured using a pH meter. Comparison light duty cleaning heavy duty cleaning pH test and floor stripper use solutions were prepared by mixing BENDUROL FORTE or SIGOFIX ULTRA concentrates both from Ecolab Inc. with water at the same 1 99 1 19 1 9 and 1 3 volume dilution ratios and applying the use solutions to beige tiles coated with 5 layers of GEMSTAR LASER floor finish which had been applied at a 25 L m 1000 ft gallon coating rate and aged for approximately four weeks. The cleaning solutions were numerically evaluated for cleaning efficacy by measuring the lightness value lightness value L of the coated tiles using a color spectrophotometer soiling the tiles in a soiling drum using a test soil containing 7 wt. carbon black 17 wt. MYRITOL oil from Cognis Corp. 40 wt. process oil and 36 wt. benzin 80 110 solvent remeasuring to determine the loss in lightness value due to soiling cleaning the soiled tiles using a Gardner scrub machine from the Paul N. Gardner Co. whose scrub brush had been saturated with the cleaning solution and measuring again to determine the percent of recovered lightness value. The floor stripper use solutions were subjectively evaluated to determine stripping performance by saturating the Gardner scrub brush with the floor stripper use solution and scrubbing the tiles for 5 minutes then rinsing to remove residual floor stripper cleaner and finish. The results are shown below in Table 15b.

The Example 15 formulation demonstrated exceptional cleaning and stripping performance even at a relatively mild pH. This may be better appreciated by comparing the Example 15 Table 15b results to those obtained using BENDUROL FORTE floor stripper. The Example 15 formulation provided light duty and heavy duty cleaning results that respectively were nearly double and more than 20 better than those obtained for BENDUROL FORTE floor stripper. Additionally the Example 15 Floor stripping results were significantly better than those obtained using BENDUROL FORTE floor stripper. The Example 15 formulation cleaning and stripping performance was also at least as good as or better than the performance obtained using SIGOFIX ULTRA floor stripper which has a much higher pH.

Six floor stripper cleaner concentrates were made using the ingredients and amounts shown below in Table 16a.

The pH of each concentrate was measured using pH strips. Each concentrate was diluted 1 3 by volume with water to provide a diluted use solution. 7.5 Milliliter portions of the Run 16 1 and Run 16 6 use solutions were placed in a 50 ml Erlenmeyer flask manually shaken for one minute and allowed to stand for one minute. The Run 16 1 use solution produced approximately 2.5 ml of foam viz. a foam volume corresponding to about one third of the initial liquid volume . The Run 16 6 use solution produced a heavy foam that filled the remaining volume approximately 42.5 mL in the flask. This foam slowly collapsed but after five additional minutes of standing time approximately half the remaining volume in the flask was filled with foam.

A commercial floor stripper CARESTRIP LOW ODOR from Ecolab Inc. was diluted 1 6 by volume with water to provide a comparison use solution. Each concentrate and use solution was visually evaluated for phase separation. The use solutions were used to strip standard vinyl composite tiles coated with 3 layers of ISI STAR floor finish which had been applied at a 50 m L 2000 ft gallon coating rate and aged in a 50 C. oven for 1 week. Stripping was performed using a ring test and a 5 minute contact time as in Example 2 and two stripping tests per use solution. Stripping performance was evaluated as in Example 5. The results are shown below in Table 16b.

As shown in table 16b each of the acids in Table 16a could be used to prepare a relatively low pH floor stripper cleaner that removed ISI STAR finish as effectively as a commercially available pH 12 floor stripper.

The dilute hydrophobic soil cleaner shown in Table A of U.S. Pat. No. 5 744 440 was replicated and evaluated to determine foam generation using the method of Example 16. A 7.5 mL portion of the cleaner was placed in a 50 ml Erlenmeyer flask manually shaken for one minute and allowed to stand for one minute. The cleaner produced a heavy foam that filled the remaining volume approximately 42.5 mL in the flask. A similar foam generation test was performed using the Run 6 1 and Example 13a concentrates each diluted 1 3 by volume with water. The Run 6 11 use solution produced approximately 5 ml of foam viz. a foam volume corresponding to about two thirds of the initial liquid volume and the Run 13 use solution produced approximately 7.5 mL of foam viz. a foam volume corresponding to the initial liquid volume . In each case the Run 6 11 and Run 13 use solutions produced less than 10 mL of foam viz. less than 4 3 the initial liquid volume .

Various modifications and alterations of this invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the scope and spirit of this invention. It should be understood that this invention is not limited to the illustrative embodiments set forth above.

