---

title: Parachute reefing system
abstract: The present invention is directed to a parachute reefing system having a flexible ring section. The flexible ring section has a circumference. The reefing system includes a plurality of equidistantly spaced loops attached to the flexible ring section and a plurality of link members wherein each link member is attached to a corresponding loop and sized to allow at least one suspension line to pass therethrough. The reefing system also has a cross-connecting section comprising pair of intersecting members that are attached to the flexible ring section. The intersecting members are attached to each other at an intersection point that is coincident with the center of flexible ring section. The reefing system has a position cord having a first end attached to the intersection point and a second end opposite the first end. A yoke is attached to the second end of the position cord and has a vertex and at least two legs that extend from the vertex. Each leg extends from the vertex to a distal end. A riser link is attached to the distal end of each leg.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07028951&OS=07028951&RS=07028951
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07028951
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050420
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by the U.S. Government for Governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon.

Parachutes are typically used in emergency life support situations. Parachutes also provide a means to deliver cargo and supplies to inaccessible regions and to quickly supply military troops. Materials with high strength to weight ratios are the standard for parachute design and construction. The performance of most parachutes with respect to deployment altitudes and velocities is limited due to the relatively small variety of materials that have the required high strength to weight ratios. Increasing deployment altitudes requires increases in aircraft true airspeed due to reduction in atmospheric density. This translates to faster opening of the parachute canopy and relatively higher forces placed on the entire parachute system. In order to ensure parachute system survival under these conditions reefing techniques were developed to slow the opening of the parachute canopy to allow the parachute system to remain within its narrow performance envelope. Two commonly used reefing techniques are parachute canopy skirt reefing and parachute suspension line reefing. Canopy skirt reefing is illustrated in . Parachute system comprises canopy which has canopy skirt . Parachute system also includes suspension lines that are attached to canopy and payload . Parachute system employs a reefing cord that has a predetermined circumference that translates to a diameter that is less than the full inflated diameter of canopy skirt . Cord is attached to canopy skirt by sliding it through reefing rings permanently attached to canopy skirt at each suspension line junction. Reefing cord forces the parachute to inflate to a relatively small diameter so as to decelerate parachute system to a lower velocity. Reefing cord maintains parachute system within its designed performance parameters prior to the occurrence of either the next reefing stage or total disreef. Disreefing is typically initiated by the use of expensive time delay pyrotechnics. In the case of multi stage reefing multiple pyrotechnic devices are used.

Referring to there is illustrated two suspension line reefing techniques. Suspension line reefing techniques prevent full inflation of the parachute canopy by grouping the suspension lines together at some calculated distance below the parachute canopy skirt to first allow inflation to a particular diameter and drag area and then allow disreefing to a larger diameter or full opening of the canopy. Line reefing can be initiated through the use of either expensive time delay pyrotechnics or a sail slider. shows parachute system which employs a pyrotechnic type line reefing technique. Parachute system comprises canopy suspension lines and line reefing device . Canopy includes canopy skirt . Suspension lines are attached to payload . Line reefing device is a pyrotechnic type device that operates on a time delay. shows parachute system which employs a sail slider. Parachute system comprises canopy suspension lines and sail slider . Sail slider includes a sail portion not shown which is well known in the art. Canopy has canopy skirt . Suspension lines are attached to payload . Sail slider comprises a piece of material that has an opening on its perimeter through which suspension lines pass so as to allow sail slider to slide up and down suspension lines . As the parachute is opening the sail portion not shown of sail slider inflates while parachute canopy is inflating. The inflation of parachute canopy causes parachute skirt and suspension lines to spread open thereby forcing sail slider down suspension lines toward payload . The inflated sail portion not shown of sail slider creates resistance to the downward sliding movement of sail slider thereby resisting the opening of parachute canopy and slowing down the parachute opening. Sail slider also provides a drag surface that acts as a drogue chute to initially reduce the deployment velocity of parachute system . Sail slider also deflects the air stream outward so as to facilitate inflation of skirt of parachute canopy .

The prior art reveals several different parachute reefing systems. U.S. Pat. No. 2 995 323 discloses a mechanical device for controlling the reefing and dereefing of a parachute canopy. U.S. Pat. No. 3 642 237 discloses a spiral reefed variable drag parachute. Reefing lines are formed about the body or canopy of the parachute in a spiral configuration to control the opening shock and rate of descent of the parachute. U.S. Pat. No. 3 278 143 discloses a parachute canopy that comprises reefing located at the panel centerline of the parachute. Reefing rings are secured to a reinforcing band and the lower inside edge of the canopy at the mid points between the adjacent connected seams of the panels. U.S. Pat. No. 4 065 079 discloses a parachute having a reefing device that secures together spaced parts of the parachute canopy in order to provide a parachute canopy that is reduced in size. The parachute includes a release device for releasing the reefed section of the canopy after initial parachute development to allow the reefed section to inflate in full deployment of the canopy. U.S. Pat. No. 4 623 109 discloses a low altitude parachute system. The parachute comprises an annular ring parachute canopy that has a control vent. A restraining device is connected to the canopy which slows the opening of the central vent while the canopy inflates during deployment of the parachute. A pilot chute is connected to the restraining device. When the pilot chute is inflated it applies a force to the restraining device to slow the opening of the control vent. U.S. Pat. No. 4 624 427 discloses a parachute canopy reefing technique that utilizes a reefing buffer. The reefing buffer is attached to one of the parachute s suspension lines and encircles all of the suspension lines. The reefing buffer includes a pocket sewn into the buffer which holds a cutter in place. U.S. Pat. No. 4 697 765 discloses a parachute reefing release device that uses an electro explosive activator. U.S. Pat. No. 4 863 119 discloses a parachute reefing system that comprises an annular flexible membrane that has a centrally located vent opening and a plurality of guides spaced around the membrane. U.S. Pat. No. 4 955 563 discloses an apparatus for controlled simultaneous opening of clustered parachutes. Each parachute in the cluster includes a canopy a plurality of reefing rings attached to the skirt portion of the canopy and a plurality of suspension lines. U.S. Pat. No. 5 205 517 discloses a parachute system that comprises a large parachute that has an inlet control parachute. The large parachute has a main canopy which is reefed to the outer portion of the inlet control parachute. The inlet control parachute is operable to expand the inlet area of a large parachute. U.S. Pat. No. 5 209 436 discloses a parachute that has radial reefing means for use in packing and opening the parachute canopy in a controlled manner. The parachute has a circular canopy that has a peripheral skirt and a plurality of spaced radials. Reefing rings are attached to each of selected non adjacent radials. Published Application No. US2003038215 discloses a cruciform parachute assembly. The parachute comprises a slider and a series of reefing rings that are fixed to the canopy crown portion. U.S. Pat. No. 6 669 146 discloses a parachute cluster assembly and a method for providing gliding and trajectory control of the parachute assembly. British Patent No. GB 776296 discloses a parachute releasing or disreefing device that comprises a member that restrains the parachute from fully opening. This member is adapted to be broken by a chemical explosive means. U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 328 262 and 6 520 453 disclose various methods for forming a parachute.

What is needed is a new and improved reefing technique that safely and effectively controls the inflation of a parachute.

The present invention is directed to a parachute reefing system comprising a flexible ring section having a circumference and a plurality of loops attached to the flexible ring section along the circumference. The loops are equidistantly spaced. The parachute reefing system further comprises a plurality of link members. Each link member is attached to a corresponding one of the plurality of loops and is sized to allow at least one suspension line to pass therethrough. The parachute reefing system further comprises a cross connecting section comprising pair of intersecting members that are attached to the flexible ring section and intersect each other at an intersection point. The intersecting members are attached to each other at an intersection point. The intersection point is substantially coincident with the center of flexible ring section. The parachute reefing system further comprises a position cord having a first end attached to the intersection point and a second end opposite the first end. The parachute reefing system further comprises a yoke that is attached to the second end of the position cord and which comprises a vertex and at least two legs extending from the vertex. Each leg extends to a distal end. The parachute reefing system further comprises a plurality of riser links. Each riser link is attached to a distal end of a corresponding leg.

In a related aspect the present invention is directed to a parachute reefing system that comprises a flexible ring section having a circumference and a plurality of loops attached to the flexible ring section. The loops are equidistantly spaced along the circumference of the flexible ring section. The parachute reefing system further comprises a plurality of link members. Each link member is attached to a corresponding loop and is sized to allow at least one suspension line to pass therethrough. The parachute reefing system further comprises a cross connecting section which comprises a pair of perpendicularly intersecting members that intersect each other at an intersection point. Each intersecting member is attached to a pair of diametrically positioned loops of the plurality of loops. The intersecting members are attached to each other at the intersection point. The parachute reefing system further comprises a position cord having a first end attached to the intersection point and a second end opposite the first end. The parachute reefing system also includes a yoke that is attached to the second end of the position cord and which comprises a vertex and a plurality of symmetrically legs extending from the vertex to respective distal ends. The second opposite end of the position cord is connected to the vertex. The parachute reefing system further includes a plurality of riser links. Each riser link is attached to a distal end of a corresponding one of the plurality of legs.

In the description of the invention various embodiments and or individual features are disclosed. As will be apparent to the ordinarily skilled practitioner all combinations of such embodiments and features are possible and can result in preferred executions of the invention.

Referring to there is shown a diagram of reefing system of the present invention. It is to be understood that reefing system is used as part of a parachute system and thus can be folded up so that it can be inserted into a parachute pack. Reefing system generally comprises section which has a circular shape. Section is fabricated from a flexible high strength cord. Such high strength cords are known in the parachute art. Reefing system further includes a plurality of loops tied to section . Loops are also made from the aforesaid high strength cord. In a preferred embodiment loops are equidistantly spaced by a predetermined angle . There are at least four loops . However it is to be understood that there can be more than four loops and that the angular spacing can vary accordingly. For example in one embodiment there are twelve loops that are equidistantly spaced thirty degrees apart. The size of the parachute with which reefing system is to be used is a factor in determining the actual number of loops .

As shown in reefing system further includes a plurality of link members . A corresponding parachute suspension line not shown in passes through each link member . Each link member is attached to a corresponding one of loops . Such a configuration allows section and link members to slide along the parachute suspension lines not shown in . This feature is described in detail in the ensuing description. In one embodiment each link member is fabricated from metal e.g. brass. In another embodiment each link member is fabricated from the aforesaid high strength cord.

Referring to reefing system further comprises cross connector that is attached to and centrally positioned on section . Cross connector is comprised of intersecting sections A and B that intersect at intersection point . Intersection point is substantially coincident with the center of flexible section . Sections A and B are connected together at intersection point . In a preferred embodiment sections A and B are knotted together at intersection point in such a manner as to form loop . The purpose of loop is discussed in the ensuing description. Section A is connected to a pair of diametrically positioned loops . Similarly section B is connected to a pair of diametrically positioned loops . Intersection point functions as a control point that controls the deployment of a parachute with which reefing system is used.

Referring to reefing system further comprises position cord that is connected to loop formed at intersection point . Position cord is fabricated from the same type of high strength cord from which flexible ring section and cross connector are made. The length of position cord depends upon the overall size of the parachute with which reefing system is to be used.

Reefing system further comprises yoke indicated by reference number which comprises vertex and at least two legs that are connected to and extend from vertex . Each leg extends to a distal end. In a preferred embodiment vertex is formed by tying a knot in single piece of cord to form a loop to which the lower end of position cord and each leg are connected. Reefing system also comprises a plurality of riser links . Each riser link is attached to the distal end of a corresponding leg . In one embodiment each riser link is made of metal. Legs are made from the same high strength cord that is used to fabricate position cord cross connector and flexible ring section . Although two legs are shown it is to be understood that there can be more than two legs . In accordance with the invention legs are symmetrically arranged.

Referring to there is shown parachute system which comprises reefing system canopy and suspension lines . Canopy includes canopy mouth . Reefing system controls the rate at which canopy mouth opens during descent of parachute system . Suspension lines pass through link members that are attached to flexible ring section of reefing system and are attached to riser links . The distal end of each leg is attached to a corresponding riser link . Cords or cables are attached between and to riser links and payload .

Once parachute system has deployed parachute canopy begins to inflate. Canopy mouth of parachute canopy is prevented from opening completely due to the diameter restriction imposed by section . Section is positioned at a specific location along the length of suspension lines . This specific location may be different for parachute canopies of different design and shape. Section is maintained in its specific location by position cord which positions section at some distance from canopy mouth . During the initial inflation of parachute canopy canopy mouth attempts to open but is prevented from doing so due to friction between suspension lines and link members that are positioned along the circumference of flexible ring section . As canopy inflates the pressure in canopy increases there by causing the radial spreading forces at canopy mouth to increase and overcome friction between suspension lines and link members . As a result section slides down suspension lines toward payload . As the parachute canopy increases its drag area the velocity of parachute system with payload attached thereto is reduced thereby lowering the parachute opening forces and allowing the parachute to remain within its performance envelope. Thus reefing system increases the time required for parachute canopy to completely open thereby slowing down the opening process. Reefing system continues to slow down the opening of canopy until section reaches riser links and position cord rests upon payload . Once canopy is fully opened the parachute system is no longer decelerating and begins a steady state descent at some terminal velocity.

It is to be understood that the term connected as used in the foregoing description with respect to the high strength cord used to fabricate portions of reefing system includes knotting and or tying techniques known in the parachute art.

The principles preferred embodiments and modes of operation of the present invention have been described in the foregoing specification. The invention which is intended to be protected herein should not however be construed as limited to the particular forms disclosed as these are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive. Variations changes and modifications may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. Accordingly the foregoing detailed description should be considered exemplary in nature and not as limiting the scope and spirit of the invention as set forth in the attached claims.

