---

title: Heat exchanger with perforated plate in header
abstract: A heat exchanger includes an inlet header, an outlet header and a plurality of flat, multi-channel heat exchange tubes extending therebetween. A longitudinally extending member divides the interior of the header into a first chamber on one side thereof for receiving a fluid and a second chamber on the other side thereof. A plurality of multi-channel heat exchange tubes extend between the headers with the respective inlet end of each heat exchange tube passing into the second chamber of the inlet header. Fluid passes through a series of longitudinally spaced openings in the longitudinally extending member for distribution to the inlets to the channels of the multi-channel heat exchange tubes. The fluid may undergo expansion as it passes through the openings.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07562697&OS=07562697&RS=07562697
owner: Carrier Corporation
number: 07562697
owner_city: Farmington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051228
---
Reference is made to and this application claims priority from and the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 649 434 filed Feb. 2 2005 and entitled MINI CHANNEL HEAT EXCHANGER WITH FLUID EXPANSION USING RESTRICTIONS IN THE FORM OF INSERTS IN THE PORTS which application is incorporated herein in its entirety by reference.

This invention relates generally to refrigerant vapor compression system heat exchangers having a plurality of parallel tubes extending between a first header and a second header and more particularly to providing expansion of refrigerant within the inlet header for improving distribution of two phase refrigerant flow through the parallel tubes of the heat exchanger.

Refrigerant vapor compression systems are well known in the art. Air conditioners and heat pumps employing refrigerant vapor compression cycles are commonly used for cooling or cooling heating air supplied to a climate controlled comfort zone within a residence office building hospital school restaurant or other facility. Refrigeration vapor compression systems are also commonly used for cooling air or other secondary fluid to provide a refrigerated environment for food items and beverage products within for instance display cases in supermarkets convenience stores groceries cafeterias restaurants and other food service establishments.

Conventionally these refrigerant vapor compression systems include a compressor a condenser an expansion device and an evaporator connected in refrigerant flow communication. The aforementioned basic refrigerant system components are interconnected by refrigerant lines in a closed refrigerant circuit and arranged in accord with the vapor compression cycle employed. An expansion device commonly an expansion valve or a fixed bore metering device such as an orifice or a capillary tube is disposed in the refrigerant line at a location in the refrigerant circuit upstream with respect to refrigerant flow of the evaporator and downstream of the condenser. The expansion device operates to expand the liquid refrigerant passing through the refrigerant line running from the condenser to the evaporator to a lower pressure and temperature. In doing so a portion of the liquid refrigerant traversing the expansion device expands to vapor. As a result in conventional refrigerant vapor compression systems of this type the refrigerant flow entering the evaporator constitutes a two phase mixture. The particular percentages of liquid refrigerant and vapor refrigerant depend upon the particular expansion device employed and the refrigerant in use for example R12 R22 R134a R404A R410A R407C R717 R744 or other compressible fluid.

In some refrigerant vapor compression systems the evaporator is a parallel tube heat exchanger. Such heat exchangers have a plurality of parallel refrigerant flow paths therethrough provided by a plurality of tubes extending in parallel relationship between an inlet header and an outlet header. The inlet header receives the refrigerant flow from the refrigerant circuit and distributes it amongst the plurality of flow paths through the heat exchanger. The outlet header serves to collect the refrigerant flow as it leaves the respective flow paths and to direct the collected flow back to the refrigerant line for a return to the compressor in a single pass heat exchanger or through an additional bank of heat exchange tubes in a multi pass heat exchanger.

Historically parallel tube heat exchangers used in such refrigerant vapor compression systems have used round tubes typically having a diameter of inch inch or 7 millimeters. More recently flat rectangular or oval shape multi channel tubes are being used in heat exchangers for refrigerant vapor compression systems. Each multi channel tube has a plurality of flow channels extending longitudinally in parallel relationship the length of the tube each channel providing a small cross sectional flow area refrigerant path. Thus a heat exchanger with multi channel tubes extending in parallel relationship between the inlet and outlet headers of the heat exchanger will have a relatively large number of small cross sectional flow area refrigerant paths extending between the two headers. In contrast a parallel tube heat exchanger with conventional round tubes will have a relatively small number of large flow area flow paths extending between the inlet and outlet headers.

Non uniform distribution also referred to as misdistribution of two phase refrigerant flow is a common problem in parallel tube heat exchangers which adversely impacts heat exchanger efficiency. Among other factors two phase maldistribution problems are caused by the difference in density of the vapor phase refrigerant and the liquid phase refrigerant present in the inlet header due to the expansion of the refrigerant as it traversed the upstream expansion device.

One solution to control refrigeration flow distribution through parallel tubes in an evaporative heat exchanger is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 502 413 Repice et al. In the refrigerant vapor compression system disclosed therein the high pressure liquid refrigerant from the condenser is partially expanded in a conventional in line expansion device upstream of the heat exchanger inlet header to a lower pressure refrigerant. Additionally a restriction such as a simple narrowing in the tube or an internal orifice plate disposed within the tube is provided in each tube connected to the inlet header downstream of the tube inlet to complete the expansion to a low pressure liquid vapor refrigerant mixture after entering the tube.

Another solution to control refrigeration flow distribution through parallel tubes in an evaporative heat exchanger is disclosed in Japanese Patent No. JP4080575 Kanzaki et al. In the refrigerant vapor compression system disclosed therein the high pressure liquid refrigerant from the condenser is also partially expanded in a conventional in line expansion device to a lower pressure refrigerant upstream of a distribution chamber of the heat exchanger. A plate having a plurality of orifices therein extends across the chamber. The lower pressure refrigerant expands as it passes through the orifices to a low pressure liquid vapor mixture downstream of the plate and upstream of the inlets to the respective tubes opening to the chamber.

Japanese Patent No. 6241682 Massaki et al. discloses a parallel flow tube heat exchanger for a heat pump wherein the inlet end of each multi channel tube connecting to the inlet header is crushed to form a partial throttle restriction in each tube just downstream of the tube inlet. Japanese Patent No. JP8233409 Hiroaki et al. discloses a parallel flow tube heat exchanger wherein a plurality of flat multi channel tubes connect between a pair of headers each of which has an interior which decreases in flow area in the direction of refrigerant flow as a means to uniformly distribute refrigerant to the respective tubes. Japanese Patent No. JP2002022313 Yasushi discloses a parallel tube heat exchanger wherein refrigerant is supplied to the header through an inlet tube that extends along the axis of the header to terminate short of the end the header whereby the two phase refrigerant flow does not separate as it passes from the inlet tube into an annular channel between the outer surface of the inlet tube and the inside surface of the header. The two phase refrigerant flow thence passes into each of the tubes opening to the annular channel.

Obtaining uniform refrigerant flow distribution amongst the relatively large number of small cross sectional flow area refrigerant flow paths is even more difficult than it is in conventional round tube heat exchangers and can significantly reduce heat exchanger efficiency.

It is a general object of the invention to reduce maldistribution of refrigerant flow in a refrigerant vapor compression system heat exchanger having a plurality of multi channel tubes extending between a first header and a second header.

It is an object of one aspect of the invention to uniformly distribute refrigerant to the individual channels of an array of multi channel tubes.

It is an object of another aspect of the invention to delay expansion of the refrigerant in a refrigerant vapor compression system heat exchanger having a plurality of multi channel tubes until the refrigerant flow has been distributed amongst the various tubes of an array of multi channel tubes in a single phase as liquid refrigerant.

It is an object of a further aspect of the invention to delay expansion of the refrigerant in a refrigerant vapor compression system heat exchanger having a plurality of multi channel tubes until the refrigerant flow has been distributed to the individual channels of an array of multi channel tubes in a single phase as liquid refrigerant.

In one aspect of the invention a heat exchanger is provided having a header having a hollow interior a longitudinally extending member dividing the interior of the header into a first chamber on one side thereof and a second chamber on the other side thereof and a plurality of heat exchange tubes each of which defines a multi channel refrigerant flow path therethrough. Each channel defines a refrigerant flow path having an inlet at an inlet end of the heat exchange tube. The inlet end of each tube passes into the second chamber of the header and is disposed in juxtaposition with a single hole or a transversely extending row of holes of a series of longitudinally spaced openings extending through the longitudinally extending member. Fluid enters into the first chamber of the header and passes through the openings in the longitudinally extending member to be distributed to the various channels of the heat exchange tubes.

In one embodiment each transversely extending row of holes extends transversely in juxtaposition with an inlet end of one of the plurality of heat exchange tubes with one hole per channel of the heat exchange tube. Each of the holes may have a relatively small cross sectional area in comparison to the cross sectional area of a channel of the heat exchange tube. Each of the holes in a row of holes may have a cross sectional area sufficiently small as to function as an expansion orifice.

In an embodiment the longitudinally extending member divides the interior of the header into a first chamber on one side thereof for receiving a fluid and a second chamber defining a plurality of divergent flow passages on the other side thereof. Each divergent flow path has a single inlet opening in flow communication with the first chamber and an outlet opening in flow communication to each channel of a respective heat exchange tube. The single inlet opening may have a relatively small cross sectional area in comparison to a collective cross sectional area of the channels of said respective heat exchange tube. The single inlet opening may have a cross sectional area sufficiently small as to function as an expansion orifice.

In another embodiment the plurality of multi channel heat exchange tubes are arrayed in longitudinally spaced sets of paired heat exchange tubes. Each set of paired heat exchange tubes is arranged in juxtaposition with one set of openings of a series of longitudinally spaced openings being disposed intermediate the respective inlet ends of the paired heat exchange tubes of the set. The set of openings may comprise a row of holes extending transversely intermediate the respective inlet ends of the paired heat exchange tubes of the set. Each of the holes may have a relatively small cross sectional area in comparison to the cross sectional area of a channel of the heat exchange tube. Each of the holes in a row of holes may have a cross sectional area sufficiently small as to function as an expansion orifice.

The heat exchanger of the invention will be described in general herein with reference to the illustrative single pass parallel tube embodiment of a multi channel tube heat exchanger as depicted in . The heat exchanger includes an inlet header an outlet header and a plurality of longitudinally extending multi channel heat exchanger tubes . In the illustrative embodiment of the heat exchanger depicted therein the heat exchange tubes are shown arranged in parallel relationship extending generally vertically between a generally horizontally extending inlet header and a generally horizontally extending outlet header . The inlet header defines an interior volume for receiving a fluid from line to be distributed amongst the heat exchange tubes . The outlet header defines an interior volume for collecting fluid from the heat exchange tubes and directing the collected fluid therefrom through line .

The plurality of longitudinally extending multi channel heat exchanger tubes thereby providing a plurality of fluid flow paths between the inlet header and the outlet header . Each heat exchange tube has an inlet end in fluid flow communication with the interior volume of the inlet header and an outlet end in fluid flow communication with the interior volume of the outlet header . In the embodiment of and the headers and comprise longitudinally elongated hollow closed end cylinders having a circular cross section. In the embodiment of the headers comprise longitudinally elongated hollow closed end cylinders having a semi elliptical cross section. In the embodiment of the headers comprise longitudinally elongated hollow closed end cylinders having a rectangular cross section. However the headers are not limited to the depicted configurations. For example either header might comprise a longitudinally elongated hollow closed end cylinder having an elliptical cross section or a longitudinally elongated hollow closed end vessel having a square rectangular hexagonal octagonal or other cross section.

Each heat exchange tube has a plurality of parallel flow channels extending longitudinally i.e. along the axis of the tube the length of the tube thereby providing multiple independent parallel flow paths between the inlet of the tube and the outlet of the tube. Each multi channel heat exchange tube is a flat tube of for instance flattened rectangular or oval cross section defining an interior which is subdivided to form a side by side array of independent flow channels . The flat multi channel tubes may for example have a width of fifty millimeters or less typically twelve to twenty five millimeters and a height of about two millimeters or less as compared to conventional prior art round tubes having a diameter of inch inch or 7 mm. The tubes are shown in drawings hereof for ease and clarity of illustration as having twelve channels defining flow paths having a circular cross section. However it is to be understood that in commercial applications such as for example refrigerant vapor compression systems each multi channel tube will typically have about ten to twenty flow channels but may have a greater or a lesser plurality of channels as desired. Generally each flow channel will have a hydraulic diameter defined as four times the flow area divided by the perimeter in the range from about 200 microns to about 3 millimeters. Although depicted as having a circular cross section in the drawings the channels may have a rectangular triangular trapezoidal cross section or any other desired non circular cross section.

Referring now to in particular a longitudinally elongated member is disposed within the interior volume of the hollow closed end inlet header so as to divide the interior volume into a first chamber on one side of the member and a second chamber on the other side of the member . The first chamber within the inlet header is in fluid flow communication with fluid inlet line to receive fluid from the inlet line . In the embodiment depicted in the member comprises a first longitudinally elongated plate A and a second longitudinally elongated plate B disposed into back to back relationship to extend the length of the header with plate A facing the first chamber and with plate B facing the second chamber . The first plate A is perforated by a series of rows of relatively small diameter holes extending transversely across the plate at longitudinally spaced intervals along the length thereof. The second plate B has a series of transversely extending slots provided therein at longitudinally spaced intervals along the length thereof. The rows of openings and slots are mutually arranged such that each row of openings in plate A is aligned with a corresponding slot in plate B. The member may also be provided with a number of relatively larger holes opening therethrough to equalize the pressure between chambers and disposed on opposite sides of the member . The pressure equalization holes need not be provided if the member is brazed or otherwise fixedly secured to the inside wall of the header .

Each heat exchange tube of the heat exchanger is inserted through a mating slot in the wall of the inlet header with the inlet end of the tube extending into the second chamber of the inlet header . Each tube is inserted for sufficient length for the inlet end of the tube to extend into a corresponding slot in the second plate B. With the inlet ends of the respective tubes inserted into a corresponding slot in the second plate B the respective mouths to the channels of the heat exchange tube are open in fluid flow communication with a corresponding row of openings in the first plate A thereby connecting the flow channels of the tubes in fluid flow communication with first chamber . The second plate B not only holds the tubes in place but also prevents refrigerant from bypassing the tubes .

Various alternate embodiments of the heat exchanger tube and inlet header arrangement for the heat exchanger are illustrated in . In the embodiment depicted in a member again divides the interior volume into a first chamber on one side of the member and a second chamber on the other side of the member . In this embodiment the longitudinally elongated member comprises a first longitudinally elongated plate A disposed in back to back relationship with a second longitudinally elongated member B having a plurality of generally V shape troughs formed therein at longitudinally spaced intervals on the side thereof facing the tubes . The plate A faces the first chamber and has a plurality of holes aligned at longitudinally spaced intervals along the length of the header . Each one of the holes opens into a respective one of the troughs . Each trough defines a chamber for receiving an inlet end of a respective heat exchange tube and forms a divergent flow passage extending from hole at the apex of the passage to the inlet end of the respective heat exchanger tube received therein. Thus the respective mouths to the channels of the heat exchange tube are open in fluid flow communication via the divergent passage to a single opening .

Referring now to in the embodiments depicted therein the header is a two piece header formed of a longitudinally elongated closed end semi cylindrical shell and a cap member brazed or otherwise suitably secured to the shell to cover open face of the shell . Although illustrated as having a semi elliptical cross section the shell may have a semi circular rectilinear hexagonal octagonal or other cross section.

In the embodiment depicted in the cap member is a longitudinally elongated plate like member having a plurality of longitudinally spaced transverse extending slots extending part way through the thickness of the cap member each slot adapted to receive the inlet end of one of the multi channel tubes . Additionally the cap member is perforated by a series of rows of relatively small diameter holes extending transversely across the plate at longitudinally spaced intervals along the length thereof. As in the embodiment discussed previously the rows of openings and slots are mutually arranged such that each row of openings in the member is aligned with a corresponding slot in member . With the inlet ends of the respective tubes inserted into a corresponding slot in the member the respective mouths to the channels of the heat exchange tube are open in fluid flow communication with a corresponding row of openings in the member thereby connecting the flow channels of the tubes in fluid flow communication with interior chamber of the header .

In the embodiment depicted in the cap member comprises a longitudinally elongated member having a plurality of generally V shape troughs formed therein at longitudinally spaced intervals on the side thereof facing the tubes . Each trough defines a chamber for receiving an inlet end of a respective heat exchange tube and forms a divergent flow passage extending from a hole at the apex of the passage to the inlet end of the respective heat exchanger tube received therein. Each hole opens in fluid flow communication with the fluid chamber . Thus as in the embodiment discussed previously the respective mouths to the channels of each heat exchange tube are open in fluid flow communication via a divergent passage to a single opening .

Referring now to the header is a one piece header formed of a longitudinally elongated hollow closed end shell . Although illustrated as having a rectilinear cross section the shell may have an ovate hexagonal octagonal or other cross section. Wall of the shell has a plurality of longitudinally spaced transverse extending slots extending part way through the thickness of the wall with each slot adapted to receive the inlet end of one of the multi channel tubes .

In the embodiment depicted in the wall is perforated by a series of rows of relatively small diameter holes extending transversely across the plate at longitudinally spaced intervals along the length thereof. The rows of openings and slots are mutually arranged such that each row of openings is aligned with a corresponding slot in the wall . Therefore as in the and embodiments with the inlet ends of the respective tubes inserted into a corresponding slot the respective mouths to the channels of the heat exchange tube are open in fluid flow communication with a corresponding row of openings thereby connecting the flow channels of the tubes in fluid flow communication with interior chamber of the header .

In the embodiment depicted in commensurate with each slot the wall has a generally V shape trough . Each trough defines a chamber for receiving an inlet end of a respective heat exchange tube and forms a divergent flow passage extending from a hole at the apex of the passage to the inlet end of the respective heat exchanger tube received therein. Each hole opens in fluid flow communication with the fluid chamber . Thus as in the and embodiments discussed previously the respective mouths to the channels of each heat exchange tube are open in fluid flow communication via a divergent passage to a single opening .

Additional alternate embodiments of the heat exchanger tube and inlet header arrangement for the heat exchanger are illustrated in . In each embodiment the longitudinally elongated plate which is disposed within the interior volume of the hollow closed end inlet header so as to divide the interior volume into a first chamber on one side of the plate and a second chamber on the other side of the plate is perforated by a series of rows of a plurality of holes extending at longitudinally spaced intervals along the length thereof. Each heat exchange tube of the heat exchanger is inserted through a mating slot in the wall of the inlet header with the inlet end of the tube extending into the second chamber of the inlet header . In these embodiments the rows of holes are arranged such that one row of holes is located between each set of paired tubes rather than a row of holes per tube as in the embodiment.

In the embodiment depicted in the inlet end of each tube is inserted into the chamber until the face of the inlet end contacts the plate . A transversely extending opening is cut in the side of the inlet end of each set of paired tubes that faces the row of holes . The opening provides an inlet in the side to each channel of a tube . Fluid flows from the chamber of the header through each of the holes and thence through the openings in the sides of the paired set of tubes associated therewith.

In the embodiment depicted in the inlet end of each tube is inserted into the chamber of the header but not far enough to contact the plate . Rather the inlet end of each tube is positioned such the face of the inlet end is juxtaposed in spaced relationship to the plate to provide a gap between the end face of the inlet end and the plate . Fluid flows form the chamber of the header through each row of holes and thence through the gap and into the mouths of the channels of the tubes of the paired set of tubes associated with each respective row of holes . To prevent the fluid from flowing elsewhere within the chamber rather than proceeding directly into the mouths of the channels of the tubes a pair of transversely extending baffles is provided about each paired set of tubes .

In the embodiments depicted in and each of the individual openings in the member has a relatively small cross sectional flow area in comparison to the cross sectional area of an individual flow channel . The relatively small cross sectional area provides uniformity in pressure drop in the fluid flowing from the first chamber within the header through the openings into the flow channels of the various multi channel tubes thereby ensuring a relatively uniform distribution of fluid amongst the individual tubes opening into the inlet header . Additionally each of the openings may have a flow area small enough in relation to the flow area of the individual flow channels of the multi channel tubes to ensure that a desired level of expansion of the high pressure liquid fluid to a low pressure liquid and vapor mixture will occur as the fluid flows through each opening to enter a corresponding mouth of a channel . For example the flow area of an opening may be on the order of a tenth of a millimeter 0.1 millimeters for a heat exchange tube having channels with a nominal 1 square millimeter internal flow area to ensure expansion of the fluid passing therethrough. Of course as those skilled in the art will recognize the degree of expansion can be adjusted by selectively sizing the flow area of a particular opening relative to the flow area of the flow channel that will receive fluid passing through that particular opening .

In the embodiments depicted in and wherein a single hole opens in flow communication through a divergent flow passage to a plurality of flow channels each of the single openings again has a relatively small cross sectional flow area in relation to the collective flow area of the individual flow channels of the multi channel tube associated therewith to provide uniformity in pressure drop in the fluid flowing from the fluid chamber within the header through the openings into the flow channels of the various multi channel tubes thereby ensuring a relatively uniform distribution of fluid amongst the individual tubes opening into the inlet header . Additionally each of the single openings may have a flow area small enough in relation to the collective flow area of the individual flow channels of the multi channel tube associated therewith to ensure that a desired level of expansion of the high pressure liquid fluid to a low pressure liquid and vapor mixture will occur as the fluid flows through each opening into the divergent flow passage downstream thereof. Of course as those skilled in the art will recognize the degree of expansion can be adjusted by selectively sizing the flow area of a particular opening .

Referring now to there is depicted schematically a refrigerant vapor compression system having a compressor the heat exchanger A functioning as a condenser and the heat exchanger B functioning as an evaporator connected in a closed loop refrigerant circuit by refrigerant lines and . As in conventional refrigerant vapor compression systems the compressor circulates hot high pressure refrigerant vapor through refrigerant line into the inlet header of the condenser A and thence through the heat exchanger tubes of the condenser A wherein the hot refrigerant vapor condenses to a liquid as it passes in heat exchange relationship with a cooling fluid such as ambient air which is passed over the condenser heat exchange tubes by the condenser fan . The high pressure liquid refrigerant collects in the outlet header of the condenser A and thence passes through refrigerant line to the inlet header of the evaporator B. The refrigerant thence passes through the heat exchanger tubes of the evaporator B wherein the refrigerant is heated as it passes in heat exchange relationship with air to be cooled which is passed over the heat exchange tubes by the evaporator fan . The refrigerant vapor collects in the outlet header of the evaporator B and passes therefrom through refrigerant line to return to the compressor through the suction inlet thereto.

In the embodiment depicted in the condensed refrigerant liquid passes through an expansion valve operatively associated with the refrigerant line as it passes from the condenser A to the evaporator B. In the expansion valve the high pressure liquid refrigerant is partially expanded to lower pressure liquid refrigerant or a liquid vapor refrigerant mixture. In this embodiment the expansion of the refrigerant is completed within the evaporator B as the refrigerant passes through the relatively small flow area opening or openings upstream of entering the flow channels of the heat exchange tubes . Partial expansion of the refrigerant in an expansion valve upstream of the inlet header to the evaporator B may be advantageous when the flow area of the openings can not be made small enough to ensure complete expansion as the liquid passes therethrough or when an expansion valve is used as a flow control device. In an alternate embodiment of the refrigerant vapor compression system the expansion valve may be eliminated with expansion of the refrigerant passing from the condenser A occurring entirely within the heat exchanger B.

Although the exemplary refrigerant vapor compression cycle illustrated in is a simplified air conditioning cycle it is to be understood that the heat exchanger of the invention may be employed in refrigerant vapor compression systems of various designs including without limitation heat pump cycles economized cycles and commercial refrigeration cycles. Additionally those skilled in the art will recognize that the heat exchanger of the present invention may be used as a condenser and or as an evaporator in such refrigerant vapor compression systems.

Further the depicted embodiment of the heat exchanger is illustrative and not limiting of the invention. It is to be understood that the invention described herein may be practiced on various other configurations of the heat exchanger . For example the heat exchange tubes may be arranged in parallel relationship extending generally horizontally between a generally vertically extending inlet header and a generally vertically extending outlet header. Further those skilled in the art will recognize that the heat exchanger of the invention is not limited to the illustrated single pass embodiments but may also be arranged in various single pass embodiments and multi pass embodiments.

Accordingly while the present invention has been particularly shown and described with reference to the embodiments as illustrated in the drawing it will be understood by one skilled in the art that various changes and modifications some of which have been mentioned hereinbefore may be effected without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the claims.

