---

title: Targeted merchandising on a user console
abstract: Advertising is targeted to a specific user of a user console. A product data request is received from a user console and includes a user identifier, user data, and at least a first product identifier. A user account record associated with the user identifier is identified. The user account record includes a subscription service level identifier and a user account history. The user data are then associated with the user account record. A product catalog is searched for any product related entries associated with the request, and when any product related entries associated with the product data request are found, each such product related entry is provided to the user console.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07775886&OS=07775886&RS=07775886
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07775886
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050630
---
In recent years game consoles have become quite popular consumer devices becoming a ubiquitous fixture in homes around the world. In particular the increasing market penetration of game consoles has inspired game developers and others to work diligently to develop new game titles and other applications for game consoles. Traditionally when a new game or product for a game console is released a marketing group places advertisements and develops merchandising materials for retail outlets to inform consumers about the newly available products. Common media channels for advertising include print and online magazines fanzines Internet retailers select websites television commercials and the like. However outside of such conventional media channels it is often difficult to alert game console owners of new products for their console that may be of interest to them. Furthermore there are often so many products available that are related to a single game title or game series such as additional game levels and add in components that it is impractical to advertise all of them through some focused media channel in a conventional manner.

Similarly it has historically been difficult to provide a simple and expedient way for consumers to learn about and purchase the multitude of new products that are available to them. Although desirable it has been even more elusive to develop a way for consumers to learn about related products that might interest a consumer based on the specific games applications and media already purchased by the consumer. Many companies presently market products to consumers based on a demographic profile created from the consumer s own purchases using for example credit and debit card purchase histories models developed by marketing experts and other data derived from online transactions by consumers. However consumers such as children typically do not have a credit or debit card that is used in making purchases of goods and which can thus provide historical data for targeting these consumers based on their prior purchases. Furthermore many adult consumers are concerned with the privacy of their credit account transactions and limit the use of debit and credit purchases or take steps to prevent data related to those purchases from being collected. Thus there is a substantial need for alternative approaches that can facilitate more effective merchandising of electronic media related content.

Various techniques are described for providing targeted marketing to a user console. One such technique involves receiving a product data request from a user console. The product data request includes a user identifier user data and at least a first product identifier. The technique also includes identifying a user account record associated with first user identifier. The user account record includes a subscription service level identifier and a user account history. The user data are associated with the user account record. A product catalog having a plurality of product related records is searched for any product related records associated with the request and when any product record associated with the product data request is identified each such product related record is provided to the user console.

Another aspect is directed to a memory medium that stores machine instructions for presenting a marketplace dialog screen on a user console interface. The memory medium also stores machine instructions for enabling a request for product related data to be initiated. The request for product related data includes a user identifier associated with a user account record and at least one product identifier. The user account record includes a user service level indicator and a user account history. The memory medium further stores machine instructions for populating the marketplace dialog screen based on any received product data records. The product data records correspond to the requested product data and are based on the user account record the service level indicator and one or more predetermined criteria.

This Summary has been provided to introduce a few concepts in a simplified form that are further described in detail below in the Description. However this Summary is not intended to identify key or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

Exemplary embodiments are illustrated in referenced Figures of the drawings. It is intended that the embodiments and Figures disclosed herein are to be considered illustrative rather than restrictive.

As depicted in console also includes an optical port for communicating wirelessly with one or more devices and two Universal Serial Bus USB ports and to support a wired connection for additional controllers or other peripherals. In some implementations the number and arrangement of additional ports may be modified. A power button and an eject button are also positioned on the front face of game console . Power button is selected to apply power to the game console and can also provide access to other features and controls and eject button alternately opens and closes the tray of a portable media drive to enable insertion and extraction of a storage disc .

Console connects to a television or other display via A V interfacing cables . In one implementation console is equipped with a dedicated A V port not shown configured for content secured digital communication using A V cables e.g. A V cables suitable for coupling to a High Definition Multimedia Interface HDMI port on a high definition monitor or other display device . A power cable provides power to the game console. Console may be further configured with broadband capabilities as represented by a cable or modem connector to facilitate access to a network such as the Internet.

Each controller is coupled to console via a wired or wireless interface. In the illustrated implementation the controllers are USB compatible and are coupled to console via a wireless or USB port . Console may be equipped with any of a wide variety of user interaction mechanisms. In an example illustrated in each controller is equipped with two thumbsticks and a D pad buttons and two triggers . These controllers are merely representative and other known gaming controllers may be substituted for or added to those shown in .

In one implementation not shown a memory unit MU may also be inserted into controller to provide additional and portable storage. Portable MUs enable users to store game parameters for use when playing on other consoles. In this implementation each controller is configured to accommodate two MUs although more or less than two MUs may also be employed.

Gaming and media system is generally configured for playing games and other electronic content stored on a memory medium internal and or portable as discussed below shopping for and purchasing products such as electronic media including game and game component downloads and reproducing pre recorded music and videos from both electronic and hard media sources. With the different storage offerings titles can be played from the hard disk drive from optical disk media e.g. from an online source or from MU . A sample of some of the types of media that gaming and media system is capable of playing include 

CPU memory controller and various memory devices are interconnected via one or more buses not shown . The details of the bus that is used in this implementation are not particularly relevant to understanding the subject matter of interest being discussed herein. However it will be understood that such a bus might include one or more of serial and parallel buses a memory bus a peripheral bus and a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example such architectures can include an Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus a Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus an Enhanced ISA EISA bus a Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and a Peripheral Component Interconnects PCI bus also known as a Mezzanine bus.

In one implementation CPU memory controller ROM and RAM are integrated onto a common module . In this implementation ROM is configured as a flash ROM that is connected to memory controller via a Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus and a ROM bus neither of which are shown . RAM is configured as multiple Double Data Rate Synchronous Dynamic RAM DDR SDRAM modules that are independently controlled by memory controller via separate buses not shown . Hard disk drive and portable media drive are shown connected to the memory controller via the PCI bus and an AT Attachment ATA bus . However in other implementations dedicated data bus structures of different types can also be applied in the alternative.

A three dimensional graphics processing unit and a video encoder form a video processing pipeline for high speed and high resolution e.g. High Definition graphics processing. Data are carried from graphics processing unit to video encoder via a digital video bus not shown . An audio processing unit and an audio codec coder decoder form a corresponding audio processing pipeline for multi channel audio processing of various digital audio formats. Audio data are carried between audio processing unit and audio codec via a communication link not shown . The video and audio processing pipelines output data to an A V audio video port for transmission to a television or other display. In the illustrated implementation video and audio processing components are mounted on module .

In the implementation depicted in console includes a controller support subassembly for supporting four controllers . The controller support subassembly includes any hardware and software components needed to support wired and wireless operation with an external control device such as for example a media and game controller. A front panel I O subassembly supports the multiple functionalities of power button the eject button as well as any LEDs light emitting diodes or other indicators exposed on the outer surface of console . Subassemblies and are in communication with module via one or more cable assemblies . In other implementations console can include additional controller subassemblies. The illustrated implementation also shows an optical I O interface that is configured to send and receive signals that can be communicated to module .

MUs and are illustrated as being connectable to MU ports A and B respectively. Additional MUs e.g. MUs are illustrated as being connectable to controllers and i.e. two MUs for each controller. Controllers and can also be configured to receive MUs not shown . Each MU offers additional storage on which games game parameters and other data may be stored. In some implementations the other data can include any one or more of a digital game component an executable gaming application an instruction set for expanding a gaming application and a media file. When inserted into console or a controller MU can be accessed by memory controller .

A system power supply module provides power to the components of gaming system . A fan cools the circuitry within console .

To implement one or more method steps an application comprising machine instructions is stored on hard disk drive . When console is powered on various portions of application are loaded into RAM and or caches and for execution on CPU . Application is described below in more detail. In general application can include one or more program modules for performing various display functions such as controlling dialog screens for presentation on a display e.g. high definition monitor controlling transactions based on user inputs and controlling data transmission and reception between the console and externally connected devices.

Gaming system may be operated as a standalone system by simply connecting the system to high definition monitor a television a video projector or other display device. In this standalone mode gaming system enables one or more players to play games or enjoy digital media e.g. by watching movies or listening to music. However with the integration of broadband connectivity made available through network interface gaming system may further be operated as a participating component in a larger network gaming community or system as discussed below in connection with .

The following discussion is intended to provide a brief general description of a suitable computing environment in which certain methods may be implemented. Further the following discussion illustrates a context for implementing computer executable instructions such as program modules with a computing system. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The skilled practitioner will recognize that other computing system configurations may be applied including multiprocessor systems mainframe computers personal computers processor controlled consumer electronics personal digital assistants PDAs but likely not when used as a server of digital media content and the like. One implementation includes distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary computing system is shown having a general purpose computing device that further includes a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including system memory to processing unit . System bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. The system memory includes ROM and RAM .

A basic input output system BIOS of fundamental routines that enable the transfer of information between elements within personal computer such as during start up is stored in ROM . Personal computer further includes mass storage including a hard disk drive a magnetic disk drive for use with a removable magnetic disk and an optical disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are coupled to system bus via a hard disk drive interface a magnetic disk drive interface and an optical disk drive interface respectively. The drives and and their associated computer readable media provide nonvolatile storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for personal computer . Although the exemplary environment described herein employs a hard disk a removable magnetic disk and a removable optical disk other types of computer readable media such as for example magnetic cassettes flash memory cards digital video disks Bernoulli cartridges RAMs ROMs may also be used in the exemplary operating environment.

A number of program modules can be stored on the hard disk magnetic disk optical disk ROM or RAM including an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . A user may enter commands and information into personal computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game controller satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices can be connected to processing unit through a serial port interface that is coupled to the system bus but can also be connected by other interfaces such as a parallel port game port an IEEE 1394 compliant port a universal serial bus USB or any of a variety of ports compliant with one of several adopted wireless standards e.g. Bluetooth IEEE 802.xx etc . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . In addition to the monitor computers can also include other peripheral output devices not shown such as speakers and printers.

Computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . Remote computer may be personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and can include many or all of the elements described above relative to personal computer although only a remote memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment computer is connected to local network through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over WAN such as the Internet. Modem which may be internal or external is connected to system bus via serial port interface . In one implementation computer is a server computer operating in a networked environment and program modules depicted relative to computer or portions thereof can be stored in the remote memory storage device .

In one implementation each of the plurality of consoles e.g. each of consoles A N is a gaming and media system such as gaming and media system of . In general consoles A N can be a set of electronic devices that are enabled for communication with console service . In one or more implementations console service is configured to provide dialog screens to a display device to enable interaction with a user. In one or more implementations consoles A N are configured to enable transactions with console service using a credit card a prepaid card or an electronic user account e.g. a micro point balance account .

Generally any console of the above described variety can be configured for on line and off line use such that a user of an off line console can access product information about software and components stored in memory on the console or that has been viewed or accessed by a user and then recorded in a user history file. Furthermore in an on line mode such a console can be configured to request automatically or based on a user action various information from the console service . Additionally console service can be configured to push information to the console periodically or as discrete events based on various data provided from the console. Console service can also be configured to provide various user dialog screens for enabling a user to interact with the console service to facilitate different functions such as shopping via a marketplace dialog screen.

Communication system can be any communication system configured to communicate signals between consoles A N and console service . In one implementation communication system is configured as a virtual private network VPN that utilizes a secure protocol e.g. secure socket layer SSL to communicate encrypted information through the Internet between consoles A N and console service . In another application communication system is implemented with calls to dedicated application program interfaces APIs using a secure communication protocol that enables closed network communication between the consoles A N and console service . Communication system thus excludes other general purpose computing devices from communicating with console service so that only consoles A N are able to enjoy the benefit of the dynamic merchandising provided by the console service.

In general console service is any combination of one or more server side devices and applications or modules configured to facilitate dynamic merchandising of products on a user console. In one implementation console service includes a server a catalog and a console service database all in communication with each other. Console service can include additional components or modules that are not relevant to the present discussion and which are therefore omitted from the Figure for clarity.

Service data base can include one or more relational databases stored in one or more data storage devices not separately shown in this Figure at one or more locations. In one embodiment service database includes a plurality of data records including user account records .

User account records can include a variety of information related to each user ID such as an associated unique identification code or key for each user. A user account record thus associates information related to a specific user ID with other information for that user such as a subscription service level indicator i.e. an ID code that establishes the specific services available to the user ID through console service . Each user account record can also include a user history that can incorporate a record of each product accessed purchased or viewed by the user a tally of purchased electronic payment units and other information tied to a specific subscription based user account. Products including user products e.g. products and content created by a user can also be included in user account record . Alternatively products can contain a bundle of rights that grants permission to download a product on demand rather than containing an actual product. Products are generally goods and services including executable applications and application components such as games and digital game components game levels and game player enhancements. Products can also include various media coupons tangible goods and rights in tangible goods e.g. when a tangible good is purchased via a console and a postal fulfillment for the good is pending. In yet another implementation user account records can contain information such as user controls that can indicate preferences or selections such as parental controls selectively applied by a parent to a child s account to filter product related information or to affect the purchase of products or to control the display of product offers and other product related data.

Catalog can include one or more data storage and processing systems not shown that are implemented to store and retrieve product records e.g. products product information product offers and user products . In one implementation catalog is a distributed data storage system that includes one or more databases located in one or more locations which can be in communication via a communication system not shown . In another implementation catalog is a component of a so called server farm comprising a plurality of servers or server computing systems. In general catalog stores product related data e.g. product records such as executable programs including games and or other media or digital content such as new game levels game components and digital media files for movies music and other digital media. Product offer can be metadata that can be linked with a specific product or good such as a game a game component or a media file by reference to a specific product ID in order to advertise features of the specific product. Product offer can also be a promotional offer that includes terms for purchase of a product and the various rights that are granted with the purchase. In other implementations product offer represents a license limited or unlimited for a specific time period. In this case an activation code or a prepaid card code can be used to determine when the time period begins to run for the license or to define other aspects of the license.

In one implementation catalog stores a plurality of encapsulated executable programs e.g. products indexed for quick access and parallel download by a plurality of consoles such as any of consoles A N that are authorized to download such products. In some implementations each distinct product record stored in catalog has a unique ID. The unique ID can include a data structure that includes product ID codes and linking codes that can indicate related products or product families which can be useful in conducting targeted marketing to merchandise products related to other products that a user has already accessed and or purchased.

In step a product related request received from a user console is identified. In one implementation the product related request includes a first user ID and a product ID. In one embodiment the product related request can be identified at any time after it is received at the console service. In another embodiment the product related request is identified by the user ID. In some implementations the product related request can be for one or more type of data for example product information pricing for a product a product offer or information about a user product.

In a step a user account record is determined based on the user ID. In one implementation the user ID is associated with the user account record. In this implementation the user account record can include a subscription service level ID and a user history associated with the user ID. The user account record can be determined at any time after the request is identified.

In a step a determination is made whether any product records in the product catalog are associated with the product related request based on the user account record and the product ID. The determination whether any product records in the product catalog are associated with the product related request can be made at any time after the user account is determined.

In a step when it is determined that at least one product record is associated with the product related request the at least one product record is provided to the user console. While this step can occur at any time after the determination is made that at least one product record is associated with the product related request in some implementations the product record or records can be provided periodically or at discrete times.

Another implementation of method can include the step of filtering the product records based on predetermined criteria. Next each of the filtered product records that matches the predetermined criteria is identified. Finally each identified product record is associated with the user account record. In some implementations the predetermined criteria can be one or more filters including the user history any new product records that are identified and parental control settings. In other implementations the predetermined criteria can be one or more filters such as any related products that are identified any product offers that are identified a product category and a search term received from the user console for example.

Although not shown in yet another implementation of method can include the step of identifying each product record associated with the user account record that is related to the received product ID. A targeted product offer can then be generated based on one or more identified product records. In some implementations the targeted product offer includes targeted product information related to one or more identified product records such as a related title a similar genre a title by the same publisher a component for an existing application of the first user a cross merchandised item and the like. The targeted product offer is then provided to the first user console.

In another implementation of method the product related request includes a product purchase order for a product associated with the product ID. In this implementation the console service is enabled to receive payment for the purchase order submitted from a user console in the form of a credit card number a prepaid card number or debit of an electronic user account.

In one implementation method further includes the step of identifying a predetermined code received from the user console. In this implementation the predetermined code is associated with a specific predetermined console service operation. The predetermined code can be from for example a prepaid card that can be redeemed for an electronic user account value or a service or a product. The identified predetermined code is then matched to the specific console service operation. The predetermined code and the specific console service operation are associated with the first user account record. The specific console service operation is then enabled for use with the user ID associated with the user account record.

In some implementations the console service operation can be an operation such as upgrading a subscription service level enabling the sale of a specific tangible good identified by the predetermined code or enabling the grant of a license to a specific product identified by the predetermined code. In other implementations the console service operation can be an operation such as adding negotiable value to an electronic user account adding additional usable time to an existing license term enabling access to a specific online service or enabling a coupon redemption.

Another implementation of method includes detecting when a product related request is associated with a specific user product. A user product can be a digital product created by a user such as media graphics game levels and skins or a commercial product for which the user has unrestricted user rights or even a transferable license bundle to a commercial product. In this implementation the product ID can incorporate a second user account ID that is associated with the specific user product. Next a determination is made as to whether any user product records associated with the second user account ID and the user product ID are in the product catalog. Finally when at least one user product record is determined to be in the product catalog the user product record s is are provided to the first user console. In another implementation the first user account record can be linked with a second user account record based on the second user account ID. A transfer of a user product record associated with the second user account record to the first user account record can then be carried out.

In various implementations as discussed briefly above the user product record can contain any of a number of digitally transferable items such as but not limited to a digital game component a license bundle user created digital content or an executable application. In other implementations the user product record can be any of a number of other digitally transferable items including without limitation an electronically exchangeable unit of payment an event ticket a redeemable coupon a predetermined code for a console service operation and a media file. Furthermore a user product record can be linked to a personal marketplace that is associated with the user account which enables a user to offer a virtual store to other users for user products so that the virtual store is facilitated by the console service.

In step a marketplace dialog screen is presented on a user console interface. The marketplace dialog screen can be any dialog screen that enables a user to access products and services from a dedicated dynamic dialog screen using a user console. On one implementation the marketplace dialog screen can be presented when invoked by a user. In another implementation the marketplace dialog screen can be presented automatically when a console is powered up. In yet another implementation the electronic marketplace dialog screen can be accessed for example from a user guide dialog screen an entry point from within a game that is executing or through a promotional banner on a dialog screen.

A step enables a request for product data to be initiated. In some implementations the request for product data includes a user ID associated with a user account record and at least one product ID. In another implementation the user account record additionally can include a user service level indicator and a user account history.

In a step the marketplace dialog screen is populated based on one or more received product data records. In some implementations the product data records can correspond to the requested product data and can also be based on the user account record the service level indicator and one or more predetermined criteria. In some implementations the predetermined criteria can be one or more filters including the user history any new product records or previously accessed product records that are identified and parental control settings. In other implementations the predetermined criteria can be for example one or more filters such as any related products that are identified any product offers that are identified a product category or a search term received from the user console.

Another implementation of method provides access to a merchandising dialog screen from within an active application screen. In one example the merchandising dialog screen can be a fly out screen that is targeted to a selected range of dialog box options such as information about a particular product and or a purchase option. In some implementations the merchandising screen can be accessed from an indicator for a new item within the active application screen a promotional banner within the active application screen or an indicator of unviewed items within the active application screen.

Yet another implementation of method includes presenting a payment dialog screen to a user display to enable a purchase transaction. In some implementations the payment dialog screen can present payment options including use of a credit card a prepaid card or an electronic user account to pay for a product. A payment option selection is made and payment information is received. In response to receiving the payment information the payment information is provided to the console service.

Another implementation of method includes the steps of accessing a specific product data application programming interface API and providing the product data request to a console service using the specific product data API. In some implementations a separate API is dedicated for each type of product data request transaction and access of the console service that can be made with a user console. In one example a game is enabled to invoke a specific API in order to obtain information about products available for that specific game. The information can include a list of items related to the game that are available for purchase. In another example a product record can be marked as hidden and is not listed to a user but can be obtained automatically by a game or application directly through invoking an API. In this example the product record e.g. a new game level or a new capability can be obtained when a user completes a prior game level or achieves at least a predefined score. In this manner each new game level of a game can be transparently delivered to a user console on demand through an API as a game is played.

By way of further illustration is a schematic diagram of another exemplary graphical user interface dialog screen which represents a screen that can be presented in response to a user invoking Game Downloads menu item in main dialog screen . Dialog screen includes tab selections including a My Games tab and an All Games tab and can include promotional items for games and game components. My Games tab provides a list of content titles for previously purchased products along with identifying information about the products including the amount of related content that has been downloaded and an indication of whether new products have become available that relate to the content title.

As a further illustration of the relationship of content to available downloads an exemplary dialog screen is presented to a user when content is invoked that is not yet downloaded. A dialog message can indicate that an additional component or even a full program needs to be downloaded in order to proceed with the content invocation. As illustrated in dialog screen can present a selection to continue downloading content and a selection to cancel a content download.

By way of another illustration illustrates an exemplary dialog screen that can be presented to a user for prompting the user to obtain a digital game component. Dialog screen includes details describing a game title and a description of a component with an offer for acquiring a digital component . A user can invoke an acquisition of the digital component by selecting a Continue field or obtain additional information about the license rights that a user obtains with the digital component by selecting a Licensing Details field .

By way of yet another illustration illustrates an exemplary dialog screen that can be presented to a user for prompting the user to submit payment information. Dialog screen includes a prompt description indicating the options available to the user for making payment. The payment options are depicted as dialog action buttons labeled Visa Redeem Prepaid Card Add Credit Card Add Debit Card and Other . Each dialog action button can invoke payment via the indicated means or invoke another dialog screen not shown for enabling a user to enter information such as user account codes passwords and other data.

Invoking an action button can also invoke an information window in the dialog screen that provides details for the selected payment option. For example illustrates that Visa dialog action button is a payment option and that a dialog window illustrates information submitted by the user to activate the payment option. In some implementations an action button for a payment option can be used to make a purchase. For example the Add Micro Points action button can invoke a purchase or transfer of value to an electronic user account from one of the payment options of dialog screen .

Each of the above described dialog screens illustrated in can be employed with the components of the exemplary operating environment illustrated in in order to facilitate the methods described with reference to . In particular the illustrative dialog screens can be displayed to a user by a console as described in in order to enable user interaction with a console service such as that illustrated in .

Although the present invention has been described in connection with the preferred form of practicing it and modifications thereto those of ordinary skill in the art will understand that many other modifications can be made to the present invention within the scope of the claims that follow. Accordingly it is not intended that the scope of the invention in any way be limited by the above description but instead be determined entirely by reference to the claims that follow.

