---

title: Steering control by means of selected segmented drag reduction
abstract: A steering system is provided for a hydrodynamically shaped vehicle having a nose end, a tail end, and forward propulsion. The steering system includes an internal supply of drag-reducing medium, at least one ejector ring positioned adjacent a nose end of the vehicle, and a plurality of ejector sections formed in the at least one ejector ring. Each ejector section includes an opening arrangement for ejecting drag-reducing medium to an external surface of the vehicle. A control unit selectively supplies drag-reducing medium to at least one of the plurality of ejector sections. The drag-reducing medium ejected from selected ejector sections causes a reduced-drag surface on said vehicle body and an increased speed thereof relative to a remainder of the vehicle body and thereby imparting a directional motion to the vehicle in the form of pitch and/or yaw.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07059260&OS=07059260&RS=07059260
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07059260
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050826
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

This invention generally relates to a reduced drag steering device. More particularly the invention relates to a steering device for an underwater vehicle that uses a selectively ejected drag reducing medium to steer the vehicle.

The current art for steering underwater vehicles is by means of rudders or other similar protruding mechanisms. In the case of many underwater vehicles there is a need for a more streamlined approach to steering. In particular torpedoes need compact steering mechanisms in order to fit inside of torpedo tubes. Other craft require compact steering mechanisms to run at shallow depths or to reduce the chance of fouling. Further torpedoes submarines and other vehicles require smooth streamlined steering mechanisms to reduce drag and noise.

The following patents for example disclose drag reducing methods or underwater steering but do not disclose the use of a selectively ejected drag reducing medium to control steering of an underwater vehicle.

Specifically Giles discloses hydrodynamic drag reduction in vehicles through boundary layer control. The device includes a plurality of slit means integral with the surface of the vehicle to permit a suction flow duct means operatively associated with the slit means for carrying the suction flow to the stern of the vehicle pump means operatively coupled to the duct means for generating and maintaining the suction flow and for preventing any hindrance to the suction flow at the surface of the vehicle and means for reversing the suction flow.

The patent to Smith discloses a method and apparatus for steering underwater bodies of the type having a surface adjacent which water is adapted to flow and produce hydrodynamic force lateral to the direction of movement of the body and includes the steps of delivering a gas in a quantity insufficient to produce a jet reaction steering force but in a quantity sufficient for flow adjacent the surface to spoil the water flow and produce a different lateral hydrodynamic force on the body.

Swanson discloses a torpedo drag reduction apparatus. Sheets of an ablative and water soluble material containing a drag reducing polymer agent are mounted on a labyrinth of baffles in an annular cavity underneath the nose fairing of a torpedo. Ambient seawater under ram pressure is ingested by scoops and introduced into the rear end of the chamber. As the seawater circulates through the baffle labyrinth it dissolves the polymer agent contained in the ablative sheets. The front end of the annular chamber is communicated with the exterior of the surface of the torpedo hull by a circumferential slot which extends continuously about the torpedo. The solution of seawater and polymer resulting from the circulation of the water through the labyrinth issues forth through the slot into the boundary layer flow under the ram pressure.

Mayer Jr. discloses a vehicle movable through a fluid supporting medium and includes an active system for controlling the layer of fluid over at least a portion of the vehicle exterior surface. Parallel slots through the surface permit fluid under pressure to issue over the surface to reduce drag and improve lift and or propulsion.

The patent to Gibson discloses an elongated flexible strip incorporating a longitudinally extending central tube provided with egress openings and is wrapped about the hull portion of a boat adjacent its bow. A chemical is fed into the central tube and passes out in controlled quantities from the egress openings to thereby form with water passing by the hull a diluted solution which then passes down the length of the hull and thereby reduces the friction of the boat hull when passing through water.

Fabula et al. disclose a method and apparatus for reducing torpedo drag in which polymer drag reducing material is carried by the torpedo in concentrated form ambient water is ingested and mixed with the concentrated polymer to produce a seawater polymer solution of predetermined concentration and the solution is ejected from the torpedo nose to be swept rearward in intimate contact with the exterior surface of the torpedo under torpedo forward motion.

It should be understood that the present invention would in fact enhance the functionality of the above patents by providing a steering mechanism for an underwater vehicle in which the steering mechanism includes the selective ejection of a drag reducing polymer from a periphery of the vehicle.

Therefore it is an object of this invention to provide an improved steering system for an underwater vehicle.

Another object of this invention is to provide a steering system for an underwater vehicle using a drag reduction medium.

Still another object of this invention is to provide a steering system for an underwater vehicle using selectively ejected drag reduction medium for initiating movement in predetermined directions.

A further object of the invention is to provide a steering system for an underwater vehicle which eliminates conventional steering mechanisms.

An additional object of this invention is to provide a steering system for an underwater vehicle which supplements conventional steering mechanisms e.g. torpedo s small control surfaces .

In accordance with one aspect of this invention there is provided a steering system for a hydrodynamically shaped vehicle having a nose end a tail end and forward propulsion. The steering system includes an internal supply of drag reducing medium at least one ejector ring positioned adjacent a nose end of the vehicle and a plurality of ejector sections formed in the at least one ejector ring. Each ejector section includes an opening arrangement for ejecting drag reducing medium to an external surface of the vehicle. A control unit selectively supplies and modulates drag reducing medium to at least one of the plurality of ejector sections. The drag reducing medium ejected from selected ejector sections causes a reduced drag surface on said vehicle body and an increased speed thereof relative to a remainder of the vehicle body and thereby imparting a controlled uneven directional motion to the vehicle producing steering and trim control in the pitch and yaw directions.

In general the present invention is directed to a steering device applicable to an underwater vehicle of the type shown by way of example in either of or . The underwater vehicle includes a nose end and a tail end . In each instance the underwater vehicle will eject a drag reducing medium such as a drag reducing polymer from at least one of plural ejection rings generally shown as and .

The vehicle of has a torpedo shaped body with an ejection ring located adjacent the nose end of the body an ejection ring located at an aft region of the body and an ejection ring located between the rings and .

The vehicle of has a more streamlined shaped body and the ejection rings and are shown more pronouncedly at the nose end of the vehicle. The drag reduction steering of the present invention is intended to be applicable to any vehicle body moving through the water usually a submerged vehicle body and the views of are exemplary only.

Each ejection ring is simply a circumferential region on the vehicle body for ejection of the drag reducing medium . The operating principle of the invention is the ejection of the drag reducing medium to effect a steering of the vehicle . In order to simplify the following disclosure it will be assumed that drag reducing medium is selectively ejected from an ejector section around a circumference of the vehicle and at any or all of the ejection ring locations .

The ejector sections are selectively actuated to accomplish the intended steering and exemplary placements of the ejector sections is shown in and . Each of and are viewed as facing vehicle from the nose end of vehicle . In there are a total of four ejector sections shown including the top port bottom and starboard . In the ejector sections are nominally offset 45 as compared to the arrangement of . In there are additional ejector sections through shown for increased maneuverability as will be explained.

Each ejector section is the smallest entity that is controlled as far as selective ejection of the drag reducing medium is concerned. Each ejector section when instructed puts out a sheet or quasi sheet of a drag reducing solution material along a shaped surface of the vehicle body . The selected ejection ring should optimally be far forward in the vehicle body to facilitate reduced drag steering. An ejection ring farther forward toward the nose of the vehicle will benefit the steering in at least two ways. First more of the vehicle body will receive the effects of the drag reduction fluid by the fluid covering more of the desired regions of the body. Further by being far forward there will be more of a moment arm relative to the location of an aft thrusting mechanism . However the ejection ring should be at least a minimal distance back from the very nose of the body for practical reasons. Specifically if the ring were very near the front nose a slight angle of attack of the torpedo could make the ejecting matter stream off to one side and not cover enough of the body . Further there may be a need to place sonar or even other devices very close to the forward most portion of the vehicle body and placement of an ejector ring may interfere with this equipment.

To maneuver the vehicle selective ejection of the drag reducing medium is controlled. For example selective ejection of drag reducing medium at the top regions of the vehicle will cause the vehicle to dive. Drag reduction material on the top regions of the body will mean the top has less resistance to forward movement. The top will increase in speed causing the vehicle to dive or more accurately to curve in a diving direction. When the desired angle downward is achieved the ejection process will be stopped or reduced. This can be better understood from a more detailed description of and . In fluid ejected from the top ejector section will cause the vehicle to dive as explained and depending upon the up down left or right maneuver desired only one quarter of the total ejection ring or will be used. Another geometry as shown in requires that about twice the vehicle body be covered with drag reduction material as compared to the arrangement of . In this arrangement the location of spaces between the ejector sections are located at the top bottom starboard and port sides of the vehicle body. To initiate a dive the two top sections will be activated and eject drag reducing material along essentially the top half of the vehicle body . This slight unbalancing of resistive forces will cause the vehicle body to turn downwards in a diving direction. The arrangement shown in includes eight ejection sections through . Selected ejection of the top four sections will produce a dive. Selected ejection of the top most two sections will also produce a dive but with less diving force than all four top sections distributing the drag reduction medium .

It will be understood that the arrangement of is specific enough such that the top four sections may be used to start a dive maneuver and subsequently only the top most sections will be used to continue the diving maneuver. After the proper desired dive angle and or the proper desire depth is reached the sections will be controlled to end the maneuver. This ending of the dive may be done by slowing or stopping the ejection out of the upper sections by ejecting drag reducing fluid out some or all of the bottom sections for example or some combination and sequencing of ejections out of any or all of the sections through . It will be further understood that other numbers of ejection sections may be used without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

The ejection sections may take different forms depending upon their intended use the type or viscosity of drag reduction fluid used or other related factors. For example as shown in each ejection section may be formed of multiple circular openings defining each section. Alternatively as shown in each section may be formed of elongated slots . Further as shown in the ejection section may itself be a single elongated slot . Depending upon the size of the vehicle it is anticipated that as many as one hundred circular openings or slots may be used for each individual ejection section .

Turning now to there are several illustrations of the possible combinations of operative ejector sections . In the drag reduction fluid is shown being ejected from the top four ejection sections thus facilitating the dive as discussed shows the possible appearance of the drag reduction fluid as it streams along the body surface of the vehicle . In only the top two ejector sections are operative thereby lessening the dive maneuver as compared to A. show those sections or which will be activated for a climb operation of the vehicle . indicate a dive or downward pitch. indicate a climb or upward pitch. This invention is capable of pitch control. will enable a turning climb to the direction opposite of the ejector sections will enable a turning climb to the direction opposite of the ejector sections and . and show a turn to the side away from ejector sections and a harder turn with sections . This invention is capable of yaw control. It is also capable of a combination of pitch and yaw control as indicated in . These ejection patterns shown are not intended to be limiting of the invention and any suitable ejection pattern including maneuver 360 degree radiuses in both pitch and yaw may be performed to achieve a desired maneuver.

If the vehicle body is significantly negatively or positively buoyant there may be a need to configure the ejector sections in a non symmetrical way. If the body is designed to turn in a non symmetrical way the sections might do better with more than eight sections or the vehicle body itself may be configured non symmetrically. This is similar to the concept of race cars being built non symmetrically because they turn one way only around a track.

In fact the un symmetric drag reduction could help keep a negatively or positively buoyant body going straight ahead.

If a body is long and slender multiple ejection rings down the length of the vehicle may be used. For example in ring locations and both with the top two sections in the arrangement of being activated will cause a dive. Ring section will restore drag reduction fluid to the top of the vehicle which due to the long distance from ring has been overly dissolved to be effective.

There are several choices of where to locate the ejector rings . Some factors dictating these choices have been discussed. Other considerations for location of the ejector rings include body speed body size fluid media and Reynolds number. The Reynolds number could change by an order of magnitude due to speed changes particularly and fluid medium change to a lesser extent . Speed changes could occur during a run during a particular firing of that body or various speeds could be selected for various runs. Fluid medium changes which will impact Reynolds number calculations are due to density and viscosity changes which result from a combination of salinity changes and temperature changes which in turn result from a combination of horizontal location and vertical location depth . Bodies that cover large speed ranges and operating conditions may use two slot locations to optimize the ejection point. So at one Reynolds number ring location might be used and for other operating conditions ring location might be preferred.

Referring now to B A B and each ejector ring and each ejector section in the ejector ring is controlled by a main control unit and the actual mechanism for control are manifolds M and valves V connected by pipes as shown. One configuration for the valves and pipes and which may be used as the basis for virtually any configuration is shown in . In elements M M M and M identify manifolds for the ejector sections respectively and valves V through V control the supply of drag reducing fluid to the respective manifolds. In elements M M M and M identify manifolds for the ejector sections and respectively and valves V through V control the supply of drag reducing fluid to the respective manifolds. In valves V through V control the supply of drag reducing fluid to the manifolds M through M respectively. Wires connecting the control unit to the valves V are shown in . Pipes from a drag reduction fluid reservoir to the valves V are shown in both . The drag reduction fluid may be force fed to the valves V and manifolds M as shown in . This method is common in torpedoes that force process fluid through a plumbing system and is a pressure over liquid POL method. A ninth valve V is used to control air pressure from a flask over the drag reduction fluid in reservoir . In the reservoir is shown essentially full and in the reservoir is about half depleted.

For the schematics of valves V and V are open. Valves V through V are closed. Valve V is also open. It should be noted that valve V may be an on off valve or a modulating valve so that the POL pressure can be modulated and controlled. Valves V through V may be on off valves or modulating valves. This arrangement of valves allows drag reduction fluid to be ejected from the ejector sections forming the top most sections. As previously explained an ejection from the top two ejector sections will initiate a dive maneuver for the vehicle .

In addition to the basic arrangement shown in it will be appreciated that a feedback may be used to determine whether the commanded heading depth or other desired result has been achieved. Specific vehicle features such as body length weight hydrodynamic aspects center of gravity center of buoyancy and the like will all have an impact on the control of the vehicle .

Although the POL method of supplying drag reduction fluid is illustrated it will be appreciated that other known methods of acquiring and supplying a drag reduction fluid to a delivery system may be utilized in the present invention and are included in the scope of the invention. For example a typical configuration is shown in and involves a concentrated drag reduction slurry supply within the body of the vehicle that utilizes external seawater from an intake at as a mixing element. The seawater passes through a pump to a mixer where the seawater is combined with the concentrated slurry to produce a desired concentration for drag reduction fluid . The mixed drag reducing fluid is supplied to the drag reduced steering arrangement as previously described. Proper activation and control of concentrated slurry supply pump and mixer along with proper utilization of valves V through V and manifolds M through M will yield desired control and modulation of the ejected mixed slurry fluid by controlling distribution of the slurry among the various sections in the various rings. This method effectively reduces the volume of slurry carried onboard a vehicle.

In addition to the segmented ejection slots being either fully activated fully on or fully off one or more of them may be partially activated partially on . depicts a flow patterns wherein the lower four slots are activated but at a reduced level and the upper four slots are fully activated fully on . For example in the drag reduction fluid coming out of would be approximately half of the fluid coming out of . This flow pattern could be created by controlling the valves in as follows valves V V V and V are fully opened valves V V V and V are approximately half opened. Such a flow pattern would be advantageous near the latter portions of a vehicle run wherein the vehicle has become lighter due to consumption of fuel or even consumption of drag reduction slurry. Note in the reservoir is shown essentially three quarters depleted.

Accordingly the present invention is a new and advantageous steering system for underwater vehicles enabling an increased speed with reduced power requirements due to the reduction in external components for the underwater vehicle. The steering device is fully integrated within the body of the vehicle thereby maintaining an outward streamlined shape. This configuration facilitates high velocity low drag and low noise flow over the vehicle body.

In view of the above detailed description it is anticipated that the invention herein will have far reaching applications other than those of underwater steering.

This invention has been disclosed in terms of certain embodiments. It will be apparent that many modifications can be made to the disclosed apparatus without departing from the invention. Therefore it is the intent of the appended claims to cover all such variations and modifications as come within the true spirit and scope of this invention.

