---

title: System and method for selecting advertising in a social bookmarking system
abstract: One aspect relates to a social bookmarking system that has the capability of displaying advertisements based on user input provided to the system. Advertisements displayed to the user may be determined based on one or more classifications provided by the social bookmarking system and selected by the user. Further, classification information that is created, used, or otherwise associated with the particular user may be used to determine ads displayed to that user. Another aspect relates to a system for collecting user classifications of content and using such classifications to match ads to appropriate content. In such a manner, more appropriate associations between ads and content may be made. Such classifications may be collected, for example, using a social bookmarking system. Further, advertisers may subscribe to classifications created in the social bookmarking system, allowing their advertisements to be displayed to users that perform actions with the subscribed classification. Also, advertisers may be permitted to submit their own classification information to the social bookmarking system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08768772&OS=08768772&RS=08768772
owner: Yahoo! Inc.
number: 08768772
owner_city: Sunnyvale
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051114
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. application Ser. No. 11 231 337 entitled SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR SELECTING ADVERTISING by J. Schachter et al. filed Sep. 20 2005 the application being incorporated herein by reference.

The field of the invention relates generally to Internet technologies and more specifically to web based advertising.

A basic problem for publishers of content on the Internet is how to match available advertising whether in the form of banners text or rich media with content. Current approaches to this problem include Google s AdSense program. The AdSense program allows a website publisher to dynamically serve relevant advertisements on web pages by analyzing text on a web page and automatically selecting ads based on the page content. The AdSense program also allows for the website publisher to provide explicit hints in the form of keywords to suggest associations of content. In any case if a visitor selects e.g. clicks on one of the AdSense ads served to the website the website publisher is credited for the referral and is provided a fee. Google s AdSense program essentially allows approved websites to dynamically serve Google s advertisements paid for by advertisers.

Website maintenance related to the AdSense program requires very little effort. Webmasters need only to insert a Google generated java script program into the web page or website template. A well known spider program parses the website upon which the AdSense program is associated and serves ads that relate to the website s content. The AdSense program uses a combination of keyword matching and context analysis to determine what ads should be served. The java script program calls the ad from a Google website and ensures that ads are served each time a visitor loads a web page. AdSense also implements a filtering system that allows webmasters to prevent a specific domain s ads from being served on any websites in their account. By performing ad blocking webmasters could prevent their competitor s ads from being dynamically served on their websites.

According to one aspect of the present invention a social bookmarking system is provided having the capability of displaying ads based on user input provided to the social bookmarking system. In particular it is appreciated that inputs to a social bookmarking system may be used to determine advertising displayed to the user. Such advertising may be displayed to the user while using the social bookmarking system or may be presented while operating one or more other programs.

As is known a social bookmark system and service allows multiple users to collect classification information of resources available in a distributed computing network. The classification information may be for example in the form of one or more tags associated with content such as that available through the Internet. Social bookmarking systems are typically used to organize references to content e.g. URLs and associate classification information with such references.

Examples of such systems include the del.icio.us bookmarking system and Internet service available at http del.icio.us the Spurl.net bookmarking system and service available at http www.spurl.net among others. According to one aspect of the present invention a distributed bookmark manager that collects tag information from multiple users is used to determine classification information that determines ad placement for content e.g. as referenced by URL data . In one specific embodiment such classification information is used to determine ad placement within the social bookmarking application itself.

According to one aspect of the present invention ad placement may be determined by one or more actions performed by the user and or information provided by the user to the social bookmarking system. For instance ads displayed to a user may be determined based on one or more classifications e.g. tags organizational structures etc. selected by a user. In one particular example the user may select a tag and in response a related advertisement may be displayed to the user in a user interface. The tag may be selected for example based on a search performed within the interface e.g. by the user entering a particular tag in a search field by browsing predefined tags defined within the social bookmarking system etc. .

According to another embodiment classification information created by used by or otherwise associated with the user may be used to select advertisements displayed to the user. For instance the user may be provided his her own capability for maintaining and storing classification information associated with various resources e.g. Internet resources such as a web page . Classifications created or otherwise used by the user may be stored for example in a database and shown to the user in an interface e.g. a personal webpage of the social bookmarking system. Such advertisements may be shown for example based upon tag information stored within a user s account. If a user is not registered or otherwise has an account tag information used in a particular session may be stored and used to determine displayed advertisements within the session.

Thus according to one embodiment of the present invention advertisements may be shown to the user based upon behavior of the user e.g. by the user selecting browsing and or searching classification information. Either alone or in combination with behavior information ads may be displayed to the user in response to historical information e.g. in the form of a user s stored personal classifications historical session based classification information etc. .

The user while interacting with elements within the social bookmarking system may be displayed ads determined by the user s defined classification information. Further ads may be selected also based upon the content referenced by the user s tags e.g. keywords within a referenced web page and also other s tags associated with the referenced content. Ad determination may be performed for instance by a conventional ad matching program e.g. the AdSense program with information from the social bookmarking system classification information referenced content lists of referenced content content feeds user selections user searches user centric classification information etc. being used as inputs to determined what ads are selected for display to the user.

Thus in summary ads displayed to a user may be determined based on user based actions e.g. behavioral information as discussed above saved information associated with the user or session e.g. saved classifications profile information e.g. user s address user s demographic information related to the user and or any other information used by the social bookmarking system e.g. content of classification lists created by one or more users organizations classification linked to the social bookmarking system from other systems e.g. by RSS feeds etc. .

According to one aspect of the present invention an advertiser is permitted to create a list of classifications on a social bookmarking system and is permitted to advertise such classifications. For instance an advertiser may have one or more web pages with which the advertiser would like to associate particular classifications. The advertiser may interface with the social bookmarking system and provide associations between classifications and reference content. In this way the advertiser may generate their own classifications of their own content.

According to yet another aspect of the present invention an operator of a social bookmarking system may be compensated for publishing classifications of the reference content from the advertisers. In one particular example operators of the social bookmarking system are compensated when one or more users use the social bookmarking system to locate the advertiser s content. Such location may be performed for example by a user locating the content based on the classifications provided by the advertiser.

In another embodiment of the present invention the advertiser may subscribe to particular classifications associated with their content. Unlike other methods of advertising where advertisers associate their content with classifications determined by an operator e.g. Yahoo Google etc. advertisers subscribe to classifications of their content as created by users. In this way advertisers are more likely to identify and reach target audiences based on meanings attributed by users.

Further as discussed above the user may locate the content using classifications collected by the social bookmarking system. Further advertisers may be compensated when their ads are selected by a user of the social bookmarking system. As discussed display of such ads may be determined by user actions within the system and or one or more classifications previously made by the user.

According to another aspect of the present invention it is appreciated that conventional forms of determining advertising e.g. ad matching programs such as the AdSense program do not in all cases optimally match ads to content. According to one aspect of the present invention it is appreciated that automatic methods of analyzing content based on contextual and keyword analysis do not always optimally match ads to corresponding web pages. A result of this suboptimal matching is that ads placed on these web pages generate less results e.g. responses to ads that result in actions click through traffic purchases etc. than ads that are correctly matched.

According to one aspect of the present invention a method is provided for developing user based classifications and using the resulting user classifications to determine advertising associations. As discussed such advertising may be displayed to a user within a social bookmarking system. According to one specific aspect of the present invention it is appreciated that users viewing website content are more capable of determining classification than automated programs. However one drawback to manual classification is that the volume of available information on the Internet to be classified is too great for one entity to classify. Therefore according to one embodiment of the present invention a distributed system for collecting content classifications is provided. Such user classifications may be used alone or with conventional contextual classification mechanisms to determine matches between ads and website content.

According to one aspect of the present invention Internet users bookmark Internet content creating user classification data of that content. Such classification data may for example be in the form of one or more tags which in one specific example are keywords that the user associates with an Internet page. Although tag data may be used it should be appreciated that other types of classification data can be used to classify data.

For instance classification data may be in the form of a folder based or other type of hierarchical structure used to organize information. Such a structure may be for instance a predetermined hierarchical structure in which users place content or references to content. In particular the predetermined hierarchical structure may be predetermined by the user. In another example the predetermined hierarchical structure is determined by some person or entity other than the user and the user only places the content or references to content. In another example users are capable of determining or suggesting one or more aspects of the classification structure. Traditionally website developers could in particular systems subscribe their websites to a classification system e.g. Yahoo in which the website developers suggest particular tags or other classification data. However according to one embodiment the user is capable of determining how and what classifications are ascribed to content rather than the originators themselves.

According to one aspect of the present invention using tags it is appreciated that these tags often provide very valuable clues as to what advertising should be displayed with a particular page as the tags provide a subjective view as to what classification the user associates with that content regardless of the actual content e.g. keyword that appear with the content. For instance an article describing a restaurant in Miami might be tagged by many users as vacation or travel . However such as article may not include keywords that contain the terms vacation or travel or otherwise be contextually associated with these classifications. Thus a user defined classification may provide a more useful classification than an automatically generated one based on content.

The tags and their associated page references may be provided e.g. sold to a website publisher for determining ad placement. In particular the publisher could then use the provided tag information to select the appropriate ads for each page. These tags might also be used as keywords to be input into a system such as the AdSense program to associate ads with content. In the specific example of the AdSense program the user classifications may be provided as hint data to the AdSense program. Thus a more accurate way may be provided to associate ads to content and to provide increased click through traffic to those ads as a result.

According to one aspect of the present invention a method for selecting advertising is provided. The method comprises acts of collecting classification data from a plurality of users wherein at least one portion of the classification data indicates a classification of content determining based on the at least one portion of the classification data an advertisement and presenting the advertisement to a user in response to the user performing an action with respect to the classification data. According to one embodiment of the invention the method further comprises an act of determining an advertisement to be displayed to the user based on the user action. According to another embodiment the user action includes a selection by the user of the at least one portion of the classification data. According to another embodiment the user action includes entering by the user the classification data into a social bookmarking system. According to another embodiment the user selects the at least one portion of the classification data in an interface of a social bookmarking system. According to another embodiment the method further comprises acts of storing an association of the entered classification with the user and determining the presented advertisement based on the stored classification information.

According to one embodiment of the invention the method further comprises an act of storing a list of classifications with the user and determining the presented advertisement at least in part based on the stored list of classifications. According to another embodiment the method further comprises an act of associating the advertisement with the content. According to another embodiment the act of collecting classification data further comprises an act of collecting one or more tags. According to another embodiment the act of collecting the classification data further comprising an act of determining a classification performed through a user action. According to another embodiment the act of determining includes determining whether the user associated the content with a particular classification. According to another embodiment one or more tags include one or more keywords that describe the content.

According to one embodiment of the invention the act of collecting the one or more tags further comprises an act of collecting the one or more tags by a collaborative computer system operated by the plurality of users. According to another embodiment the content includes a website page and wherein the act of associating includes an act of associating the advertisement with the website page. According to another embodiment the advertisement includes data and the act of associating further comprises an act of associating the data with the content. According to another embodiment one or more keywords are derived from at least one of the plurality of users. According to another embodiment the method further comprises an act of providing the classification data to an entity to be used to determine the association of the advertisement with the content. According to another embodiment the act of collecting classification data is performed by a plurality of computer systems.

According to one embodiment of the invention the classification data is shared among a plurality of computer systems. According to another embodiment the content is referenced by reference data and wherein the act of associating includes an act of associating the advertisement with the reference data. According to another embodiment the reference data includes a Uniform Resource Locator URL . According to another embodiment the classification data is shared among a plurality of application programs. According to another embodiment the classification data is shared among the plurality of users.

According to one aspect of the present invention a system for selecting advertising is provided. The system comprises a classification system adapted to provide classification data collected from a plurality of users wherein the classification data includes a portion that classifies the content and is adapted to associate the portion of the classification data with an advertisement and an interface adapted to display an advertisement to a user in response to at least one user performing an action with respect to the classification data. According to one embodiment of the invention the system further comprises an ad matching component adapted to match the advertisement with content referenced by the classification data. According to another embodiment the classification system is adapted to determine an advertisement to be displayed to the at least one user based on the action. According to another embodiment the user action includes a selection by the at least one user of the at least one portion of the classification data. According to another embodiment the classification system includes a social bookmarking system and wherein the user action includes entering by the at least one user the classification data into a social bookmarking system.

According to one embodiment of the invention the at least one user selects the at least one portion of the classification data in an interface of a social bookmarking system. According to another embodiment the classification system is adapted to store an association of the entered classification with the user and is adapted to determine the displayed advertisement based on the stored classification information. According to another embodiment the classification system is adapted to store a list of classifications with the user and is adapted to determine the displayed advertisement at least in part based on the stored list of classifications. According to another embodiment the classification system is adapted to collect one or more tags. According to another embodiment the one or more tags include one or more keywords that describe the content. According to another embodiment the classification system further comprises a collaborative computer system operated by the plurality of users.

According to one embodiment of the invention the one or more keywords are derived from at least one of the plurality of users. According to another embodiment the plurality of users collectively provide the classification data. According to another embodiment the content is referenced by reference data and wherein the ad matching component is adapted to associate the advertisement with the reference data. According to another embodiment the reference data includes a Uniform Resource Locator URL . According to another embodiment the system further comprises a plurality of application components that share the classification data. According to another embodiment the classification system is adapted to share the classification data among the plurality of users. According to another embodiment the classification system is adapted to determine a classification performed through a user action. According to another embodiment the classification system is adapted to determine whether the user associated the content with a particular classification.

According to one aspect of the present invention a method for selecting advertising is provided. The method comprises acts of collecting classification data from a plurality of users wherein at least one portion of the classification data indicates a classification of content the content being related to an organization and subscribing by the organization to the at least one portion of the classification data. According to another embodiment the content includes a web page and wherein the classification data includes at least one tag associated by at least one of the plurality of users to the web page and wherein the method further comprises an act of subscribing by the organization to the at least one tag associated by the at least one of the plurality of users. According to another embodiment the act of collecting classification data further comprises an act of collecting one or more tags.

According to one embodiment of the present invention the act of collecting the classification data further comprises an act of determining a classification performed through a user action. According to another embodiment the act of determining includes an act of determining whether the user associated the content with a particular classification. According to another embodiment one or more tags include one or more keywords that describe the content. According to another embodiment the act of collecting the one or more tags further comprises an act of collecting the one or more tags by a collaborative computer system operated by the plurality of users. According to another embodiment the method further comprises an act of providing by the organization classification data relating to the content. According to another embodiment the method further comprises an act of providing by the organization tag information relating to the content. According to another embodiment the method further comprises an act of maintaining by the organization a list of tags associated with content provided by the organization.

Further features and advantages of the present invention as well as the structure and operation of various embodiments of the present invention are described in detail below with reference to the accompanying drawings. In the drawings like reference numerals indicate like or functionally similar elements. Additionally the left most one or two digits of a reference numeral identifies the drawing in which the reference numeral first appears.

This invention is not limited in its application to the details of construction and the arrangement of components set forth in the following description or illustrated in the drawings. The invention is capable of other embodiments and of being practiced or of being carried out in various ways. Also the phraseology and terminology used herein is for the purpose of description and should not be regarded as limiting. The use of including comprising or having containing involving and variations thereof herein is meant to encompass the items listed thereafter and equivalents thereof as well as additional items.

As discussed above one aspect of the present invention relates to displaying advertisements based on one or more inputs provided to a social bookmarking system. For instance such advertisements may be displayed to the user while using the social bookmarking system. According to one embodiment advertisements may be determined based on one or more actions performed by the user and or information provided by the user to the social bookmarking system. For instance ads displayed to a user may be determined based on one or more classifications e.g. tags organizational structures etc. selected by a user.

For example a user may select a particular tag within an interface of the social bookmarking system and an advertisement based at least in part on that selected tag may be displayed to the user in the user interface. The user may then select the advertisement if interested. Further the social bookmarking system may store information relating to classifications of a user and may use such information to determine displayed ads specific to the particular user.

In general ads displayed to a user may be determined based on user based actions saved information associated with a user or session and or any other information used by the social bookmarking system. For example user based actions such as behavioral information as discussed above may be used to determine a displayed ad. Further either alone or in combination with user based actions saved information associated with the user or session such as for example saved classifications profile information e.g. user s address user s demographic information related to the user may be used to determine ad placement. Also any other information may be used in conjunction with any of the information above to determine the display of advertisements. For instance content of classification lists created by one or more users organizations classification linked to the social bookmarking system from other systems e.g. by RSS feeds etc. may be used to determine displayed ads.

Further as discussed above one aspect of the present invention relates to system for collecting user classifications of content and using such classifications to match appropriate ads to corresponding content. In such a manner more appropriate associations between ads and content may be made. According to one aspect of the present invention the ads may be presented to one or more users of a social bookmarking system.

Another aspect of the present invention relates to a process for creating user classifications. More specifically a distributed process for creating a classification data is provided that allows a user to create classifications of content that may be shared among systems applications and users. Generally there are many ways that users can classify data. However classifications of data are generally limited to a specific user applications and or systems. For instance e mail items in the well known Microsoft Outlook application program are restricted to the folders created within the application. Thus a user could not use the same folder to organize items other than those types available within the Outlook application program.

According to one aspect of the present invention it is realized that there are restrictions to using classification structures across domains such as users systems and applications. According to one specific aspect of the present invention a system is provided wherein classification structures can be shared among data objects e.g. those that contain content in an open manner. To this end a distributed system is provided for sharing classifications and references to content.

The system may be adapted to display for example reference information such as Uniform Resource Locator URL information. Such reference information may refer for example to a website page referenced by a URL address. In one embodiment the system is capable of storing one or more user classifications associated with content referenced by the URL. The classification information may be according to one embodiment of the present invention tag information including one or more keywords that describe the referenced content.

A tag may itself have more than one keyword associated with it e.g. a multiple word tag . Such tags using multiple elements may include for example one or more keywords presented in a particular format. In one example using a multiple word tag keywords may be separated by one or more spaces e.g. household pet other types of characters e.g. books fiction or no character e.g. newyorkyankees . It should be appreciated that tags may have any type of formatting and the invention is not limited to single word tags.

Such tag information may be collected in a distributed manner from multiple users. Users may also be permitted to view tags used by other users to classify a particular page and to use other s classifications for classifying content. To this end the system may present to a user a listing of classifications used by other users to classify currently viewed content.

The system may include in one specific example a system for managing bookmarks in a browser program executing on a local computer system. Such bookmark manager programs are well known and are used to organize URL information. Examples include the del.icio.us bookmarking system and Internet service available at http del.icio.us the Spurl.net bookmarking system and service available at http www.spurl.net among others. According to one aspect of the present invention a distributed bookmark manager that collects tag information from multiple users is used to determine classification information that determines ad placement for content e.g. as referenced by URL data .

In one such bookmark management system a bookmark management program is executed by a user s browser program. The bookmark management program performs functions relating to storing and classifying URL information based on input from the user. For example the bookmark management program permits the user to associate a currently viewed URL with one or more keywords or tags. 

In one such bookmark manager program URLs classified by the user are stored in a database located on a network e.g. stored centrally on a network server or distributed among a number of systems in a distributed database . In this way the user may access his her bookmarks from one or more systems or locations. Further because bookmark information is located on a server such information may be shared with other systems and or users. For example bookmark information may be shared among a plurality of users the users operating a client system. The users may for example use a browser program e.g. the Microsoft Internet Explorer browser program or other type of browser program to access a bookmark service to classify information. Users may alternatively or in addition to accessing bookmark information through a browser program access bookmark information through one or more application programs and or operating systems.

According to various aspects of the present invention a server based system may collect classification from one or more client types. In one example the client system may be a browser based system that permits the user to classify content and provide classification data to the server based system in real time. However the server based system may collect classification information from other types of clients e.g. thick or thin clients different types of client systems cell phones PDAs web servers etc. different types of programs OSs programs etc. . These other types of clients may provide such classification in real time may provide information periodically or may provide information at defined times e.g. when a specific action is taken on the client . In this way the server system is capable of collecting and distributing classification information to a variety of client and system types.

According to one embodiment of the present invention such tag information is collected by a collaborative system that collects tag information from multiple users. The system may include a number of features to facilitate user s classifications such as for example displaying classifications from other users for the same content. This feature may permit for example the user to refine their own use of tags or use additional tags for classifying a particular content reference e.g. URL . Further the system may show to the user URLs associated with the same or related tag information. This feature may allow the user to locate related content previously located and classified by other users. Other features may include a listing of most recently bookmarked URLs most frequently bookmarked URLs and a subscription feature that allows a user to subscribe to other s bookmarks having similar interests.

The system may also be capable of providing any or all of the bookmark information to other programs via for example an RSS feed API or other programming mechanism. The interface to the system may permit for example the user and or applications to store edit categorize and retrieve bookmark information. Thus application developers may extend the functions of applications including but not limited to browsers desktop client programs and API bindings for various programming languages. The system may store the information in one or more databases e.g. object relational or other database type . Alternatively or in addition to traditional databases information may be stored in any other database format such as flat file or other data structure file format e.g. XML .

In this way user classifications may be collected and provided to website owners or other entities for determining ad placement. Such classification information may be sold to entities that provide Internet services such as for example ad services and or Internet search services. Further such classification information may be used to locate Internet resources in place of or along with conventional Internet search utilities.

As discussed above advertisers using the collaborative system may allow the advertiser to associate particular classifications to content provided by the advertiser. This may permit for example the advertiser to publish their own classifications to the collaborative system and those published classifications may be used by users of the collaborative system. In particular the users may use the classifications such as tags or any other organizational structure to locate the content provided by the advertiser.

In one aspect of the invention the advertiser may compensate an operator of the collaborative system e.g. a social bookmarking system when the advertisers content is located using the system. In this way the advertiser may control which associations are made with their content and may share such classifications with other users so that their content can be located. To this end the collaborative system may include one or more interface elements that permit an advertiser to publish classification information associated with their content. According to one embodiment a user acting on behalf of the organization the advertiser may log into the collaborative system as a user and create delete and modify classifications attributed to the organization. Such classifications may be shared with other users.

Various embodiments according to the present invention may be implemented on one or more computer systems. These computer systems may be for example general purpose computers such as those based on Intel PENTIUM type processor Motorola PowerPC AMD Athlon or Turion Sun UltraSPARC Hewlett Packard PA RISC processors or any other type of processor. It should be appreciated that one or more of any type computer system may be used to determine ad placement according to various embodiments of the invention. Further the system may be located on a single computer or may be distributed among a plurality of computers attached by a communications network.

A general purpose computer system according to one embodiment of the invention is configured to perform any of the described functions including but not limited to storing editing categorizing and retrieving bookmark information. It should be appreciated that the system may perform other functions including storing and or managing bookmark information sharing bookmark information etc. and the invention is not limited to having any particular function or set of functions.

Computer system also includes one or more input output I O devices for example a keyboard mouse trackball microphone touch screen a printing device display screen speaker etc. In addition computer system may contain one or more interfaces e.g. network communication device that connect computer system to a communication network in addition or as an alternative to the network .

The storage system typically includes a computer readable and writeable nonvolatile recording medium in which signals are stored that define a program to be executed by the processor or information stored on or in the medium to be processed by the program. The medium may for example be a disk or flash memory. Typically in operation the processor causes data to be read from the nonvolatile recording medium into another memory that allows for faster access to the information by the processor than does the medium. This memory is typically a volatile random access memory such as a dynamic random access memory DRAM or static memory SRAM . The memory may be located in storage system as shown or in memory system . The processor generally manipulates the data within the integrated circuit memory and then copies the data to the medium associated with storage after processing is completed. A variety of mechanisms are known for managing data movement between the medium and integrated circuit memory element and the invention is not limited thereto. The invention is not limited to a particular memory system or storage system.

The computer system may include specially programmed special purpose hardware for example an application specific integrated circuit ASIC . Aspects of the invention may be implemented in software hardware or firmware or any combination thereof. Further such methods acts systems system elements and components thereof may be implemented as part of the computer system described above or as an independent component.

Although computer system is shown by way of example as one type of computer system upon which various aspects of the invention may be practiced it should be appreciated that aspects of the invention are not limited to being implemented on the computer system as shown in . Various aspects of the invention may be practiced on one or more computers having a different architectures or components that that shown in .

Computer system may be a general purpose computer system that is programmable using a high level computer programming language. Computer system may be also implemented using specially programmed special purpose hardware. In computer system processor is typically a commercially available processor such as the well known Pentium class processor available from the Intel Corporation. Many other processors are available. Such a processor usually executes an operating system which may be for example the Windows based operating systems e.g. Windows NT Windows 2000 Windows ME Windows XP operating systems available from the Microsoft Corporation MAC OS System X operating system available from Apple Computer one or more of the Linux based operating system distributions e.g. the Enterprise Linux operating system available from Red Hat Inc. the Solaris operating system available from Sun Microsystems or UNIX operating systems available from various sources. Many other operating systems may be used and the invention is not limited to any particular operating system.

The processor and operating system together define a computer platform for which application programs in high level programming languages are written. It should be understood that the invention is not limited to a particular computer system platform processor operating system or network. Also it should be apparent to those skilled in the art that the present invention is not limited to a specific programming language or computer system. Further it should be appreciated that other appropriate programming languages and other appropriate computer systems could also be used.

One or more portions of the computer system may be distributed across one or more computer systems coupled to a communications network. These computer systems also may be general purpose computer systems. For example various aspects of the invention may be distributed among one or more computer systems e.g. servers configured to provide a service to one or more client computers or to perform an overall task as part of a distributed system. For example various aspects of the invention may be performed on a client server or multi tier system that includes components distributed among one or more server systems that perform various functions according to various embodiments of the invention. These components may be executable intermediate e.g. IL or interpreted e.g. Java code which communicate over a communication network e.g. the Internet using a communication protocol e.g. TCP IP .

It should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to executing on any particular system or group of systems. Also it should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to any particular distributed architecture network or communication protocol.

Various embodiments of the present invention may be programmed using an object oriented programming language such as SmallTalk Java C Ada or C C Sharp . Other object oriented programming languages may also be used. Alternatively functional scripting and or logical programming languages may be used. Various aspects of the invention may be implemented in a non programmed environment e.g. documents created in HTML XML or other format that when viewed in a window of a browser program render aspects of a graphical user interface GUI or perform other functions . Various aspects of the invention may be implemented as programmed or non programmed elements or any combination thereof.

Various aspects of this system can be implemented by one or more systems within system . For instance the system may be a distributed system e.g. client server multi tier system . In one example the system includes software processes executing on a system associated with a user e.g. a client system . These systems may permit the user to associate classification information with one or more references to content e.g. a URL .

As shown in a distributed system may be used to create and store user classification information. System may include one or more computer systems e.g. systems A D coupled by a communication network . Such computer systems may be for example general purpose computer systems as discussed above with reference to .

In one embodiment of the present invention system stores classification information in the form of tag information in one or more databases e.g. database . Further system performs associated functions with the tag information.

System may include a server process e.g. process that responds to requests from one or more client programs. Process may include for example an HTTP server or other server based process e.g. a database server process XML server peer to peer process that interfaces to one or more client programs distributed among one or more client systems e.g. systems A D .

According to one embodiment client programs may be capable of permitting a user to classify content. Such programs may include for example any type of operating system and or application program capable of communicating with system through network . In one particular instance a client may include a browser program e.g. browser program that communicates with server process using one or more communication protocols e.g. HTTP over a TCP IP based network XML requests using HTTP through an Ajax client process distributed objects etc. .

Although it is shown by way of example that a browser program may be used to classify data it should be appreciated that other program may be used to interface a user to server process . For instance an application program that is specially developed to manage classification data may be provided to permit a user to perform classifications according to one embodiment of the present invention. The client program may be for example a thin client including an interface for managing classification data although such classification data may or may not be stored on the client. Alternatively the client may be a scripted program or any other type of program having the capability of transferring classification data. According to one embodiment such client programs may for example be downloaded and installed over the network. Further these client programs may be stored and distributed by system in the form of one or more software programs .

In one specific example the client program may include a classifier program that permits the user to associate classification data with one or more references to content e.g. URLs . This classifier program in one embodiment may be integrated with browser program executing on system D. For instance the classifier program may include one or more controls that when selected by the user perform storing editing and other functions of tag information. These controls may be written in a variety of programming languages and the invention is not limited to any particular language. In one specific example the control may be a bookmark that when accessed performs one or more programmed functions.

In one embodiment the controls may be displayed as selections in the user s bookmark list. When selected one type of control may permit the user to associate tag information with the currently viewed URL. In another type of control the user may be permitted to view a list of tags previously associated with the user. To this end the user may be presented a web page that includes defined tags and their associated URL data. Yet another type of control may permit the user to see tags defined by others. In particular the system may permit a user to see what other users have bookmarked a specific URL. Further the capability may be provided for a user to view URLs collected by others and subscribe to the links of users whose lists of URLs are interesting to the user. Additional capabilities may be provided to permit the user to organize Internet information and to benefit by other s previous organization of content.

Information stored in the database may include for example a URL address one or more keywords associated with the URL address a description of the URL among other information that may be used to describe and classify content. This information may be collected from the user in an interface e.g. as described below with reference to and stored in the database e.g. database . Additionally client systems may store a local copy of a user s tag information with a local database associated with the client system e.g. database located on client system D . However it should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to storing classification information in any particular location.

A client system e.g. clients A D may include one or more interfaces through which advertisements may be presented to the user. In one example advertisements may be presented in an interface of a browser program e.g. browser program executing on a client computer system. As discussed one aspect of the present invention relates to receiving inputs through an application e.g. a social bookmarking system and using such inputs to determine ads displayed to a user e.g. users A D . Such ads may be displayed for instance in an interface associated with a social bookmarking application program.

To this end a client system may advocate the ability to display advertisements in an interface either the same or different interface as the application accepting the input from the user. As will be further appreciated below with respect to a social bookmarking application the application may determine and display advertisements to the user based on classification information collected by the social bookmarking application and or actions performed by the user within the interface of the social bookmarking application. For instance a database classification information used by the user may be used to determine a particular advertisement displayed to the user in the social bookmarking application at any point in time. Such classification information may be for example stored in the social bookmarking application and represents the user s historical creation of classification information. In one particular example the classification information includes classifications of Internet resources e.g. web pages that identify the user s association of the content to the classifications. System may use such classifications as inputs to an ad selection program e.g. the AdSense program . For instance in the case of the AdSense program the classifications may be used as keyword inputs to determine a selected ad.

At block a computer system e.g. a client computer server computer or other computer or process determines classification data based on a user action. For instance the user may associate one or more tags with content place a portion of content in a particular folder or any other user action that may be used to create a classification.

Further a computer system may store the classification. The classification data may be stored locally at a computer system operated by the user and or may be stored centrally at a server. In one embodiment classification data may be stored for each user over time. Such advertising may be ads that are available to be displayed to a particular user and selected for individual users based on the stored classifications.

At block the classification data is used select advertising to be displayed to a user. For instance the advertising may be displayed to the user in a current computer session in the same or different application interface based on the classification provided. Further advertising may be selected based on stored classification information for the user. In one specific example classifications collected over time may be used by the system e.g. a social bookmarking system to determine ads to be displayed to the user. For instance for a particular portion of content e.g. one referenced by a URL one or more of the most frequently occurring keywords associated with a particular URL may be used as classification information to determine selected advertising. In one specific example such keywords may be used as inputs to an ad matching program such as AdSense to determine advertising selected for display to the user.

At block the selected ads may displayed to the user. Such display may occur for example on a display associated with the same or a different computer system. Further the selected ads may be displayed in a presently occurring or future computer session. At block process ends.

At block the user on behalf of the organization is permitted to publish the classification information to a social bookmarking system. As discussed the social bookmarking system may permit access to previously defined classification associated with a user. According to one embodiment the social bookmarking system is modified to allow the publication and sharing of classifications originating from organizations.

According to one embodiment the organization may use classification information to classifications created by users that refer to their content. In one specific example advertisers may subscribe to particular tags or other classification information that reference their content. Rather than provide their own recommendations regarding classifications of their content the organization may use classifications provided by users as indications of the meaning that should be attributed to the advertiser s content. In this way the meaning attributed by users may prove to be a more effective determinant of advertising than conventional targeting techniques originated solely by advertisers. More particularly the meaning of content as attributed by users may be a more accurate input for determining ads to be displayed to such users than a selection of an association between ads and content as performed by an advertiser. For instance if a classification provided by a user for a restaurant in Miami is associated by a user with keywords vacation or travel the advertiser may choose to subscribe to such keywords or combinations thereof rather than or in addition to some other advertiser generated classification.

In one specific embodiment the classification information relates to content provided by the organization. Such information may be provided for example by a user representing the organization and providing classification information on their behalf. Other methods e.g. linking to a list of classifications providing classification data through an API of the social bookmarking system etc. may be used for transferring classification data to the social bookmarking system.

At block an operator of the social bookmarking system is permitted to charge an advertiser based on a function of user actions relating to the defined classifications. In one specific example a user selects a classification defined by an organization that originates the content associated with the classification. Once selected the organization the advertiser may be charged a fee. Fees may be charged for example when a user selects content through advertiser based classifications selection of particular advertisements displayed within the social bookmarking application and or when a user completes an action e.g. a purchase with the referenced content. At block process ends.

According to one embodiment ad placement may be determined by one or more actions performed by a user and or information provided by the user to a social bookmarking system. For instance at block a user may be permitted to select one or more predefined tags displayed to the user within a user interface of the social bookmarking application. Such predefined tags may be for example tags defined by other users tags defined by the particular user in a listing of personal tags or other type of classification information e.g. a folder that contains a reference to content .

Another action may include for example performing a search by the user of tag information at block . More particularly the user may enter tag information in a search field of an interface of the social bookmarking application and perform a search based on the entered tag information. In one embodiment the social bookmarking application maintains a database of tags defined by users of the application and users are permitted to search based on tag information. Also the user may be permitted to search on other related information such as a description attributed to the reference to content title of the reference title of the content metadata associated with the referenced content portions of the content itself and or any other associated information.

In another example a user at block saves one or more classifications of content in the social bookmarking application. This may be done for example by associating one or more tags with a reference to content e.g. a URL . One method of associating classification information with content is discussed below with respect to .

At block the social bookmarking application may be adapted to select advertising based on one or more actions performed by the user e.g. actions performed at blocks . In one example when a user selects a predefined tag at block advertising associated with the selected tag may be displayed to the user at block . In this example the advertising may be displayed shortly after the user selects the predefined tag. In yet another example the advertising may be displayed some point after the user performs the selection.

In another example as the user performs a search of tag information in the social bookmarking system advertisements may be displayed to the user based on the search parameters and or results associated with the search. For instance one or more keywords entered in a search field may be used as inputs to an ad determining program. In another example keywords associated with tags defined in the system corresponding to keywords entered in the search field may be used to locate an ad displayed to a user.

In yet another example ads displayed to the user may be selected based on classification information associated with that user e.g. by the user saving classifications at block . Thus the user s behavior may be monitored by the social bookmarking application to determine what advertisements are displayed to a user. What advertisements displayed may be based at least in part on the user s use of such classifications how many content elements are associated with a particular classification when such a classification was previously accessed or other behavioral item associated with a particular classification.

According to one embodiment the operator of the social bookmarking application may be compensated for actions performed in response to the display of the advertisements. In particular at block it is determined whether a user performs an action in response to the display of the advertisement. In one example the user may perform a purchase based on the displayed advertisement or may take any other action with respect to the displayed content. If the user does not perform an action the social bookmarking application continues to accept further inputs to the user. However if it is determined that the user performs an appropriate action a charge back to the advertiser may be determined at block . In this way the operator of the social bookmarking application may be compensated for referrals provided by the system.

At block the user accesses his her account. Access may be performed for example by the user entering a login identifier e.g. a user name and password. Optionally it is determined whether the user has an associated account and if not the user may be permitted to create an account to manage his her tag information. If for example the system on which the user is operating does not have an associated client program installed the system may install any necessary software e.g. classifier program at block . The software may be programmed in any language or combination of languages and the invention is not limited to any particular language or set of languages.

As discussed above the client program may be integrated with a browser program e.g. browser program installed on the client system e.g. system D . At block the user loads content into a browser program interface by for example entering a specific URL in an address line of the browser interface or by selecting a link to the URL from another URL reference e.g. a search function .

The user may select to classify the currently viewed URL by for example selecting a control within an interface of the browser. In response to selecting the control the program may prompt the user at block to classify the content. The prompting may be displayed for example in a same or different window of the browser interface that displays the selected content. Specifically the interface may prompt the user to enter one or more tags associated with the URL. These tags may be according to one embodiment keywords that describe the content referenced by the URL.

At block the system saves the collected classification information. As discussed the information may be stored in a database of a server coupled to the client over a communication network. Classification information may also be stored local to the client or in any other location so that the information may be accessed by the client when not connected to the network or when the information is accessed by other applications when not connected to the network.

At block the classification information may be collected and maintained by the system over time. For instance the system may maintain classification information received from individual users over time. This information may be consolidated and used as classification information to select advertising at block . For instance for a particular URL one or more of the most frequently occurring keywords associated with a particular URL may be used as classification information to determine selected advertising. In one specific example such keywords may be used as inputs to an ad matching program such as AdSense.

Once selected the ads may be associated with the URL described by the classification information e.g. at block . The ads themselves may include data and or programs that present advertisements to users. The ad content may be linked with embedded in or otherwise associated with the web page referenced by the URL. The ads may be displayed when the URL is subsequently loaded in a browser program e.g. block . The URL may be subsequently loaded by the same or a different browser program instance e.g. a browser program instance existing on another client system . In this manner user selected classifications of the content may be used to associate ads with the referenced content. At block process ends.

Although discussed above show a process that involves the creation of classifications using a browser program it should be appreciated that classifications may be performed using any type of computer system and or application and the invention is not limited to any particular implementation. For example the classification system may be implemented in an operating system and or application permitting users and or programs to classify information and any resulting classification information can be used to associate ads with content.

As discussed above the entry window may include one or more data entry fields in which classification information may be entered. In particular the entry window may include a URL field in which a URL address or other reference information may be entered. Interface may also include a description field that includes for example a text based description of the URL content. By default description may include a stored title or filename of the content. Interface may also include a tag field in which classification information may be entered. In one example the classification information may be in the form of one or more keywords associated with the content reference. Interface may include other information stored in the above or additional fields. For instance an extended field may be used to store an extended description of the content entered by the user. This extended field may also include one or more tags or other classifying information that may be used to describe content.

According to one specific embodiment of the present invention tag data may be developed using a social bookmarking system operated by multiple users. For instance the well known del.icio.us web service is a web service that provides users the ability to store and organize their bookmarks share their bookmarks with others and find new bookmarks that may be of interest to them. According to one embodiment of the present invention it is appreciated that a bookmarking system service such as the del.icio.us service may be used to provide classification information for use in determining ad placement. Although various aspects of the present invention may be implemented with the del.icio.us web service it should be appreciated that various aspects of the present invention may be implemented in other systems services and the invention is not limited thereto.

As discussed the del.icio.us system is a social bookmark management system. An interface of one such social bookmark management system is shown by way of example in . shows an interface which may be for example a browser program interface e.g. the Microsoft Windows Explorer browser . Within interface may be displayed a main interface or page to a social bookmarking system e.g. the del.icio.us system .

This interface may include one or more bookmarks e.g. bookmark that reference content such as data stored on a website. Such data may be referenced by a link such as a URL. Link data may be associated with each bookmark and stored in a database. For instance link data may be collected from a user within an interface similar to interface discussed above with reference to . Further within an interface of the system a bookmark may show an indication e.g. indicator of how many other users have bookmarked a particular portion of content.

The system allows users to easily add sites to a personal collection of links to categorize those sites with keywords and to share the collection not only between applications and systems but also with other users. What makes the del.icio.us system a social bookmarking system is its ability to let users see links that other users have collected e.g. a list of top ranked bookmarks e.g. list as well as showing other users who have bookmarked specific content e.g. a website page referenced by a URL . Users can also view the bookmarks of links collected by others and subscribe to bookmarks of people whose lists the user finds interesting.

According to one embodiment tags are one word descriptors that a user can assign to any reference to content e.g. a bookmark . A user is permitted to assign as many tags to a bookmark as desired and rename delete add or merge tags together. A selectable list e.g. list of of all of the user s current tags may be displayed for example on the right hand side of the user s personal page together with the number of bookmarks that have that tag. A user can assign tags to an item when the user first submits a bookmark or by selecting an edit link e.g. element of next to an existing bookmark. In one example tags are automatically created the first time the user uses them. In a user s personal page such as the one shown in a user can view an indicator e.g. indicator that shows how many other users have previously bookmarked a particular URL.

In another example interface a user can merge rename or delete tags whenever desired by selecting the settings tab on the user s personal page and selecting tags from the Settings menu e.g. of menus on the right side of the interface e.g. interface or by entering the URL http del.icio.us USERNAME settings tags in an address field of the browser interface. The user may be then presented a pull down menu of all the user s current tags along with a text field. To rename all instances of a tag the user enters a new tag name in the text area. To merge two tags a user selects the tag to be merged and renames the tag to the name of an existing tag. To split a tag into two or more pieces a user enters multiple tags in a rename field. To delete a tag a user selects the tag from the pull down menu and selects a Delete button.

Features of the del.icio.us system can be broadly divided into the following four general functional areas 

To save bookmarks in the del.icio.us system a user creates an account and installs a del.icio.us bookmarklet. The bookmarklet is a program that adds a control e.g. a button to the browser s links or bookmarks toolbar. In one embodiment the control acts similarly to the browser s built in bookmark this website feature. In one specific example the bookmark is stored on a server operated by the del.icio.us website. In another example the feature may be part of an application e.g. Explorer or operating system or may otherwise be previously installed on a client system.

After navigating to a website of interest and pressing the bookmarklet button the user is presented with an interface with fields showing the URL of the currently viewed website its title editable and additional fields for entering an optional paragraph length description of the site and an optional list of free form descriptive keywords. In the context of the del.icio.us system keywords entered by a user to describe a particular bookmark are referred to hereinafter as tags. 

Bookmarks saved by the user are listed on a personal page created for the user referred to hereinafter as a personal page e.g. as shown by way of example in . A section of this personal page also lists all the tags used by a user and the number of bookmarks tagged with a given tag. Selecting e.g. by clicking on a tag name restricts the display of bookmarks to those tagged with that particular tag name. Additionally a list of tags that have been used together with the selected tag is displayed as related tags . Tag related tag lists serve for example as mnemonic and navigational aids with which the user can locate bookmarks previously saved by other users.

The del.icio.us system provides several mechanisms for finding bookmarks of interest saved by other users. These mechanisms provide the social aspect of the del.icio.us system.

Various pages such as for example user personal pages main page popular page global and per user tag pages or other pages may be made available as RSS feeds allowing users to subscribe to them with online or desktop aggregators and form their own custom views on the del.icio.us system classification data. A user can for instance use RSS feeds provided by the del.icio.us system to add the del.icio.us popular content to his or her my.yahoo.com page or view their personal inbox through for example the well known Firefox browser s Live Bookmarks feature. Additionally the del.icio.us system can periodically post the user s recent bookmarks to a user s blog automating the maintenance of linkblogs. Similarly an organization e.g. an advertiser may subscribe and or publish classification data.

The del.icio.us system provides a REST style open programmatic application program interface API to a user s own content. A set of API calls are provided that mimic the functionality generally available to a user. That is the API calls mimic the storing editing categorizing and retrieving functions performed with bookmarks and their associated information. This functionality allows third party developers to develop tools that implement the del.icio.us system and integrate del.icio.us features into other products. Many tools have been developed including but not limited to del.icio.us extensions for several popular browsers desktop clients API bindings for popular programming languages and others.

According to one aspect of the present invention such interfaces may be leveraged to permit other applications operating systems and or computer systems to share classification data. In this way classification data is more easily shared and effort for classifying data in separate applications computer systems etc. are reduced. Further the quality of classification data is increased as more entities applications computers users share and add to the classification data.

The del.icio.us system is in one example a database driven system including a database interface program loaded on a client with the database being located on a server system. For instance the del.icio.us system may include an architecture similar to system as discussed above with reference to . In one embodiment URL link and tag information posted by users may be stored for example in a relational database for later retrieval. The database information may according to another embodiment be broken up and distributed across several tables to enable fast processing of queries. Further the system may maintain link and tag information posted by users in a structured format e.g. XML . Full text indexing and distributed inverse indices may be used to locate information for retrieval.

Although various aspects of the present invention may be used with the del.icio.us system it should be appreciated that other systems services and or applications may be used. Further systems having different components or architecture may be used to collect and store classification data. Having thus described several aspects of at least one embodiment of this invention it is to be appreciated various alterations modifications and improvements will readily occur to those skilled in the art. Such alterations modifications and improvements are intended to be part of this disclosure and are intended to be within the spirit and scope of the invention. Accordingly the foregoing description and drawings are by way of example only.

