---

title: Flip-down footrests for an all-terrain vehicle
abstract: A two-seater all-terrain vehicle (ATV) has straddle-type driver and rear passenger seats, and a pair of movable rear footrests to support the feet of a rear passenger. The rear footrests pivot from a stowed non-supporting position to a supporting position. When folded into the non-supporting position, the rear footrests become substantially flush with side paneling of the vehicle. The all-terrain vehicle may further include a pair of vertical and horizontal adjustment mechanisms for independently vertically adjusting each of the rear passenger footrests so that passengers of varying height can be comfortably accommodated on the rear seat. A cargo space is provided under the passenger's footrest, the cargo space being enlarged when the passenger's footrests are in the stowed position. Restraints and other holding mechanisms are also provided. The flip-down adjustable rear footrests may be used on other types of straddle-type recreational vehicles.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07404568&OS=07404568&RS=07404568
owner: Bombardier Recreational Products Inc.
number: 07404568
owner_city: Valcourt
owner_country: CA
publication_date: 20050307
---
The present application claims priority from U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 551 493 filed Mar. 8 2004 entitled FLIP DOWN FOOTREST FOR AN ALL TERRAIN VEHICLE which is incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention relates generally to all terrain vehicles ATVs and in particular to two seater all terrain vehicles having passenger footrests.

As illustrated in a typical prior art all terrain vehicle ATV denoted generally by reference numeral has a straddle type seat disposed on an upper portion of the vehicle s frame. A driver usually rests his feet on a pair of footrests that extend laterally from a lower portion of the frame between the front and rear wheels. The footrest is connected between a front fender and a rear fender . Although a passenger can squeeze onto the straddle type seat behind the driver or sit on a rear rack above and slightly forward of a rear wheel axle as shown in this arrangement is generally uncomfortable for the rear passenger especially when the ATV traverses rough terrain and is strongly discouraged by manufacturers because the vehicle is less stable. Furthermore as depicted in there is not much room on the single pair of footrests for both the driver s feet and the passenger s feet leading to further discomfort and passenger instability. Moreover when a passenger attempts to share the single pair of footrests with the driver the passenger s toes have a propensity to point outwardly from the vehicle. The passenger s toes are thus prone to hitting rocks trees bushes and other obstacles as the ATV traverses rough terrain. Many problems existed with this configuration. In an after market passenger seat kit an optional foot peg can be positioned on steel tube optionally added between rear rack and the frame. In other such conventional situations it could be appreciated from the feet of the passenger cannot touch the driver footrests at all because of the higher passenger sitting position. As illustrated in the after market rear passenger seat installed on rear rack is a distinct straddle type seat with armrests and a backrest so that the passenger sits above and slightly rearward of the rear wheel axle . The unsupported passenger feet may be uncomfortable for the passenger and does not provide the support needed when the vehicle moves on an uneven terrain.

Accordingly a two seater all terrain vehicle was developed with a longer wheelbase A and a rear passenger seat for comfortably and securely accommodating a rear passenger. The two seater ATV was the subject of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 475 511 entitled ATV WITH IMPROVED DRIVER POSITIONING AND OR MULTI PASSENGER CAPACITY filed Jun. 4 2003 U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 393 114 entitled ATV WITH IMPROVED DRIVER POSITIONING AND OR MULTI PASSENGER CAPACITY filed Jul. 3 2002 U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 384 822 entitled ATV WITH IMPROVED DRIVER POSITIONING AND OR MULTI PASSENGER CAPACITY filed Jun. 4 2002 U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 331 252 entitled ATV WITH IMPROVED DRIVER POSITIONING AND OR MULTI PASSENGER CAPACITY filed Nov. 13 2001 U.S. Regular patent application Ser. Nos. 10 647 782 10 647 778 10 647 786 10 647 780 10 647 785 10 647 781 10 647 779 10 647 788 10 647 787 and 10 647 777 all filed on Aug. 26 2003. All the above mentioned documents are incorporated by reference herein in their entireties.

The prior art extended wheel base two seater ATV provides footrests for the rear passenger that could be improved. On prior art extended wheel base two seater ATVs a pair of fixed foot rests not shown are disposed on each side of the vehicle s frame. These passenger footrests cannot be moved. However the pair of passenger s footrests extending from either side of the frame could more adequately and comfortably support the passenger s feet. Furthermore the footrest could be foot pegs attached to the frame at a fixed height and thus could hardly provide a more adequate ergonomic for short or tall passengers. Moreover when there is no passenger riding on the vehicle the passenger foot pegs take up valuable potential cargo space particularly due to their higher position.

Thus there is a need for an improved pair of footrests for passengers on two seater all terrain vehicles.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide an improved footrest for an all terrain vehicle that overcomes at least one of the deficiencies of the prior art.

An aspect of the present invention provides a two seater all terrain vehicle with footrests for a passenger having a surface for supporting a large part of the feet of the passenger the footrests being adjustable in height. The inclination of the footrests in different directions is also adjustable to better fit the ergonomics of the passenger. The passenger s footrests are movable so that substantially flush with the side panel of the vehicle when in the stowed position to avoid obstruct the volume behind the driver s feet thus providing a larger cargo volume. The passenger s footrest can have a volume large enough to provide a storage compartment. If the passenger s footrest can also cover a storage volume underneath the footrest. In the latter case the footrest can serve as a pivotable lid closing the storage compartment. The storage compartment would ideally be sealed to prevent water intrusion in the cargo space.

In accordance with a first aspect of the invention an all terrain vehicle is provided which includes a frame having a straddle type seat a plurality of wheels supported by the frame each wheel suitable to accommodate a low pressure balloon tire generally supporting a pressure of less than 2 kg cm a drive assembly supported by the frame including an engine operatively connected to at least one of the plurality of wheels to impart drive power to the at least one wheel and a footrest movable between a supporting position and a non supporting position. Preferably the vehicle further includes an adjustment mechanism for vertically and horizontally adjusting the footrest so that passengers of varying size can be comfortably accommodated. The footrest when in the non supporting position are positioned in a side fairing recess. The recess can receive a portion of the footrest or the entirety of the footrest to remove the unused footrest from a useful volume on the vehicle. Inserting the footrests in a recess also favorably improve the aesthetic of the vehicle.

In accordance with another aspect of the invention an all terrain vehicle is provided which includes an elongated frame having a forward straddle type seat for accommodating a driver and a rear straddle type seat for accommodating a passenger a plurality of wheels supported by the elongated frame and defining an increased distance between the front axle and the rear axle. This longer distance between the front and the rear axle is commonly called elongated wheelbase which is usually between 132 cm and 183 cm long. The all terrain vehicle also includes a drive assembly supported by the frame including an engine operatively connected to at least one of the plurality of wheels to impart drive power to the at least one wheel a pair of driver footrests for the driver s feet and a pair of passenger footrests for the passenger s feet the pair of passenger footrests being movable between a supporting position and a non supporting position. Preferably the vehicle further includes an adjustment mechanism for vertically and horizontally adjusting the footrest so that passengers of varying size can be comfortably accommodated. The elongated wheelbase of the ATV accommodates the driver and passenger seats as well as the driver and passenger footrests.

In accordance with yet another aspect of the invention a straddle type recreational vehicle is provided which includes a frame including at least one straddle type seat accommodating a driver and a rear passenger an engine mounted to the frame for imparting drive power to the vehicle a pair of driver footrests at least one pair of passenger footrests movable between a first position and a second position. Preferably the passenger footrests may pivotally fold from a supporting position to a non supporting position and or are vertically and horizontally adjustable to accommodate passengers of varying height. By folding the passenger footrests into the non supporting position cargo may be stored in the space that would otherwise be occupied by the passenger footrests in the supporting position. When the multi seat ATV is not carrying any passengers cargo may be stored behind the driver by removing or folding the rear passenger seat s to accommodate a storage rack or modular container in which case the passenger footrests need not be folded into the non supporting position. Different concepts for using the passenger seat space are included in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 796 371 filed Mar. 8 2004 entitled MODULAR COMPONENTS FOR AN ATV. This application is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

It is one aspect of the invention to provide a passenger footrest moving from a vertical non foot supporting position to an horizontal foot supporting position having a locking mechanism that secures the foot rest in either position. The locking mechanism can also maintain the foot rest in an intermediate position if needed.

One other aspect of the present invention has a recessed portion on the vehicle s side wall accommodating the footrest when in a stowed non foot supporting position. The recess is sized and designed to receive all of the footrest or just part of it so the retracted footrest does not extend outside the vehicle s side fairing.

In accordance with yet another aspect of the present invention a cargo volume is defined under the passenger footrest the cargo volume being enlarged when the passenger s footrest is in the stowed position. The vehicle is suitable to receive a restraint for securing cargo on the cargo volume. Hooks belts rubber band and anchors are all provided with the cargo volume to secure the cargo.

It is one other aspect of the present invention to provide a storage compartment in the passenger footrest. The compartment is enclosed by a lid which is secured by a mechanical fastener. The mechanical fastener can posses a lock to ensure protection of goods inside the storage compartment. Ideally the storage compartment is sealed when the lid is secured to prevent water intrusion in the cargo volume.

One further aspect of the present invention provide a removable passenger footrest enclosed cargo compartment. The cargo compartment is removable while either keeping the footrest on the vehicle or removing the footrest form the vehicle.

One aspect of the present invention provides passenger footrests having multiple adjustments for the height as well as for the horizontal inclination. A locking mechanism maintains the footrests in the desired position.

Further features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent from the following detailed description taken in combination with the appended drawings.

It will be noted that throughout the appended drawings like features are identified by like reference numerals.

The ATV shown in is a two seater ATV since it further includes a rear passenger seat with a backrest . The passenger grips the grab handles best seen in positioned laterally outwardly of the passenger seat . The driver rests his feet on a pair of driver footrests which are affixed to the frame in a usual manner. The rear passenger rests his feet on a pair of passenger footrests . The passenger footrests are independently pivotally connected to the frame and are able to pivot about an axis of rotation from a supporting position which is generally horizontal as shown in to a non supporting position which is generally vertical . The ATV further includes an adjustment mechanism for independently vertically adjusting the passenger footrests to accommodate passengers of varying height. The vertical adjustment mechanism may be a ratchet like system having a plurality of notches permitting the passenger footrests to be raised or lowered with ease. Alternatively the vertical adjustment mechanism may be a plunger and hole mechanism as depicted in where a spring loaded plunger with a knob is able to mate with one of a plurality of vertically spaced holes in a box beam affixed to the vehicle frame. The footrest is affixed to a square collar that may translate vertically with respect to the box beam when the knob is pulled and the plunger is withdrawn from the hole. In this embodiment to fold the footrest into the non supporting i.e. stowed position the footrest must first be raised to the top hole to give the needed rotational clearance . It may also be possible to modify the driver footrest or running board to provide sufficient lower clearance to permit the footrest to be folded downward instead of upward. Alternatively axis could be moved closer to the footrest to ensure proper clearance without having to raise the footrest to the top hole. Movement of the footrest from a foot supporting position to a non foot supporting position is locked by a spring loaded plunger with a knob that is able to mate with one of a plurality of holes in a box beam affixed to the vehicle frame.

As shown in not only are the footrests pivotable and vertically adjustable but the angle of inclination or angle of attack of the footrests may also be adjusted so as to adapt the inclination angle of the footrest to a comfortable or ergonomic angle. As depicted in a nut is tighten to prevent rotational movement over axis . Movement over axis provides an horizontal adjustment of the footrest. Other kind of mechanisms providing height or angle adjustments could be used without departing from the scope of the present invention.

While the left and right passenger footrests are preferably independently pivotable inclinable and vertically adjustable it would be possible to devise a mechanism not shown to kinematically couple the left and right passenger footrests so that they move in unison i.e. so that pivoting inclining or vertically adjusting one passenger footrest causes the counterpart passenger footrest to pivot incline or vertically adjust in an identical manner.

Depicted in is a close up perspective view of driver and passenger footrests. The driver footrest has an anti skid surface topography and a cleat or crenellated member for providing traction to the sole of a driver s shoe or boot. Likewise the passenger footrest which is able to pivot about the axis of rotation has an anti skid surface and a cleat or crenellated member to provide good traction or grip to the sole of the passenger s shoe or boot. Since the rear passenger sits higher than the driver the rear footrests are on average higher than the driver footrests by a vertical distance X which will depend on the precise configuration of the vehicle. The driver footrests and the passenger footrests sit between the front fender and the rear fender and define a foot well of length F which is also determined by the exact vehicle configuration. It is standard to disposed the passenger seat a little higher than the driver seat to allow the passenger to see in forward direction over the driver.

A second embodiment is shown in in which the ATV has three straddle type seats namely the driver seat a first passenger seat and a second passenger seat . The second passenger seat has a backrest . As in the first embodiment the driver rests his feet on the driver footrests which has a cleat . A first passenger who sits on the first passenger seat rests his feet on a first pair of passenger footrests while a second passenger who sits on the second passenger seat rests his feet on a second pair of passenger footrests . Both the first passenger footrests and the second passenger footrests are able to pivot about respective axes of rotation . Furthermore both the first and second passenger footrests have cleats for providing traction and grip and for engaging the heel of a sole or boot to ensure that the passengers sit comfortably and securely on the ATV which is especially important when traversing rough terrain . As illustrated in the first and second passenger footrests may also be vertically adjustable. A pair of vertical adjustment mechanisms may be provided as was shown in to ensure that both pairs of passenger footrests may be adjusted to accommodate passengers of different heights. An horizontal adjustment mechanism provides the passenger s footrest to adapt to the specific ergonomic of the passenger by preferably inclining rearward the foot rest.

Still referring to a first storage area is configured under the first passenger footrest and a second storage area is configured under the second passenger footrest . The addition of the volume behind the driver s footrest provides a large storage volume when both passenger s footrests are in the stowed configuration.

In each of the embodiments described above the passenger footrest may pivot or flip between a supporting position where it is generally horizontal and perpendicular to the side of the vehicle and a non supporting position where it is generally vertical and parallel to the side of the vehicle . In the non supporting position the passenger footrests preferably fold flush with the vehicle s frame or body paneling as shown in . Likewise the adjustment mechanism may be integrated so as to be generally flush with the body paneling i.e. lateral or side fairing as shown in .

In the embodiment shown in the driver footrests may extend all the way back to the rear fender . This is a versatile design because when there is no passenger the passenger footrests can be folded up flush with the body paneling to permit cargo such as a fuel container or a toolbox to be stored on a rear portion of the driver footrest as illustrated in . The cargo may be secured with a restraint such as a strap or band on cargo surface . A lower end of the restraint is anchored to the vehicle at an anchor point while an upper end is removably connected to the vehicle at a connection point not shown . For smaller pieces of cargo the footrests need not be folded up and may be latched or restrained under the passenger footrests. When a passenger wishes to sit behind the driver the restraint is undone the cargo is removed and the rear footrests are flipped down from the non supporting position shown in to the supporting position shown in and .

Another embodiment of the present invention includes a storage compartment in the footrest as depicted in . The footrest is made of injection molded plastic and forms a cavity to store cargo. This storage compartment is closed by lid and sealed by seal . The lid is pivotally attached to the footrest and moves according to hinge . Mechanical fasteners can be used to secure the lid to the footrest. A rotatable elongated key passes through opening and secures the lid to the footrest when turned in such a way the key is not aligned with the opening.

A locking mechanism not shown locks the footrest in either the foot supporting position or the stowed position. Intermediate positions can be selected as well. A hole and plunger type locking mechanism is preferably included in the footrest so it can be released when the user desires to change the footrest position.

The folding flip down footrests may be used alone or in conjunction with the vertical adjustment mechanism. Although the folding and vertically adjustable footrests are illustrated as being the rear passenger footrests it would be possible to make the front footrests folding or vertically adjustable as well. The folding flip down footrest can be replaced with any equivalent mechanism that permits the footrests to be moved from a supporting position to a non supporting position. The footrests could extend and retract laterally by sliding or swinging from a recess in the vehicle body to a supporting position. Persons skilled in the art will appreciate that other mechanisms may be used to move the footrests from a non supporting position to a supporting position. For instance the retractable footrests may be spring loaded. Optionally a sensor may be provided to detect whether the footrest is in the non supporting or supporting position.

Furthermore the movable and adjustable footrests described herein can be utilized not only on one seat two seat or multi seat ATVs but also on other types of vehicles especially straddle type recreational vehicles where external footrests are present. The movable and adjustable footrests may be used on snowmobiles personal watercraft and motorcycles to provide comfort and stability to a rear passenger riding behind the driver.

The embodiments of the invention described above are therefore intended to be exemplary only. The scope of the invention is intended to be limited solely by the scope of the appended claims.

