---

title: NBC marker light
abstract: An NBC marker light is designed to be simplistic, lightweight, and expendable. The case is two pieces, designed for ease of assembly. The assembly includes a circuit card, one or more batteries, light sources, typically IR and visible LEDs, and a custom designed rotary switch. A diffuser is designed to enhance side visibility in all directions.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07298244&OS=07298244&RS=07298244
owner: The United States of America as Represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07298244
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050824
---
This application claims priority from U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 604 381 filed Aug. 25 2004 herein incorporated by reference in its entirety.

The invention relates to enhancing the visibility of the current nuclear biological and chemical weapon NBC marking system utilizing a visible and IR flashing light.

Throughout the 1980s the Chemical Corps sought a nuclear biological and chemical NBC reconnaissance capability that would prevent the possibility of an unwarned encounter with contaminated terrain. With the type classification of the German Transportpanzer 1 Fuchs vehicle as the standard NBC reconnaissance asset the U.S. Army first became capable of rapidly detecting terrain contaminated with chemical agents. The U.S. variant of this vehicle was designated as the M93A1 Fox Nuclear Biological and Chemical Reconnaissance System. The system includes a marker set which consists of a weighted base a wire mast and pennants for each class of NBC hazard. Enough components to assemble 175 markers are stored inside the crew compartment of the vehicle. There is a marker chute at the rear of the vehicle which allows assembled markers to be dropped outside without compromising the collective protection system of the vehicle.

Starting with World War I 1914 1918 various methods of marking contaminated areas have been used. All have shared the same goal preventing an unwarned encounter with a chemically contaminated area. The protocol for annotating the pennant or marker has remained relatively unchanged over the years. When emplaced the unit the date time group and the hazard are written on the marker typically using a grease pencil. The identification of these markers is a common task at Skill Level 1 for all soldiers found in Soldier Training Publication STP 21 1 SMCT Soldier s Manual of Common Tasks Skill Level 1 task number 031 503 1019 React to Chemical or Biological Hazard Attack . The adequacy of the Fox marker system was an issue during the field testing of the system before its type classification. With the limited number of markers on board it was clear that placing them around a typical contaminated area would immediately consume the entire basic load of markers. Soldiers also raised issues concerning the visibility of the markers during periods of darkness and the limited amount of information available at the marker. Following the type classification field units began to report that the markers were difficult to see and tended to tip over in rough terrain.

In 1997 the U.S. Army Chemical School s Directorate of Combat Developments at Fort McClellan Ala. drafted a concept for the digital marking of contaminated areas. An evaluation of a concept entitled Smart Marker was proposed. In 1998 the U.S. Army Maneuver Support Battle Lab Fort Leonard Wood Mo. managed a limited scale in house project designed to demonstrate a long duration infrared IR beacon. A circuit was then assembled based upon an LM3909 integrated circuit and other components purchased at a local electronics store.

The goal of this early experiment was to determine if a small thumbnail sized 1 centimeter by 1 centimeter IR beacon could be used to improve the visibility of a Fox NBC marker for a period of two weeks without a battery change. This experiment was a success the beacon worked for 87 days on one AAA battery without a failure.

The success of the beacon project prompted an investigation into the scope of the capabilities that could be included in a marking system product improvement. The Maneuver Support Center Battle Lab was sponsoring an Army advanced technology demonstration that looked at the development of decision tool software for NBC personnel. The prototype software was installed on a commercially available Windows CE based personal data assistant PDA . The PDA mirrored the capabilities of laptop computers with the same graphics text files database utilities and IR port. When the software contractor delivered the products they were demonstrated on a PDA that also had a personal computer radio frequency RF modem card for Internet access. This allowed the user to obtain online maps via a Web site. Further investigation revealed small Global Positioning System integrated circuits that could be used inside a Smart Marker.

A demonstration to transfer a field survey form and a graphic hazard from a laptop to a PDA was conducted. This caused further interest in the concept. The Smart Marker concept was revised and improved based on the combination of technology demonstrations market surveys and collateral readings resulting in development of a U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command Concept Evaluation Program CEP proposal.

The funding needed to conduct the Smart Marker CEP was approved in 1999. The goals of the program were to improve the visibility of the marker and increase the amount of information it makes available. A statement of work was then prepared and a solicitation for bid issued. The University of Missouri Rolla was selected for the contract and work began. Government personnel provided the background information on the concept and its goals for the experiment. The one government specified constraint for the design team was to use commercial off the shelf COTS technology or components whenever possible.

The project was partitioned into four phases and transitioning from one phase to the next was contingent upon the results of an in progress review IPR . Phase I was a front end analysis that examined the varying methods of addressing the problems of the existing markers. Phase II was the fabrication of breadboards alpha prototypes that demonstrated function and potential and resolved any shortcomings of the existing system within the constraints specified. Phase III involved fabricating and demonstrating functioning prototypes for field demonstration. Phase IV was the demonstration of a working prototype in a limited objective experiment.

There were three senior design teams assigned to develop three different designs. Each team consisted of one electronics computer engineering student and two mechanical engineering students. Two of the teams also had one engineering management student each. The three teams arrived at two design approaches. Two of the groups elected to repackage a PDA to take advantage of its built in functionality. The other team opted for the use of COTS electronic components that were coordinated by a microcontroller. Some time after the work had begun the teams were reorganized to partition the effort. The three mechanical teams remained but the electronics development team was consolidated.

The researchers used computer assisted design and manufacture to create the marker prototypes. Each team had a different solution to the problem of marker stability. One team decided upon a multipod approach using multiple short legs that provided at least three points of contact regardless of its directional orientation. The multipod approach was the closest to the design of the existing marker but the approach did not demonstrate well during the field trials. An alternative design approach used a counterweighted cylinder with a self orienting antenna mast. This technique had the advantage of simplicity of design but was difficult to deploy from the Fox and suffered from durability problems. The most successful mechanical design had articulated legs and was self righting. When cost was considered it was decided that this approach however elegant was not practical.

The electronics module was the most successful element of the design approach. Initially the design teams had two different approaches to the electronic functions. As the teams reviewed the requirements it became obvious that most of the requirements could be met with a PDA. The battery well keyboard and visual display are the biggest parts of the PDA. These parts are unnecessary to the marker function. Two of the teams concluded that a PDA could be repackaged to meet the need. The third team thought that this approach was inefficient and that a fresh breadboard should be developed using miniature COTS electronic components. This approach was selected at a midpoint IPR.

With this decision the teams were reorganized and a composite team was created to design an electronics module that was compatible with all three mechanical designs. In response to the reorganization the scope of work statement was adjusted. This team was given a size constraint for the marker and was instructed to conduct a design to fit study. The idea was that the actual device could be larger than the design constraint if standard design practices could configure the electronics to fit the constraint. The engineers took a modular approach placing the components inside a clear plastic enclosure. The use of a miniature frequency hopping transceiver ensured that it would be possible to download the marker s data from standoff distances.

A standard graphic interface was designed so that service members who are familiar with WINDOWS products could use the supporting software easily. This approach was an unqualified success because personnel who were familiar with WINDOWS applications had no difficulty using the prototype software. The terminal used in the field was a standard military contract laptop computer with a Windows NT operating system. Accordingly soldiers with experience using these tools had no challenges with the Smart Marker and its supporting software.

The field experimentation was very successful. The Smart Marker concept evaluation demonstrated that by leveraging commercially available technology it is possible to improve the Fox s M93A1 Fox Nuclear Biological and Chemical Reconnaissance Systems marking of hazard areas dramatically. Simply adding different flags and a commercially available stick on beacon makes a significant difference in the ability to detect the marker during periods of limited visibility. Leveraging available technology allows the standoff download of detailed hazard information via RF modem or digital download via the IR or the hardwire communication port. In the case of the RF mode detailed hazard data was visible in the cab of a truck 300 meters before the marker was encountered. While this project focused upon the Fox its findings could be useful for a number of different applications such as minefield hazard and traffic control marking.

The current method of tactically marking NBC contaminated areas utilizes a weighted self righting base with an 18 inch staff that has a flag attached. This marker is deployed through a sleeve in the hull of the NBC recon vehicle which limits the overall length and diameter. The visibility of this item is limited to day time only and depending on the viewing angle can be nearly invisible from 50 feet away. Night time visibility is currently marginal reflectivity at best. This allows soldiers to accidentally enter contaminated areas. A need exists for a device to warn soldiers of a contaminated area up to 500 meters away while still being deployable through the NBC recon vehicle sleeve.

The invention relates to an NBC warning light including a plurality of warning indicators comprising an infrared light source and a visible light source a electronics assembly operatively connected to selectively operate said warning indicators a switch said switch having a plurality of operable positions wherein each of said operable positions commands said electronics assembly and a power source.

The NBC marker light is designed to be simplistic lightweight and expendable. The case is two pieces designed for ease of assembly. The assembly typically includes a circuit card one or two or more coin batteries IR and visible LEDs and a custom designed rotary switch. A diffuser is designed to enhance side visibility in all directions.

The warning indicators preferably include an infrared IR light source A and a visible light source B which can be independently operated to actuate multi position switch depending upon the selected mode. The mode can be selected by rotating a selection collar to align with indicia provided on either the upper case or the lower case . Additionally selection collar can be integral with either of the upper case or the lower case such that rotation of the upper case with respect to lower case or vise versa rotates selection collar .

Typically marker light has a generally cylindrical shape having an outer diameter of between 1 and 5 inches preferably between about 1 and 3 inches for example approximately 1.125 inches. The length of the marker light is typically between 1 and 5 inches preferably between 2 and 4 inches for example approximately 3 inches long.

Preferably both the upper case and the bottom case are injection molded and formed from black ABS plastic. However any construction is permitted. For example other plastics such as polyolefins natural materials such as wood or metals or composites may be utilized. However the particular construction must be capable of withstanding the environmental conditions of the expected use.

In a first embodiment the upper case and the lower case snap together permanently. As shown in lower ends of tabs snap fit over a rim of the lower case . The lower case of the case rotates in the upper case to actuate a switch contained as part of the battery and electronics assembly . Positions are identified by a raised bar on the bottom of the lower case and engraved tabs e.g. tabs on the top part of the light . Typical markings include WH S WH F a solid raised bar IR F IR S indicating white steady white flash off infrared flash and infrared flash respectively. In one embodiment the indicia are provided on selection collar as shown in . The function of light when each of the various indicia is selected will be hereinafter described.

The switch is a typically rotary cam actuating five nickel plated contacts that mate with adjoining surfaces on the circuit board. The switch can be heat staked on to the circuit board which is designed to control flash length intensity and frequency of the selected warning indicators. Typical configurations for the circuitry are shown in .

The battery and electronics assembly also includes a power source such as a pair of batteries . In one embodiment the batteries are CR2032 type batteries held in place by a battery clip and typically have a life of a minimum of 72 hours at 20 C.

While the preferred embodiment of light is not designed to be re used upon expiration of the power source it is within the scope of the invention to produce light with a replaceable power source. Typically this is accomplished by making upper case removable from lower case and batteries removable. Additionally the power source may provided with a rechargeable apparatus such as a small solar cell or a weight which when moved generates an electrical charge sufficient to recharge the power source.

In a preferred embodiment the circuit board slides into a locating slot in the upper case and is held in place by the lower housing . A clear polycarbonate diffuser at the top covers both IR LED A and Visible light LED B. One side of the diffuser is typically provided with a circular loop of about inch diameter. illustrate the loop attached to its diffuser and a five fingered clip attached to or extending from the upper case . This loop is designed to secure the bottom of the NBC flag utilizing a standard zip tie. This loop and zip tie can be used to secure the light to any number of other objects requiring marking. The 5 finger clip is designed to securely attach the light to the current NBC Marker staff pole . shows a portion of the embodiment of attached to the pole by the five fingered clip .

The lower portion of the case also typically has a slot for a battery disconnect pull tab for shipping. shows a bottom view of the embodiment of with the pull tab and slot . The disconnect tab has one or more punched holes to connect a trip wire not shown to use as a covert IR warning device.

The invention includes selectable Infrared IR and Visible light sources A B to upgrade and enhance the current NBC marker system. This is a unique design that fits seamlessly into the current NBC marking system without modification. This device provides a means to increase the day and nighttime visibility of the current NBC marker system by several hundred meters while utilizing the marker s current staff and base. The light is designed to be small lightweight and disposable. Its intended performance is to be visible at 500 meters at night and have a minimum longevity of 72 hours at minus twenty degrees Celsius. It has two flash frequencies one hertz and one and one half hertz for either IR or Visible light. It is designed with a clip on the case that mates with the current NBC marker staff and a tie loop to secure the bottom of the marker flag in the correct position for added reflectivity. Its rotary switching mechanism has five modes fast and slow frequency rates for IR or Visible light and an off position. The rotary switch allows for easy mode selection while wearing MOPP4 Mission Oriented Protective Posture level 4 gear. For example at MOPP4 soldiers should first mask then don protective gloves. Overgarments should be closed and then overboots should be put on .

The rotary switch also provides positive position lock for feedback while wearing gloves. The overall weight is typically less than 10 oz. and will not affect the self righting capability of the NBC marker. It also features a 10 second turn on delay to allow placement and movement before marking the area.

The operation of light preferably proceeds as follows. As packaged and shipped light is packaged with the switch in the OFF position wherein the raised bar on the bottom of the lower part of the case would be aligned with the OFF marking . When a Visible Light Mode VLM is desired while holding the upper case with the diffuser pointing away the lower case clockwise is rotated to align the raised bar on the bottom of the lower part of the lower case with the correct marking. The first position associated with the marking WH F 23 is visible light fast speed. The second position associated with the marking WH S 25 is the visible light slow speed.

To activate the infrared light mode ILM the lower case is rotated counter clockwise with respect to the upper case . The first position associated with the marking IR F not shown is infrared light fast speed. The second position associated with the marking 1F S 27 is the infrared light slow speed. This feature allows the light to designate clear safe paths through the contaminated area. This is typically done by placing a series of markers flashing at slow speed in a first line and a second set of markers flashing at high speed in a second line alongside the first line to define the path between the two lines.

Although the markings are described as coinciding with only five different operation modes i.e. off VLM fast and slow and ILM fast and slow it is within the scope of the invention to modify the operation modes. For example in one embodiment operation modes can include additional VLM and or ILM speeds to indicate various conditions such type of NBC or decontamination status of the area. In such a case the number of markings would be increased.

The warning indicators may also include other warning signals such as various colors or signals invisible to the naked eye. Such signals can include ultra violet or radio signals which require specialized goggles or other equipment to process or analyze the signal.

To mount the light for use in the field typically the light is clipped to the NBC marker staff with a lens loop just below the bottom of the flag and light is secured at the bottom of the flag to the loop using the tie provided with the flag. The case of the light also typically has a slot for a battery disconnect pull tab for shipping. The pull tab is removed just prior to deploying the marker.

Although light is not designed to be decontaminated in some embodiments it may be constructed to withstand a decontamination procedure.

Furthermore although light is designed to be manually actuated it is within the scope of the invention to equip light with an automatic detection and analysis apparatus not shown which can actuate switch upon detection of any NBC contaminant with manual activation. In these embodiments the apparatus can be designed as described by U.S. Published Application No. 2004 0257227 and U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 278 539 and 5 576 952 each of which is incorporated by reference it its entirety.

The light may also be designed to give an advance warning to personnel outside the visible range of the light by transmitting a signal to such personnel which signal can include various data such as type of contaminant and location and may be activated upon a command from apparatus or simply when light is manually activated.

It should be noted that while IR LEDs and visible light LEDs are shown in the above described embodiments other measurable signal generators may be substituted. For example two different color visible lights could be employed and or bulbs rather than LEDs could be employed.

In view of the above it should be apparent that embodiments other than those expressly described above come within the spirit and scope of the present invention. Thus the present invention is not limited by the above provided description but rather is defined by the claims appended hereto.

