---

title: Rules-based health care referral method and system
abstract: An Internet-based system and method facilitates interactive placing and acceptance of patient referrals within a health care community. A referring health care provider accesses the proposed specialty clinic or other provider through the system, identifies the patient and pertinent medical conditions, and responds to interactive queries put by the system to qualify the patient and his or her medical condition for the referral. The system automatically accepts or rejects the referral, proposes prior tests or treatments for the patient before another referral attempt is made, or accepts the referral subject to tests being completed. Accepted referrals are then scheduled by staff depending on their urgency as indicated in the interactive querying system. Rules governing the interactive querying are set by physicians and managers of the community and can be changed as conditions warrant. Security of patient information in the system in accordance with federal HIPPA requirements is readily provided via passwords and user log-ins.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07904315&OS=07904315&RS=07904315
owner: 
number: 07904315
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050114
---
Priority of my provisional U.S. application Ser. No. 60 536 877 filed Jan. 16 2004 is claimed under 35 USC 120.

The present invention relates to methods and systems for referring matters from one provider or supplier to another across enterprises in a health system it relates more specifically to patient referrals between and among health care providers such as doctors clinics technical service providers and the like.

Referrals from general health care providers to specialists must often be made in the modern health care system. Such referrals have been done by telephone or by prescription slips sending patients from one provider to another with long waits for appointments even when critical care was needed. Referrals were often incorrect and done for incorrect reasons without proper documentation and or follow up to see that proper care was available to or was obtained by particular patients.

As healthcare providers assemble multi enterprise based health systems to serve people in their communities particularly for example the poor the uninsured and the underinsured the size and scope of operations places unique new demands on their people their processes and unfortunately their patients. The use of hand written referrals sent by fax couriers and mail are required to bridge across the various information systems and operating policies and procedures inherent in any cross enterprise operation. As providers examine methods to improve these operations they continue to focus on these three key essentials 

Many of specialty clinics have significant overloads of patients. At the same time significant numbers of the patients in the appointment books are in the wrong place or have a low clinical need or acuity while many other patients who truly need the skills of the resource are unable to get timely appointments.

Patients arrive without complete workup information available to the specialist. Today s system too often relies more on who you know rather than on the pure clinical facts of the case. Many times patients must wait far too long to get appropriate medical treatment.

The lack of consistent feedback to referring physicians and of convenient routing processes breaks down the continuity of care. In too many cases specialists become primary care physicians for the patients.

Problems amplify as one moves geographically and structurally away from a health care community s traditional main campus. Community clinics both intra enterprise and extra enterprise must deal with extensive delays in obtaining an appointment for their patients regardless of the lead times of the clinics . Clinics have the extra burden of communicating the appointment to the patient long after they have left the provider s office. Adding to the problem is the fact that the appointment was made with no patient input hence the appointments are often not suitable for the patient. These factors contribute greatly to the exorbitant no show rates experienced across many health systems particularly public systems.

Current operational approaches wind up holding a large unscheduled backlog of referral orders with some referrals being as much as 9 12 months old. Many of these patients need relatively basic care but they are in an out of sight out of mind status with their health care providers.

In building an effective referral system addressing just the transporting of referrals as by implementing Internet order entry alone provides little improvement to the process. A method to address a range of needs is required. These needs include 

In the healthcare industry physicians are the only individuals who have the full knowledge required to define clinical rules that can best accomplish these goals. However physicians are not trained to develop rules in a manner that a programmer can use to transfer the rule into XML or similar computer code. A standardized method of documentation is required to bridge the gulf between the medical and information technology worlds.

It is an object of this invention to use the power of the Internet and of personal computers and servers connected to the Internet to facilitate and streamline patient referral processes among health care providers improving and providing appropriate levels of care within the health care systems. A rules based patient referral system is disclosed wherein a referring provider must qualify a patient and the patient s medical conditions test results and the like before the referral is accepted by the referred to provider. The rules are applied sequentially and interactively as the referral is being made and if added tests or information are needed from the referring level or prior to the referral visit then they can be ordered and obtained before the visit to the second provider occurs.

According to the invention the Internet is used to communicate among terminals of health care providers in a community and across enterprises using secure communications methods and protocols. A provider who needs a patient to receive specialized tests evaluations and or treatment goes on line into the referral system of invention and through the applicable rule connects with a specific second provider whether a physician clinic laboratory technician or the like. The patient and his or her medical condition are qualified for a visit to the referred to provider through a series of rules based questions put interactively to the referring provider. If the referral is appropriate then an appointment is made immediately if added tests or information are needed then they are ordered automatically for results to come in time for the appointment. If the referral is not appropriate the referring provider is advised of why and what alternatives appear suitable. Records are kept of each attempted referral for administration of the system and the providers in the community subject to federal and local confidentiality and security requirements.

The specific rules are subject to constant testing and revision so that if problems or opportunities appear they can be dealt with or implemented without disrupting the operation of the referral system. Urgent need cases can be handled within the system or marked for special handling manually supported by the system.

At the end of the specification is an XML format document that defines the programming language specifications into which rules are assembled for incorporation into one preferred embodiment of the invention.

As the invention was initially developed for use in public healthcare this description of its implementation and uses are specific to a public health system. However the invention is intended for application outside the public health system as well.

In order for the invention to function in the intended manner XML rules containing admission criteria must be designed usually by cooperation between the healthcare provider and a consultant. These rules provide the sole method of this embodiment for the system of the invention to determine clinical need or acuity of a patient for particular treatments.

The rule documentation method designed for this system is used to guide healthcare providers to visualize their rule construction options. The method permits a knowledgeable health care consultant to draw out the full range of ideas and it serves as an iterative tool in the development or modification of any referral rule.

This method of yes no multiple choice questions of this invention is one that physicians easily understand and can quickly and effectively work with. The same documentation method when paired with the rule programming specifications set forth below allows anyone familiar with XML programming to code rules that will interface with the operational system code of the invention.

The invention is to be used by all providers in the patient referral process. At the beginning of a referral lifecycle the invention is used by the referring provider to place and to track outbound patient referrals. Once a referral is entered and accepted it is directed to a work queue at the referred to clinic where it awaits processing. Work queue administrators in the specialty care clinics access the work queues and schedule the referrals based on their clinical priority. The specific schedule details are entered into an Internet referral information system of the invention that performs automatic notification back to the ordering provider and the patient as well as reminder notices to the patient. The method of communication can include email fax printed notices or any known Interactive Voice Response system IVR .

On the day of the patient appointment clinic staff accesses the daily referrals for use by their physicians before the consultation. Specialty clinic administrators referring site managers and hospital administrators use reporting functions in the system of the invention throughout this process to track and measure the referral process.

In compliance with federal HIPPA regulations users are required to log into the computers operating the system of the invention using a unique username and alphanumeric password. The invention relies on a role based authorization control RBAC security system that allows each unique username to hold one or more roles and permissions for a single username. This feature is meant to create safeguards against mistakes and abuses of the system of the invention. The roles and permissions are built to accommodate specific requirements of the health system. For example medical residents frequently rotate through many clinics during time of their residency so to track a referral the name of the attending physician for the clinic that the resident is working in will also be placed on the order. This level of detail is achieved through RBAC which identifies each resident s role in the system as resident and ensures that the attending physician s name is attached to the referral.

RBAC also adjusts the menu options available when a user logs in which options are keyed to the permissions and security levels the user holds. For example a referring physician sees only a few options because of the way such person is intended to use the invention. A referring provider is able to manage their own information to submit referrals and to explore the rules. On the other hand a user in a management role has access to these functions and also to detailed reporting features sites queues and user management tools. Managers use these functions to monitor and alter user settings in the system of the invention as appropriate for instance when a medical resident is assigned to a different practice in the hospital.

When a referring provider uses the invention to place a referral he or she is required to select a clinic and or procedure from a list provided. The invention includes a specific feature a variable ordering template which allows system managers to customize the clinics and procedures available for particular referring providers to order from. For example the managers may want to allow a group of referring providers access only to certain specialty care clinics located in their immediate geographic area.

When a referring provider selects a clinic or procedure the invention requests demographic information as to the patient and then presents the provider with a first corresponding rule. This rule is one created upon consultation between a specialty care physician and a consultant. The system of the invention treats the rule as data therefore after a rule is coded into XML and activated in the referral system of the invention referring providers interact with the rule in a question answer format. The way the referring provider answers these questions determines the subsequent question and the rejection or acceptance and associated clinical priority of the referral. Referring provider interaction with the rules is illustrated in the following example the asthma rules above are used in this example .

The referring provider logs into the system of the invention selects Asthma Clinic from the available clinics and is then prompted by the following questions and gives the following answers 

In addition to determining the clinical need or acuity of a referral the rule based system of the invention will also automatically generate referrals for any other required procedures. For example if a patient receives an accepted referral to the Pulmonary clinic but needs to have a current MRI before he or she is seen in the Pulmonary clinic the system of the invention will spawn an additional order for an MRI at the time the referral to the Pulmonary clinic is placed. The invention links all the related referrals so the referring physician and the patient are notified about the spawned order the additional order is scheduled and processed in the same manner as an ordinary or primary referral.

When the referral is accepted by the system for the referred to clinic a physical document containing information specific to that referral is printed on the ordering physician s printer. In addition to the referral information a default confirmation message specific to the clinic and or procedure being ordered is printed at the top of the confirmation page. Both the referral information and the default confirmation message are printed and given to the patient as they are meant as reference tools for the patient. Physicians and administrators in each specialty care clinic use the system of the invention to create the default confirmation message. This message will consist of any text chosen by the specialty care clinic and is intended as a vehicle for communication between the clinic and the patient before the patient s appointment. This communication also will convey information pertinent to the patient s appointment such as directions to the clinic contact information for the clinic and any dietary make up or other restrictions for the visit.

The urgency level assigned to a referral affects how it is scheduled and processed. Every day a healthcare provider assigned as a work queue staff accesses his or her clinic s work queue in accordance with an additional feature of the invention. Each accepted referral resides in the work queue for the appropriate clinic or procedure and waits at most one day to be processed. When the work queue staff accesses the queue they see a list of all the referrals yet to be scheduled ordered by urgency. The work queue staff then opens and optionally prints each referral and schedules each one based on the available appointment times in the clinic. The referrals may for instance be printed in batches of 100 a batch printing in a large clinic. Clinic administrators and hospital management access work queue reports that detail this process including the time used to process referrals and the number of outstanding referrals not yet scheduled.

Information regarding each referral is stored on a designated server under HIPPA compliant security. Storing all referrals enables several features of the invention to function including facilitating provider communication regarding referral status patient communications regarding appointment times and management reporting functions.

Frequently new research and information in medicine make current practices obsolete. The system and method of the present invention contain a rules management module that allows managers to access rules and to change them to reflect changes in clinical practices and procedures. It is intended that managers will communicate with specialty care physicians to stay abreast of changes in the medical field and cooperate fully with them to make necessary changes to the rules of the invention as such changes become appropriate.

The purpose of these specifications is to allow the creation of an object structure in an XML file that describes a decision set rule to the point that it can be rendered by a referral information system without any other input or data. The XML file will conform to the XML schema that will be used to insure that the description is reliable.

RBAC should be implemented based on a clinic s existing organizational structure keeping in mind the personnel factors capabilities and restrictions that may exist.

Implementation of the variable ordering template should occur before the invention is activated. It is intended that hospital administrators with control over the affected specialty care clinics and referring clinics make a determination of which services and clinics will be made available to the referring clinics. When the decision is made a consultant sets up the initial variable ordering templates before the invention is activated. After the initial setup of the variable ordering templates the hospital managers will have full control over any future changes. It is intended that only upper level managers and hospital administrators have access to this feature as it can drastically impact demand on healthcare services.

In order for referrals to be prioritized physician defined admission criteria in the form of rules need to be implemented in the form of questions to be posed to the referring provider. The admission criteria need to be organized into a logical format conducive to the question answer format of the invention. The referring provider encounters and interacts with the rule at the time the referral is placed. Implementing this procedure is not difficult as the predefined format of the XML code is designed to be used with minimal training. Providing the referring provider with a username password and appropriate access level are the only necessary steps to ensure interaction between the provider and the rules. The invention assumes Internet connectivity and a browser that can work with XML code.

The default confirmation messages that print with the patient s referral are as stated above defined by each specialty care clinic individually and can be changed at any time. Existing clinics have the ability to change their default confirmation messages at any time. The authority to change a default confirmation message for a clinic is only intended for the clinic administrator.

After a referral is scheduled the invention provides information to the patient regarding the appointment time and location. This feature can be implemented through mail fax email or the IVR and requires the patient to confirm the appointment or reschedule the appointment.

The manner in which work queue management is implemented depends greatly on the personnel resources available to a specific specialty care clinic however there are general guidelines that must be followed. Work queues are designed with varying levels of authority that grant access to features appropriate to each level of authority. A work queue administrator work queue manager and work queue staff need to be assigned for each clinic that will process referrals.

The work queue staff has the lowest level of access and is able to process a referral print batches reschedule a referral and view basic queue reports. The procedure for processing referrals begins with the work queue staff printing a batch of referrals which for instance may come in batches of 100 referrals. Then the work queue staff accesses the schedule for the clinic finds an appropriate time for the referral to be handled and schedules the appointment in accordance with the invention. At any time the work queue staff can reschedule a referral if necessary. The work queue manager has one additional responsibility in addition to the functions of the work queue staff managing print batches. This function allows the work queue manager to reset a print batch if it printed incorrectly or was printed in error. In addition to all lower level functions the work queue administrator has the ability to add or remove people from the work queue as required.

It is intended that different people will hold each of the above described roles in a specialty care clinic. However due to personnel constraints it is sometimes necessary for one person to hold several or all of these roles. The invention allows users to hold several titles at the same time to accommodate this reality. It is intended that hospital administrators measure the performance and accuracy of the admission criteria consulting with specialty care physicians to make revisions when necessary.

In order to implement the HIPPA compliant database the invention needs to be stored on either a secure server managed either by the health care facility or by a consultant. Once this is achieved all the necessary functions that enable data warehousing of referral information occur automatically through the code in the invention so no further implementation is required.

There is no need to implement the rules management module independently as it is a standard feature of the invention. However detailed processes are required for successful use of this feature. A computer savvy consultant trains the health care managers and IT personnel to code test validate and activate the rules that run in accordance with the invention. The administrators or their IT staff must also understand how to upload download and manage the version log of all the existing rules.

Many variations may be made in the invention as shown and its manner of use without departing from the principles of the invention as described herein and or as claimed as our invention. Minor variations will not avoid the use of the invention.

