---

title: Mobile e-mail confirmation support
abstract: Techniques for providing services to a mobile device not offered on the device are provided. The techniques include intercepting a message from a mobile device at a server. It is then determined if a service should be performed, where the service is not offered on the mobile device. A confirmation message is sent to the mobile device requesting confirmation that the service should be performed. The message is sent in a channel that the mobile device can communicate through. If a reply message is received from the mobile device, it is determined if an action should taken based on the reply message. For example, a confirmation message may ask if the service should be performed and if the answer is yes, the service is then performed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07570964&OS=07570964&RS=07570964
owner: Oracle International Corporation
number: 07570964
owner_city: Redwood Shores
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050525
---
The present invention generally relates to mobile communications and more specifically to techniques for mobile email confirmation services.

Advances in technology have allowed a user to communicate while being mobile. For example access to email private or corporate while on the road may be provided using mobile devices. For example messages may be received using email clients on mobile devices via an Internet browser on the mobile device via messaging such as short message service SMS and multimedia message service MMS using email devices specifically configured for receiving emails blackberry and goodlink devices etc.

The applications that are used to read emails on the mobile devices are often less powerful versions of a user s email application found on a desktop computer. For example the mobile device being used may offer far fewer features than those offered on the desktop computer. This may be because the computing power of a mobile device is not sufficient to support some of the functions or it is not feasible to include the functions on the mobile device. Accordingly users have to access email without using these functions.

Some functions provided on the desktop computer are important and it may be critical that they are used. For example certain virus checking applications privacy protection applications etc. may be provided locally on the desktop computer. The applications can automatically provide the services to a user when the user is using the desktop applications. Because the applications are local the emails are not sent before the service is invoked. This is advantageous because changes can be made before the email leaves the desktop computer. However these applications may be too complicated to be included on a mobile device. This may be because of a lack of application programming interface API support lack of memory lack of computing power etc. Thus users may have to forego using the services and risk being infected by a virus or risk sending privacy information.

The present invention generally relates to using messaging in order to provide services that are not offered on a mobile device.

In one embodiment techniques for providing services to a mobile device not offered on the device are provided. The techniques include intercepting a message from a mobile device at a server. It is then determined if a service should be performed where the service is not offered on the mobile device. A confirmation message is sent to the mobile device requesting confirmation that the service should be performed. The message is sent in a channel that the mobile device can communicate through. If a reply message is received from the mobile device it is determined if an action should taken based on the reply message. For example a confirmation message may ask if the service should be performed and if the answer is yes the service is then performed.

In one embodiment a method for providing services to a mobile device not offered on the mobile device is provided. The method comprises intercepting a message from the mobile device at a server determining if a service should be performed the service not being offered on the mobile device sending a confirmation message to the mobile device requesting confirmation that the service should be performed the message sent in a channel the mobile device can communicate through and if a reply message is received from the mobile device determining an action to take based on the reply message.

In another embodiment a method for receiving services at a mobile device not offered on the mobile device is provided. The method comprises sending a message from the mobile device to a destination wherein the message in intercepted at a server the server determining if a service should be performed the service not being offered on the mobile device receiving a confirmation message at the mobile device requesting confirmation that the service should be performed the message received in a channel the mobile device can communicate through and generating a reply message at the mobile device confirming whether the service should be performed and sending the reply message to the server the server determining an action to take based on the reply message.

In yet another embodiment a system for providing services is provided. The system comprises a mobile device configured to send a message and a server configured to intercept the message from the mobile device determine if a service should be performed the service not being offered on the mobile device send a confirmation message to the mobile device requesting confirmation that the service should be performed the message sent in a channel the mobile device can communicate through and if a reply message is received from the mobile device determine an action to take based on the reply message.

In another embodiment an information storage medium having a plurality of instructions adapted to perform a set of steps for providing services to a mobile device not offered on the mobile device is provided. The steps include intercepting a message from the mobile device at a server determining if a service should be performed the service not being offered on the mobile device sending a confirmation message to the mobile device requesting confirmation that the service should be performed the message sent in a channel the mobile device can communicate through and if a reply message is received from the mobile device determining an action to take based on the reply message.

In another embodiment an information storage medium having a plurality of instructions adapted to direct an information processing device to perform a set of steps for receiving services at a mobile device not offered on the mobile device is provided. The steps include sending a message from the mobile device to a destination wherein the message in intercepted at a server the server determining if a service should be performed the service not being offered on the mobile device receiving a confirmation message at the mobile device requesting confirmation that the service should be performed the message received in a channel the mobile device can communicate through and generating a reply message at the mobile device confirming whether the service should be performed and sending the reply message to the server the server determining an action to take based on the reply message.

A further understanding of the nature and the advantages of the inventions disclosed herein may be realized by reference of the remaining portions of the specification and the attached drawings.

Mobile device may be any mobile device. For example mobile device may be a cellular telephone mobile email device personal digital assistant PDA pocket PC laptop computer etc.

Receiver may be any device configured to receive a message. For example receiver may be another mobile device or any other device such as a personal computer with an email client an instant message client etc.

Mobile device may include a mobile client that is configured to perform messaging. For example mobile client may include an application configured to communicate messages through messaging channels such as email SMS MMS push voice instant messaging etc. Mobile device may be configured to send messages through any combination of these channels.

Mobile device often offers fewer services for messaging than that offered from a desktop or networked computer. For example a desktop computer connected to a corporate network may offer a multitude of services such as virus checking services privacy protection services metadata removal services etc. These services can be offered because the computing power on a desktop computer is far greater than a mobile device .

The virus checking service offers virus checking for messages sent to and from a user. The privacy protection services scan for private or confidential information such as addresses Social Security numbers confidential information etc. and metadata removal services remove metadata that may be associated with documents such as Microsoft word documents.

The applications that perform these services all need confirmation from the user in order to perform these services. For example before any privacy information can be removed from an email the user is typically prompted with a question box asking whether the privacy information should be removed. The user can then click a yes icon typically using a mouse in order to confirm that the privacy information should be removed. The confirmation is easily provided using an application installed locally on the device.

Providing the above services on the mobile device however is often difficult. This may be because the application is not stored locally on the mobile device . Thus the service cannot be applied before a message is sent by mobile device . Also mobile device may not have the appropriate APIs or processing capabilities in order to provide the services of the application. For example mobile device may not include enough memory to install the application or may not have enough computing power to efficiently run the application.

Accordingly a service module is provided on server to provide the services. Server is remotely located from mobile device and may be any server configured to route messages for mobile device . For example server may be an email server.

Service module is configured to provide the services. These services often require confirmation from a user. Because server is remotely located from mobile device confirmation cannot be easily obtained from a user. Conventionally a pop up dialogue box is used to ask for confirmation from a user on a desktop or networked computer. A dialogue box however cannot be displayed on the mobile device because the application is not local to mobile device and also because the message has already been sent. With the desktop or networked computer the message is not sent and confirmation is requested. Because the service is not offered on mobile device the message is sent and out of the domain of mobile device .

Typically when a message leaves mobile device and reaches a server nothing can be done because the message has been sent and it will just be routed. However server is configured to intercept the message to determine if any services should be performed. Accordingly when a message is sent to a receiver service module intercepts the message and determines if a service should be provided for the message. If so a confirmation message is sent to mobile device . The confirmation message asks the user if the service should be performed on the message.

The confirmation message may be sent through any communication channels that the device communicates in. For example if mobile device communicates through SMS an SMS message may be sent asking for confirmation if the service should be provided. The user can then send an SMS to reply indicating either that the service should be performed or should not be performed. In other embodiments instant messages emails etc. may be sent.

When server receives a reply service module performs the service if a confirmation is received. If confirmation is not received the email may be sent back to mobile device for the user to correct the message or the message may be sent to a receiver without performing any services.

In step service module determines if a service should be performed for the message. For example services that need confirmation may be performed for a message if it is determined that the message qualifies for any of these services.

In step a confirmation message is generated asking for confirmation to perform the service. The confirmation message may be generated in any format that is compatible with messaging device . For example any messaging channel that the messaging device can communicate through may be used in order to format the message. In one embodiment service module stores the data formats in which messaging device may communicate. Service module determines a preferred data format and messaging channel and generates a confirmation message for that messaging channel.

In step the confirmation message is sent to mobile device through a messaging channel. For example if an SMS message was generated it is sent through an SMS messaging channel.

In step a reply is received from mobile device . For example the user may review the message and determine an appropriate response. The message may ask Would you like to remove the following confidential information that is found in the message The user may compose a response message possibly in the same format of the messaging channel the confirmation message was received in or any other messaging channel. The response message is then sent to server .

In step service module determines if confirmation is received. If the user does not give confirmation in step an action for a negative confirmation response may be taken. For example the email may be sent back to the user in order for the user to edit the email. Also the email may just be sent without providing the service. In the above example an email may be sent back to the user for removing any of the confidential information.

If the answer from the user may be yes in step the service is performed. For example the privacy information found in the message may be removed from the email. Any other actions that are required by the service module may also be performed.

In step the message is sent after the service is performed. Accordingly the message may be sent to receiver . This service may be transparent to receiver . Accordingly mobile device does not need to support the service rather mobile device just needs to be able to send messages in any communication channels in order to have the service performed.

Message interceptor is configured to intercept a message from mobile device to receiver . The message is intercepted when it is determined that a service should be performed on the message.

The message is stored in a queue . The message is stored in queue in order for service module to determine if a service should be performed. At a later time if confirmation is received and the service is performed the message may be sent from queue .

Service determiner is configured to determine a service to perform on a message. For example if settings indicate that email messages from mobile device should be scanned for privacy information service determiner determines if there is any privacy information that should be removed.

If privacy information is found confirmation message generator then generates a confirmation message to send to mobile device . The message is formatted in a messaging channel that the mobile device is configured to communicate in. This message is sent to mobile device and then a user can reply to the confirmation message.

A reply message is received at reply message receiver and service performer . If confirmation is received to perform the service the email message is retrieved from queue and the service is performed. For example privacy information may be removed from the message. The message is then sent to a receiver after the service is performed.

In one example certain corporations may scan messages for confidential information. These confidential information protection applications check a message for anything confidential in the messages sent. If confidential information is detected the user is prompted to confirm the confidential information should be removed. This service is typically not available locally on mobile device .

In this case email messages may be intercepted and confirmation messages sent to mobile device to remove confidential information in a communication channel mobile device communicates in. When confirmation is received the confidential information may be removed from the message or else the user may indicate that the email message should just be sent and server sends the email message. Typically once the email message leaves mobile device the services that are performed locally on a computing device cannot be performed. However server is configured to intercept a message and determines if services should be performed.

In another example a user may require that a read receipt is sent when an email is read. Using mobile client on mobile device the read receipt functionality may not be possible. If a user is using a desktop computer the option is available because a pop up window is provided using a local application and the user select click yes to send a read receipt or click no to not send a read receipt. This happens before the message is sent. The local application can then perform the action of sending a read receipt or not sending a read receipt. This action cannot be performed solely on mobile device . However it may be desirable in order to provide the user with the service of providing a read receipt.

In this case when a message is read by mobile device a message is sent to server . Service module intercepts the message and generates a read receipt message that is sent to mobile device . The user can then reply communicating whether the read receipt should be generated or not. If the read receipt should be generated confirmation may be sent to service module and the read receipt is generated and sent.

Bus subsystem provides a mechanism for letting the various components and subsystems of computer system communicate with each other as intended. The various subsystems and components of computer system need not be at the same physical location but may be distributed at various locations within a network. Although bus subsystem is shown schematically as a single bus alternative embodiments of the bus subsystem may utilize multiple busses.

User interface input devices may include a remote control a keyboard pointing devices a mouse trackball touchpad a graphics tablet a scanner a barcode scanner a touchscreen incorporated into the display audio input devices such as voice recognition systems microphones and other types of input devices. In general use of the term input device is intended to include all possible types of devices and ways to input information using computer system .

User interface output devices may include a display subsystem a printer a fax machine or non visual displays such as audio output devices. The display subsystem may be a cathode ray tube CRT a flat panel device such as a liquid crystal display LCD a projection device or the like. The display subsystem may also provide non visual display such as via audio output devices. In general use of the term output device is intended to include all possible types of devices and ways to output information from computer system .

Storage subsystem may be configured to store the basic programming and data constructs that provide the functionality of the computer system and of the present invention. For example according to an embodiment of the present invention software modules implementing the functionality of the present invention may be stored in storage subsystem . For example modules implementing the functionality of service module may be provided. These software modules may be executed by processor s . In a distributed environment the software modules may be stored on a plurality of computer systems and executed by processors of the plurality of computer systems. Storage subsystem may also provide a repository for storing various databases that may be used by the present invention. Storage subsystem may comprise memory subsystem and file storage subsystem .

Memory subsystem may include a number of memories including a main random access memory RAM for storage of instructions and data during program execution and a read only memory ROM in which fixed instructions are stored. File storage subsystem provides persistent non volatile storage for program and data files and may include a hard disk drive a floppy disk drive along with associated removable media a Compact Disk Read Only Memory CD ROM drive an optical drive removable media cartridges and other like storage media. One or more of the drives may be located at remote locations on other connected computers.

Computer system itself can be of varying types including a personal computer a portable computer a workstation a computer terminal a network computer a mainframe a kiosk a personal digital assistant PDA a communication device such as a cell phone or any other data processing system. Server computers generally have more storage and processing capacity then client systems. Due to the ever changing nature of computers and networks the description of computer system depicted in is intended only as a specific example for purposes of illustrating the preferred embodiment of the computer system. Many other configurations of a computer system are possible having more or fewer components than the computer system depicted in .

The present invention can be implemented in the form of control logic in software or hardware or a combination of both. The control logic may be stored in an information storage medium as a plurality of instructions adapted to direct an information processing device to perform a set of steps disclosed in embodiment of the present invention. Based on the disclosure and teachings provided herein a person of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate other ways and or methods to implement the present invention.

The above description is illustrative but not restrictive. Many variations of the invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art upon review of the disclosure. The scope of the invention should therefore be determined not with reference to the above description but instead should be determined with reference to the pending claims along with their full scope or equivalents.

