---

title: Chance meeting addition to trip planner or meeting planner
abstract: One embodiment of the present invention includes a system and method for managing a travel plan. In response to a travel plan being identified for a traveler, a search is performed for one or more persons based on a predetermined relation to the traveler. In response to identifying one or more persons based on the predetermined relation to the traveler, it is determined if the one or more such persons is to be present at a location in proximity to the traveler's location according to the travel plan. If the one or more such persons is to be present at a location in proximity to the traveler's location, an opportunity is presented to modify the travel plan to accommodate those persons.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08090707&OS=08090707&RS=08090707
owner: Rearden Commerce Inc.
number: 08090707
owner_city: San Mateo
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050707
---
This invention relates generally to procurement of services and more particularly to coordinating the group procurement of services.

Often trips particularly business trips must be planned far in advance of the departure date. In some cases it may happen that at the time of the trip people that a traveler wants to meet with may be in the same area as the traveler. However because no meeting has been scheduled to occur during the trip a traveler may be unaware of the proximity of the people that he or she potentially wants to meet.

What is clearly needed is a system and method for a chance meeting planner that helps arrange meetings with people that a traveler may be interested in meeting but whose travel plans he was not aware of when the trip was planned so he did not schedule a meeting with them during his trip.

One embodiment of the present invention includes a system and method for a chance meeting planner that helps arrange meetings with people that a traveler may be interested in meeting but whose travel plans he was not aware of when the trip was planned so he did not schedule a meeting with them during his trip.

In the following detailed description of embodiments of the invention reference is made to the accompanying drawings in which like references indicate similar elements and in which is shown by way of illustration specific embodiments in which the invention may be practiced. These embodiments are described in sufficient detail to enable those skilled in the art to practice the invention and it is to be understood that other embodiments may be utilized and that logical mechanical electrical functional and other changes may be made without departing from the scope of the present invention. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense and the scope of the present invention is defined only by the appended claims.

For example if Mark is traveling from San Francisco to Chicago and John is traveling from New York to Chicago they may have the same evening available in Chicago. The system may propose a dinner meeting for them. Or if John is planning to fly back to New York that night the system may propose for example that John take a late night flight such as a flight at 10 or 11 p.m. or even stay overnight in Chicago.

Other than using contact databases the system may look for information about contacts and their travel plans and follow certain rules about advertisement meaning that for example if Mark and John don t work for the same company Mark may make his trip private so that even if John is on Mark s preferred list John may not see that Mark is traveling. This feature is important for reasons such as for example a case where Mark decided he doesn t want to meet with John. Or in other cases due to some current political situation between the two companies or between the persons such a meeting may not be desired and the advertisement of the availability of such a meeting could create problems.

A system level overview of the operation of one embodiment of an automatic services exchange system is described by reference to . In the automatic services exchange system is illustrated as having an automatic services exchange component and an optional call center backup component . The automatic services exchange component allows users such as a user A user B user C and user D to request services from the exchange. The service requests may be sent to the exchange component through various communication media. For example user A sends its request A to the exchange component through an interactive voice response system IVR user B sends its request B to the exchange component through e mail typically a structured e mail user C sends its request C via a Web browser such as Internet Explorer or Netscape or a micro browser on a WAP enabled cellular telephone and user D send its request D through an instant messaging system IM . These different communication media typically have different data formats such as structured e mail or an Internet based markup language such as XML or IVR voice recognition. Regardless of the communication media used to send the request to the exchange component a response to a request may be sent back to the user through a different media. Thus illustrates that user A receives its response through e mail user B receives its response via instant messaging and user D receives its response via fax. In the case of user C the same communication medium Web used to send the request is also used to send the response.

The services available through the exchange component include travel services entertainment service personal services e.g. haircutting educational services business administrative services and the like. Some services may be time critical e.g. a dinner reservation at a particular time. The service request specifies other required criteria for the service such as location e.g. a certain geographic area type duration quantity price information e.g. preferred price or price range and maximum price etc. Additionally a single service request may actually require services from multiple different service providers which are linked or associated. For example if a user is planning a business trip the request will often require services from airlines hotels and car rental agencies and perhaps other services which are linked to or associated with the business trip.

The automatic services exchange component automatically sends the service request to various service providers. In one embodiment this transmission may be through several different electronic communication media such as structured e mail XML IVR etc. In the event that the exchange component is unable to automatically procure the service requested by the user the request is transferred to the backup call center component . For example assume that request C from user C could not be automatically fulfilled by the exchange component . As illustrated in the request C is sent to the backup call center along with other information such as which service providers have already been contacted for the service. One of the human agents or operators at the backup call center attempts to find a service provider for the request. Once the backup call center determines that the request can or cannot be satisfied it communicates the result to the corresponding user who made the request. In the example the result is sent to user C through e mail.

Assuming there is at least one positive reply the broker sends a response to the requestor with the results indicating at least one response matched the request. Depending on parameters set by the requestor if multiple positive replies are received by the broker the broker may choose the best match based on the required or predetermined criteria or it may send responses for all the positive replies to the requestor for selection. The requestor may also authorize the broker to contract for the service under certain circumstances without waiting for approval from the requestor . A match to request typically means that the response from the service provider is within the range of acceptable requesting parameters such as time of service location of service price of service level e.g. quality requested of service and other parameters specified by the request.

As illustrated in phantom in the broker may also send the response to others specified by the requestor . For example when multiple people are planning a dinner one person the requester may be in charge of obtaining the reservation but the other people involved should receive notification of the particulars.

Also shown in phantom in is the capability of sending a change notice to the requestor if a procured service changes before its performance date. This change may occur by a modified request which is issued by the requestor . Similarly the change notice may also be sent to others specified by the requestor . The requester can approve the change if the change is satisfactory or submit a new service request if the change is unsatisfactory or if the service is now unavailable from the original provider not shown . The exchange system of the invention in one embodiment can automatically respond to a modified request.

The broker reviews through an automatic machine implemented process the service requests to determine if the service request is actually a request for multiple services such as multiple services which are linked or associated such as those associated with an event e.g. a business trip which requires airline tickets rental car reservation and hotel reservation . The resulting operation is illustrated in . The broker breaks such a request into sub service requests and and sends each to the appropriate service providers. Thus in sub service request A is sent to service providers while sub service request B is sent to service provider and aggregator which aggregates the services from service providers and . As before each service provider aggregator typically returns a message to the broker specifying its ability to provide the service. Each sub service response may be sent separately to the requestor or the broker may wait until all service providers aggregators have responded or until a match to each sub service request has been found. As in change notices also will be sent to the user upon a change in a procured service. Additionally the responses and the change notices may be sent to others specified by the requestor .

The particular methods of the invention are now described in terms of computer software with reference to a series of flowcharts. The methods to be performed by a computer constitute computer programs made up of computer executable instructions illustrated as blocks acts . Describing the methods by reference to a flowchart enables one skilled in the art to develop such programs including such instructions to carry out the methods on suitably configured computers e.g. the processor of the computer executing the instructions from computer readable media . The computer executable instructions may be written in a computer programming language or may be embodied in firmware logic. If written in a programming language conforming to a recognized standard such instructions can be executed on a variety of hardware platforms and for interface to a variety of operating systems. In addition the present invention is not described with reference to any particular programming language. It will be appreciated that a variety of programming languages may be used to implement the teachings of the invention as described herein. Furthermore it is common in the art to speak of software in one form or another e.g. program procedure process application module logic . . . as taking an action or causing a result. Such expressions are merely a shorthand way of saying that execution of the software by a computer causes the processor of the computer to perform an action or a produce a result.

Referring first to a service request method receives a service request method block and examines it to determine if there are multiple related services requested block . If so the service request method creates a request for each service block . Once the multiple requests are created or if there is only one request the service requests are sent to the appropriate providers including aggregators for the services block .

The service request method processes the replies for each request separately as illustrated by request loop starting at block . It will be appreciated that multiple request loops may be running concurrently. The requestor may specify a time which is associated with a deadline for completion of a search for a match to a request. In one embodiment the requestor specifies a predetermined required period of time time out period or deadline within which replies must be received or by which time the requestor should be contacted by the exchange to inform the requestor of the incomplete status of a request. In another embodiment the time out period is determined by the method based on time criteria specified in the request. The request loop waits at block until an incoming reply is received or until the time out period expires. When the request loop is activated by an incoming reply block the reply is recorded at block . If all replies have not yet been received the request loop returns to its wait state. If all replies have been received the particular request loop ends block and the method proceeds to block to evaluate the replies. Alternatively if the time out period expires before any or all replies are received the method also proceeds to block . The time out period can provide the exchange system with some time to attempt to manually through the intervention of a human operator procure the service with enough time before the service is actually required. If the user requestor fails to specify a time out period the exchange system may specify a default time out period which is at least several hours before the requested time of the service e.g. a 4 30 p.m. time out for a dinner reservation at 7 30 p.m. or at least one day before the requested date of the service. Further this time out period also allows the requestor to be notified of a failure to procure a service before the time requested for the service so that the requestor can take appropriate actions.

At block the method determines if any positive replies were received. If not the corresponding request is transferred to the backup call center which includes human operators for processing along with all replies block so the backup call center knows the current status of the request e.g. who has replied to the request who has not etc. . The processing represented by block is described in more detail in conjunction with further below.

If multiple services were requested the method determines if at least one service provider has replied positively to each service request block . Requests that cannot been procured are sent to the backup call center at block while positive replies are processed at block e.g. by sending out confirmations to the requestor and the service providers to secure the providing of the service . Similarly if only one service was requested and at least one reply is positive the method proceeds to block to process the reply. The processing represented by block is described next.

One embodiment of a process reply method is illustrated in . It will be appreciated that multiple instances of the method may be executing simultaneously based on the number of service requests that were made. For each service requested block the process reply method determines if multiple positive replies for a service were received block . If so but only one match has been requested block the method filters the replies to find a single match that best satisfies the criteria specified by the requestor or specified as defaults by the system of the exchange service block . If there was only one positive reply for the service or once a single reply has been filtered out in block the method determines if the requestor has authorized the automatic services exchange system to automatically procure the service block . If so the method contracts or otherwise reserves the service from the corresponding service provider block and sends a confirmation request confirmation to the requestor that the service has been procured block . In these situations where the service provider requires a commitment e.g. a down payment or a deposit from the requestor the automatic services exchange provides payment information e.g. credit card name number and expiration date previously provided by the requestor to the automatic services exchange or requests that this information be provided by the requestor to either the exchange so it can be forwarded to the service provider or to the service provider directly. If however there is no authorization block the information in the reply is sent to the requestor at block and the method waits to receive approval from the requestor. If approval is received block the method contracts for or otherwise reserves the approved service and sends a confirmation as previously described. However if approval of the particular service is not received from the requestor the service request is terminated.

If more than one match is wanted at block as specified by a predetermined preference sent by the requestor or as set as a default by a system of the exchange service a response containing all positive replies is sent to the requestor for selection block and the method waits to receive approval of one of the providers at block . As in the case of a single reply the method contracts for or otherwise reserves the service from the approved provider at block and returns a confirmation message at block or the request is terminated if no approval is received.

Turning now to one embodiment of an information transfer method for a backup call center is illustrated. When the service request is sent to the providers through an automatic system a reply may be invalid such as when a person in response to questions from an IVR system presses an incorrect digit on a telephone key pad or hangs up without replying or if the call is unanswered. For each unfulfilled related service request block the method selects those service providers that gave invalid replies block . Each of the selected service providers block will be called by a human agent block until one provider is able to provide the service block or until all have been called block . If no service provider can fulfill the service request the method sends a failure message to the requester at block . If there are no further related service requests block the method terminates.

The first positive reply at block causes the method to determine if the requester has authorized the automatic services exchange system to automatically procure the service block . If so the method contracts or otherwise reserves the service from the corresponding service provider block and sends a confirmation request confirmation to the requestor that the service has been procured block . If however there is no authorization at block the information in the reply is sent to the requestor block and the method waits to receive approval from the requestor. If approval is received block the method contracts for or otherwise reserves the approved service and sends a confirmation as previously described. However if approval of the particular service is not received from the requestor a failure message is sent to the requester at block .

As described previously the automatic services exchange system optionally can send change notices to the requester to alert him her of changes in a procured service or receive a modified request from the requestor even after the services have been procured. One embodiment of a service change method that communicates changes is illustrated in . When the method receives notification of a change in a procured service block it notifies the requester and asks if the requester approves the change or wishes to submit a new service request block . If the change is approved block a message is sent to the service provider to contract for the changed service block and the change is confirmed to the requester block . If the change is not approved but a new service request is submitted block the new request is resubmitted into the automatic services exchange system at block .

The particular methods performed by computers acting as the automatic services exchange and backup call center components for one embodiment of the invention have been described with reference to flowcharts in and including all the acts from until from until from until and until respectively. It will be appreciated that more or fewer processes may be incorporated into the methods illustrated in and without departing from the scope of the invention and that no particular order is implied by the arrangement of blocks shown and described herein and that alternative orders of the operations are within the scope of the invention.

The following description of is intended to provide an overview of computer hardware and other operating components suitable for performing the methods of the invention described above but is not intended to limit the applicable environments. One of skill in the art will immediately appreciate that the invention can be practiced with other computer system configurations including hand held devices e.g. PDAs personal digital assistants such as a Palm Pilot or cell phones etc. multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention can also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network having a physical or wireless infrastructure or a combination of both.

The web server is typically at least one computer system which operates as a server computer system and is configured to operate with the protocols of the World Wide Web and is coupled to the Internet. Optionally the web server can be part of an ISP which provides access to the Internet for client systems. The web server is shown coupled to the server computer system which itself is coupled to web content which can be considered a form of a media database. It will be appreciated that while two computer systems and are shown in the web server system and the server computer system can be one computer system having different software components providing the web server functionality and the server functionality provided by the server computer system which will be described further below.

Client computer systems and can each with the appropriate web browsing software view HTML pages provided by the web server . The ISP provides Internet connectivity to the client computer system through the modem interface which can be considered part of the client computer system . The client computer system can be a personal computer system a network computer a Web TV system a handheld wireless device or other such computer system. Similarly the ISP provides Internet connectivity for client systems and although as shown in the connections are not the same for these three computer systems. Client computer system is coupled through a modem interface while client computer systems and are part of a LAN. While shows the interfaces and as generically as a modem it will be appreciated that each of these interfaces can be an analog modem ISDN modem cable modem satellite transmission interface e.g. Direct PC radio frequency RF cellular or other interfaces for coupling a computer system to other computer systems. Client computer systems and are coupled to a LAN through network interfaces and which can be Ethernet network or other network interfaces. The LAN is also coupled to a gateway computer system which can provide firewall and other Internet related services for the local area network. This gateway computer system is coupled to the ISP to provide Internet connectivity to the client computer systems and . The gateway computer system can be a conventional server computer system. Also the web server system can be a conventional server computer system.

Alternatively as well known a server computer system can be directly coupled to the LAN through a network interface to provide files and other services to the clients without the need to connect to the Internet through the gateway system .

It will be appreciated that the computer system is one example of many possible computer systems which have different architectures. For example personal computers based on an Intel microprocessor often have multiple buses one of which can be an input output I O bus for the peripherals and one that directly connects the processor and the memory often referred to as a memory bus . The buses are connected together through bridge components that perform any necessary translation due to differing bus protocols.

Network computers do not usually include a hard disk or other mass storage and the executable programs are loaded from a network connection into the memory for execution by the processor . A Web TV system which is known in the art is also considered to be a computer system according to the present invention but it may lack some of the features shown in such as certain input or output devices. A typical computer system will usually include at least a processor memory and a bus coupling the memory to the processor. Further mobile devices such as PDAs browsing web phones etc. and their respective supporting infrastructure may also be used as clients etc.

It will also be appreciated that the computer system is controlled by operating system software which includes a file management system such as a disk operating system which is part of the operating system software. One example of an operating system software with its associated file management system software is the family of operating systems known as Windows from Microsoft Corporation of Redmond Wash. and their associated file management systems. The file management system is typically stored in the non volatile storage and causes the processor to execute the various acts required by the operating system to input and output data and to store data in memory including storing files on the non volatile storage .

One embodiment of the present invention permits group members to add additional reservations onto an existing reservation of a group leader supervisor or any other member of the group in such a manner as to synchronize travel plans and coordinate locations etc. both in terms of travel time sharing rides staying at the same hotel tee times and other services one may desire when attending an event. But rather than book all group members at once individual group members may make plans separately to accommodate instances in which group members are for example traveling from different locations or are arriving at different times etc. For example a sales person may be coming from a different customer site in another city while the marketing person and the technical person may be coming from the home office.

Thus in the example embodiment shown in group members have the options shown in section to choose one of four travel options. It is clear that in other example embodiments other similar options additional options or fewer options may be offered. Section is an option to book an identical itinerary which would be suitable for a person starting the trip from the same location at the same time. This option allows group members to travel together. Section allows group members to book separate identical air and hotel reservations but has them share a single car rental section allows members to meet at the airport upon arrival in this example at the Boston airport so a group member flying in from for example New York could meet with members flying in from San Francisco to share the car into Walton and section allows for only booking rooms at the same hotel so group members may come and go separately but stay at the same hotel allowing them to meet and travel together to the company site conveniently.

The system illustrated in is just one embodiment of the novel art of this disclosure for automated coordination of services procurement for a group of individuals involved in a common goal or event. In this and other embodiments one of the individuals the leader would define the attributes of the event and specify the other individuals to be involved in the event the group . All of the individuals would be automatically notified via the Internet or other media by the system that they are invited to participate in the goal or event and all individuals would be able to accept or decline membership in the group event or goal in some cases in accordance with company policies for such participation expense rules privacy rules etc. Likewise all individuals who accept group membership would be able to procure a combination of services required to execute the event. All individuals who accepted the invitation to join the group would be notified of the booking of services by the other members of the group and each individual in the group would be able to make a services procurement request for the services procured by any other individual or individual s in the group. The system is able to coordinate sharing of the services based on its understanding of the mutual requirements of the group and is also able to adjust the services procured by members of the group to better meet the overall group s objectives. The system is likewise able to adjust the services procured by the members to optimize the use of the services by the group as a whole or to intelligently cancel services based on changes in requirements input by one or more members of the group. In some cases corporate policy may allow some participants to exceed their usual settings in context of a group event. In other cases it may notify additionally their supervisor procurement group or human resources and in yet other cases it may require a confirmation by e mail from a supervisor or similar. The type of services that may be procured are not limited to services related to travel but rather may also include other services related to attending an event or other activities to participate in while visiting a location.

Yet in some cases if a member needs to come in late for example due to a previous meeting he may not share in some aspects such as the share car ride for example etc. In other circumstances if a member needs special facilities not available at the hotel car flight chosen for the group the member may break out of the group arrangements. This may be on a case by case basis with approval and or notification of the group leader his supervisor etc. or may be pre defined in the member s profile in some cases.

In yet other cases a user may be able to forward their service request in an automatic fashion. For example a user could initiate a group by inviting others to join for a meeting at a specific date time and location. Once they have done this they have formed a group. Once one member of the group has booked their travel for this particular meeting they would be prompted to see if they are willing to share their itinerary with the other members of the group. If they give permission for the other members to see the itinerary all other members of the group would be automatically notified by the system. When notified the other members of the group would be given options to book similar or identical services. When other group members select an option a service request such as in is automatically generated and sent to the services exchange.

Trips particularly business trips involving multiple persons may often be complicated multi event expeditions that require a complex orchestration of events and services to meet all the requirements of all parties. Typically a traveler would like to rely on a personal assistant who from long experience knows the preferences of the traveler and therefore can quickly and easily book all the arrangements for services and events of the trip. Even advanced travel service systems such as Expedia Travelocity or airline vacation package services still require the user to specify each element separately. The only convenience offered to the user is that he does not need to seek another provider or re enter this payment information for each booking. He still has to indicate each desired service separately.

What is clearly needed is a system and method for trip planning that based on the specifics of the planned event and on a user profile compiled from historical experience and known user preferences can propose a complete trip package instead of asking the user for responses on each element.

Further the system may extract certain location or context specific information. For example the system might have a history of typical travel times or patterns for a given city of a traveler. The system might also have data on what options for ground transportation exist at a given airport such as for example shuttle taxi subway and limo. The system would also know how to calculate the cost of the various modes of transportation. Similarly the system might know how much the hotel charges for parking a car overnight and take that into account when making a recommendation. The contextual information could also include the availability of other services and factor that into decisions on how to plan the trip. For example the system could know that at a certain airport rental offices e.g. Laptop Lane or a Wi Fi hot spot are available etc. Based on this information the system might determine that it is better to take certain layovers than others.

For example in one embodiment a personal preference editor allows a user to view and modify records of his preferences. The records could be ordered by type of service hotel airline ground transport restaurant etc. or by location i.e. when traveling to New York when traveling to Boston etc. or by customer partner to be visited etc.

In one embodiment a personal preference wizard could interview the user to initially obtain a comprehensive set of preferences. In one embodiment a personal preferences parser could for example parse a historical transaction databases which can be extracted from system for example a services reservation system.

In one embodiment an interactive change monitor could track interactive changes occurring during trips as changes are required and the user makes choices. These changes may then be recorded in preferences set . In other cases they may be culled on a regular basis by refresh reviewing of historic data.

One embodiment of the interactive change monitor may also include the ability to generate automated updates of preferences based on past events or trips. For example a traveler may consistently stay in a Hilton when visiting a certain city or ask for certain amenities etc. In one embodiment the interactive change monitor extracts these patterns and trends and adjust the preferences and hence the search results or query accordingly. As a result the traveler is presented with more targeted results in regards to what they are likely to select as a trip segment.

In one embodiment preferences may be influenced by many factors and may vary according to each situation. Factors may include location time of day time of year customer country and many other variables. Based on each factor or combination of factors event or service preferences may vary.

For example during the day in New York a traveler may prefer to use the subway but at night after 8 p.m. the traveler may prefer to use a taxi or limo service. When meeting with a certain customer he may have a particular restaurant preference or for that specific customer his preference may be to let the customer choose the restaurant. In Los Angeles the traveler may prefer a rental car while in New York he may prefer public transportation subway by day limo at night as stated above . Hotel preferences may also vary according to each location city according to the specific customer visited or according to some other set or combination of factors.

In addition in one embodiment the system may issue status updates based on location of a service provider. For example it may alert a user that a limo is 15 minutes behind schedule based on GPS driving time estimates and if necessary move a flight time based on the resulting schedule change.

In some cases one embodiment may also be used for services unrelated or not directly related to travel. For example an invitation to a meeting might first ask invitees if they will attend in person or virtually. If they elect to attend virtually the system could arrange for audio and web conferencing or possibly video conferencing. Phone available time as discussed above may be scheduled during a trip to a meeting for another meeting. If they elect to attend in person the system could arrange for travel as described in the description. Other additional types of services may also be scheduled through the system.

There are many situational elements that affect preferences resulting in a complex set of preference rules that may be deduced from the traveler s historical selections and augmented by preference selections input by the traveler. These historical records and stated preferences are used to book a trip according to template in one embodiment.

There may be different templates for a trip involving a single customer visit a multi event trip a multi city multi event trip etc. Accordingly one embodiment disclosed herein may automatically suggest templates based on the particulars of the trip or the user may manually select a specific template type. For example trips that are automatically planned may have an additional feature or parameter in personal calendar software or web based systems such as MS Outlook Exchange IBM Lotus Notes Yahoo Calendar or other similar software that causes the trip planner to transfer the information to the services platform system to be booked accordingly.

Further in one embodiment trip planner can then block out times for each segment of a trip. In one case various components of the trip could be entered into a user s calendar with differing definitions of busy. For example when a user is in a limo the calendar might say that they are free for phone calls. Or in another example the traveler might be available for email on certain flights based on contextual information about airline email availability and the company s agreement and or rules for use of such facilities etc.

In one embodiment the system may offer a search function for previous bookings. For example a user may search by keyword such as finding all past trips with Chicago and May or Hertz. More generally this feature may be a mechanism whereby a user can search all previous transactions.

In one embodiment the system may automatically offer services based on event information. For example if person s mother dies it may suggest sending flowers or if person s calendar says Meeting in New York it may suggest a flight.

In one embodiment automated rules based changes to services may be included. For example a terrorist attack in France could cause all flights to France in the next month to be canceled so the system would send an alert to users. Similarly automated changes may be based on status updates from service providers. For example a flight cancellation due to bad weather may cause a travel record to be protected so that alternative flights are put in the passenger name record for a user rather than just canceling the whole trip.

Before final bookings are confirmed in one embodiment of the system may send a trip proposal to the user by email for example or may send an invitation for the user to review the proposal on a web page.

The processes described above can be stored in a memory of a computer system as a set of instructions to be executed. In addition the instructions to perform the processes described above could alternatively be stored on other forms of machine readable media including magnetic and optical disks. For example the processes described could be stored on machine readable media such as magnetic disks or optical disks which are accessible via a disk drive or computer readable medium drive .

Alternatively the logic to perform the processes as discussed above could be implemented in additional computer and or machine readable media such as discrete hardware components as large scale integrated circuits LSI s application specific integrated circuits ASIC s firmware such as electrically erasable programmable read only memory EEPROM s .

Whereas many alterations and modifications of the present invention will no doubt become apparent to a person of ordinary skill in the art after having read the foregoing description it is to be understood that any particular embodiment shown and described by way of illustration is in no way intended to be considered limiting. Therefore references to details of various embodiments are not intended to limit the scope of the claims which in them selves recite only those features regarded as essential to the invention.

It is clear that many modifications and variations of this embodiment may be made by one skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the novel art of this disclosure.

