---

title: Communicating multimedia information to respondent endpoints
abstract: Communicating information to respondent endpoints includes detecting a trigger event for an incident. The trigger event is related to an incident category for the incident. A rule is identified in accordance with the incident category. The rule specifies one or more processes for responding to the incident. A collaboration session with a first respondent endpoint and a second respondent endpoint is established in accordance with the rule. The first respondent endpoint is associated with a first respondent system, the second respondent endpoint is associated with a second respondent system. Multimedia information is communicated to the first respondent endpoint and the second respondent endpoint according to the rule.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08402089&OS=08402089&RS=08402089
owner: Cisco Technology, Inc.
number: 08402089
owner_city: San Jose
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050503
---
This invention relates generally to the field of communications and more specifically to communicating multimedia information to respondent endpoints.

Emergency situations typically require communication of information between a dispatcher and one or more respondents. A dispatcher may notify the respondents of the emergency situation and may also provide the respondents with information that the respondents can use to respond to the situation.

Known techniques for providing information include radio communication. The dispatcher and the respondents communicate via a radio communications system such as a two way radio communications system. Radio communication however may not be able to communicate certain types of information. It is generally desirable to communicate certain types of information.

In accordance with the present invention disadvantages and problems associated with previous techniques for providing information to respondent endpoints may be reduced or eliminated.

According to one embodiment of the present invention communicating information to respondent endpoints includes detecting a trigger event for an incident. The trigger event is related to an incident category for the incident. A rule is identified in accordance with the incident category. The rule specifies one or more processes for responding to the incident. A collaboration session with a first respondent endpoint and a second respondent endpoint is established in accordance with the rule. The first respondent endpoint is associated with a first respondent system the second respondent endpoint is associated with a second respondent system. Multimedia information is communicated to the first respondent endpoint and the second respondent endpoint according to the rule.

Certain embodiments of the invention may provide one or more technical advantages. A technical advantage of one embodiment may be that multimedia information may be communicated to respondent endpoints in real time. Communicating multimedia information in real time may allow for respondent endpoints to more effectively respond to an incident.

Another technical advantage of one embodiment may be that a collaboration server may launch an application to provide information to respondent endpoints. The respondent endpoints are not required to launch the application to receive information. Yet another technical advantage of one embodiment may be that an incident command server may initiate a series of processes in response to detecting a trigger event that includes receiving a notification from dispatcher endpoint.

Certain embodiments of the invention may include none some or all of the above technical advantages. One or more other technical advantages may be readily apparent to one skilled in the art from the figures descriptions and claims included herein.

Embodiments of the present invention and its advantages are best understood by referring to of the drawings like numerals being used for like and corresponding parts of the various drawings.

The collaboration server and the incident command server may operate to automatically gather and provide information about an incident. The information may be gathered from multiple types of sources and provided to endpoints in accordance with the context of the incident. The context may refer to a response to an incident that is predefined at the incident command server. The collaboration server and the incident command server may be used to automate operating procedures in applications such as public safety transportation and finance applications.

An incident may refer to an occurrence that requires a response from respondent endpoints . According to one embodiment an incident may refer to an occurrence such as a fire or an injury that may require an emergency response. An incident may be associated with an incident category for the incident and incident data describing the incident.

An incident category describes the type of incident and may be further subdivided into different categories. For example incident categories may include a medical property criminal military transportation or other incident category or any combination of the preceding. A medical incident category may describe incidents that invoke a medical response and may include categories representing a health emergency injury or death.

A property incident category may describe incidents that invoke a response to protect property and may include categories representing fire severe weather or building failure. A criminal incident category may describe incidents that invoke a law enforcement response and may include categories representing homicide burglary or vandalism. A military incident category may describe incidents that invoke a military response and may include categories representing a terrorist attack. A transportation incident category may describe incidents that invoke a response to control transportation and may include categories representing a traffic accident.

Incident data describes a particular incident. Incident data may include the location of the incident the time of the incident an incident identifier that uniquely identifies the incident or other suitable information.

According to one embodiment network allows communication devices to communicate with other networks or devices. Network may comprise all or a portion of a public switched telephone network PSTN a public or private data network a local area network LAN a metropolitan area network MAN a wide area network WAN a global communication network such as the Internet a wireline or wireless network an enterprise intranet other suitable communication link or any combination of the preceding.

Network may communicate information in packets. A packet may comprise a bundle of data organized in a specific way for transmission and a frame may comprise the payload of one or more packets organized in a specific way for transmission. A packet may carry any suitable information such as such as video audio telephony text graphics facsimile data instant messaging IM presence other information or any combination of the preceding. Network may utilize Internet Protocol IP or IP enabled technology. For example the collaboration server and the incident command server may utilize IP or IP enabled technology to send or receive packets from IP or non IP endpoints.

According to the illustrated embodiment network includes a dispatcher endpoint a collaboration system and respondent endpoints of respondent systems . In operation collaboration system may detect a trigger event which may be initiated by dispatcher endpoint or other node. In response collaboration system sends multimedia information pertaining to the incident to respondent endpoints .

Dispatcher endpoint comprises any suitable endpoint operable to send a notification to initiate a trigger event for an incident. In general an endpoint may comprise any hardware or software or combination of both operable to communicate with collaboration system . For example an endpoint may comprise a cellular telephone a computer such as a laptop or desktop a personal digital assistant PDA a handheld device a push to talk PTT device a mobile handset a radio frequency device or any other device suitable for communicating data packets to and from collaboration system .

An endpoint may have any suitable input output or both input and output devices. As an example an endpoint may have a keyboard a microphone a camera a speaker a display a monitor or any other device suitable for receiving input providing output or both receiving input and providing output. An endpoint may support for example Internet Protocol voice over Internet Protocol VOIP or any other suitable communication protocol and may utilize any other suitable wireless or wireline communication technology.

Dispatcher endpoint sends a notification of an incident to collaboration system . The notification for an incident may include an incident category for the incident and incident data describing the incident. According to one embodiment dispatcher endpoint may allow a user such as a dispatcher to invoke a series of response processes using a minimum number of notification commands. A user may send a notification with a single command. For example dispatcher endpoint may have a touch screen that the user may use to select a command to send the notification. Dispatcher endpoint may also verify if a user is authorized to invoke a particular command. The notification initiates an incident response that includes several processes.

Although the embodiment describes a user initiating a notification a notification may be initiated in any suitable manner. For example dispatcher endpoint may automatically receive a notification from another communication system.

Collaboration system provides multimedia information during a collaboration session. A collaboration session may refer to a call session among participants during which multimedia information may be provided. Collaboration system detects a trigger event for the incident and provides multimedia information to respondent endpoints in response to the trigger event. A trigger event for an incident may refer to an event that triggers a specific response to the incident. The trigger event may provide information about the incident such as an incident category for the incident and incident data describing the incident. According to one embodiment the trigger event may comprise a notification from dispatcher endpoint or other node. According to one embodiment the trigger event may comprise a particular type of input received from a node.

According to the illustrated embodiment collaboration system includes an incident command server an application manager data sources and a collaboration server . Incident command server detects a trigger event for the incident and accesses business logic that specifies response to the incident. The business logic may include rules that specify a series of processes to be implemented in response to the trigger event of an incident. For example the rules may be used to notify respondent endpoints to engage collaboration launch applications from application manager retrieve data from data sources perform any other suitable process or any suitable combination of the preceding. As an example a rule may state that if a trigger event of a fire at a building is received contact firefighter respondent endpoints launch a display application at application manager and retrieve blueprints of the building from data sources . An example embodiment of incident command server is described in more detail with reference to .

Application manager manages applications that may be used by collaboration server to provide information to respondent endpoints . An application may refer to a software program. According to the illustrated embodiment application manager may include an application server and a headless participant . Application server stores and launches applications that may be used by collaboration server . The applications may include bandwidth intensive applications or third party applications that may be difficult for collaboration server to store. For example applications may include word processing slide presentation blueprint viewing map location database web browser or other application or any combination of the preceding. For example the applications may include a video surveillance application that may control a surveillance camera using remote pan tilt and zoom PTZ operations.

Application server may be used to store applications that can be launched by incident command server through an application programming interface API . Control parameters may be used to designate the privileges that users may have to launch applications stored at application server .

Headless participant may provide applications and data from data sources to collaboration server . Control parameters may be used to designate the privileges that users may have to the data or applications. Headless participant may launch applications in response to a request from incident command server . Headless participant may be invited to be a virtual participant in the collaboration session or may be invited to drop into a data collaboration mode.

Data sources provides data to collaboration server . The data may include any suitable data that may be used by respondent endpoints to respond to an incident. For example data may include medical records street maps blueprints hazardous material information disabled person information first aid information law enforcement records status reports or other information. The data may be stored as data files that may be opened by specific applications.

Data sources include a database and a passive endpoint . Database stores data. Database may include any hardware or software or combination of hardware and software for storing and facilitating retrieval of the data. Also database may use any of a variety of data structures arrangements and compilations to store and facilitate retrieval of the data.

Passive endpoint may refer to an endpoint that passively receives information to send to collaboration server . For example a passive endpoint may comprise a surveillance camera an alarm a sensor a radio frequency identifier detector other passive device or any combination of the preceding. Typically a passive endpoint may send information to collaboration server but may not be required to receive multimedia information. A passive endpoint may be activated in response to detecting certain triggers. The trigger may initiate a call to dispatcher endpoint or directly to collaboration server .

Collaboration server retrieves and receives multimedia information and provides the multimedia information to participants such as dispatcher endpoint and respondent endpoints . According to one embodiment collaboration engine may comprise for example a CISCO MEETINGPLACE server provided by CISCO SYSTEMS INC. Multimedia information may include video audio telephony text graphics facsimile data other information or any combination of the preceding. Collaboration server may provide information generated from data to respondent endpoints even if respondent endpoints do not have the application to access the data. An example embodiment of collaboration server is described in more detail with reference to .

A respondent endpoint of a respondent system may refer to an endpoint that a user responding to an incident may use to receive and transmit information about the incident. As an example respondent endpoint may represent a device used by emergency personnel responding to an emergency. A respondent system may refer to the communication system used by the user. As an example respondent system may represent the communication system used by fire law enforcement security medical military other emergency personnel or any combination of the preceding.

Respondent endpoints may comprise thin clients since respondent endpoints are not required to store certain applications for accessing certain types of data. Respondent endpoints may also have various features that facilitate access to the multimedia information. As another example respondent endpoints may automatically display a user interface that allows a user to efficiently access the information.

Respondent endpoint may have any suitable application sharing portal. According to one embodiment dispatcher endpoint may provide respondent endpoints with an incident identifier. Respondent endpoint may use the incident identifier to retrieve the application sharing portal. According to another embodiment respondent endpoints may have a subscriber stub that polls application server . A portal page may be pushed to respondent endpoint when dispatcher endpoint initiates a collaboration session. The subscriber stub may receive information in an active mode or a passive mode. The subscribe stub may receive information in real time in the active mode. In the passive mode a pointer to the information is updated in the stub. Respondent endpoint may use the pointer to access the collaboration information when needed.

Modifications additions or omissions may be made to network without departing from the scope of the invention. For example network may include a web application that may be used to manage the servers of network . The web application may also aid the graphical user interface of dispatcher endpoint with integration of multimedia services.

The components of network may be integrated or separated according to particular needs. Moreover the operations of network may be performed by more fewer or other modules. For example the operations of application server and headless participant may be performed by one module or the operations of incident command server may be performed by more than one module. Additionally operations of network may be performed using any suitable logic comprising software hardware other logic or any suitable combination of the preceding.

According to the illustrated embodiment incident command server includes an interface I F logic a memory and one or more applications coupled as shown. Interface receives and sends data. An interface may refer to any suitable structure of a device operable to receive input for the device send output from the device or both and may comprise one or more ports. Logic manages the operation of incident command server . Logic may be embodied in a non transitory medium and may comprise any suitable hardware software or combination of hardware and software. For example logic may include a processor. A processor may refer to any suitable device operable to execute instructions and manipulate data to perform operations.

Memory stores and facilitates retrieval of information used by logic . Memory may refer to any structure operable to store and facilitate retrieval of information used by logic and may comprise Random Access Memory RAM Read Only Memory ROM magnetic drives disk drives Compact Disk CD drives Digital Video Disk DVD drives removable media storage any other suitable data storage device or any combination of the preceding.

According to the illustrated embodiment memory includes business logic . Business logic may include rules. A rule may define a series of processes to be performed in response to an incident. A rule for an incident may be mapped to the incident by for example incident category for the incident incident data describing the incident or other aspect of the incident. Mapping the rule to the incident may allow incident command server to identify the response to a particular incident.

According to one embodiment a rule may specify parameters for performing the response such as respondent endpoints to contact applications to launch data to retrieve other procedure or any combination of the preceding. Respondent endpoints to contact may refer to respondent endpoints with which to open a collaboration session. The applications to launch may refer to applications to launch to provide multimedia information to respondent endpoints . The data to retrieve may refer to data to retrieve from data sources to provide to respondent endpoints .

A rule may designate other parameters for performing the response. For example a rule may specify authorized users channels for the collaboration session other parameter or any combination of the preceding. The authorized users may represent users who are authorized to receive information about the incident. The channels may refer to radio channels that may be used to communicate information regarding the incident.

Applications may include application programming interface API or software development kit SDK applications that manage systems. Applications may include software for managing closed circuit televisions CCTVs building management systems contact closure devices alarms sensors public address systems emergency systems other system or any combination of the preceding.

Modifications additions or omissions may be made to incident command server without departing from the scope of the invention. Interface logic memory and applications may be integrated or separated according to particular needs. For example the present invention contemplates the functions of both logic and memory being provided using a single device. If any components are separated the separated components may be coupled using a wireline wireless or other suitable link. Moreover the operations of incident command server may be performed by more fewer or other modules. Additionally operations of incident command server may be performed using any suitable logic software hardware other logic or any suitable combination of the preceding.

According to the illustrated embodiment collaboration server includes an interface I F logic memory and one or more applications coupled as shown. Interface receives and sends data. Logic manages the operation of collaboration server and may comprise any suitable hardware software or combination of hardware and software. For example logic may include a processor. Memory stores and facilitates retrieval of information used by logic .

According to one embodiment applications include a collaboration engine . Collaboration engine retrieves and receives streams of information mixes the streams and provides the streams to participants. A media stream may refer to a flow of digital information. Collaboration engine may perform any suitable process for providing the streams. As an example collaboration engine may initiate or terminate a collaboration session with respondent endpoints . Collaboration engine may also transfer control of one or more streams such as a video stream to an endpoint such as a respondent endpoint . As another example collaboration engine may identify the source of a stream. As yet another example collaboration engine may suppress a stream. As yet another example collaboration engine may translate between different communication techniques to communicate the information.

Collaboration engine may receive the information to be communicated from any suitable source. For example collaboration engine may receive the information from a dispatcher endpoint application manager or respondent endpoints . For example dispatcher endpoint may provide incident data such as the location of the incident. Application manager may provide street maps to the location. Respondent endpoint may provide video information about the incident itself.

Collaboration engine may provide information generated from data to respondent endpoints even if respondent endpoints do not have the application to access the data. Collaboration engine may launch the application from application server access the data using the application and display the data to respondent endpoint . For example a respondent endpoint may not have a blueprint drafting application required to access blueprint data. Collaboration engine may retrieve the blueprint drafting application from application server and the blueprint data from database . Collaboration engine may then open the blueprint data using the application and then provide the information to respondent endpoint .

Collaboration engine may replicate and distribute information to participants in any suitable manner. According to one embodiment a publisher such as application manager or data sources may have a publisher stub and a subscriber such as an endpoint may have a subscriber stub. SyncML or other suitable protocol may be used to synchronize the distribution of the information between the publisher stubs and the subscriber stubs.

According to the embodiment dispatcher endpoint may designate headless participant through incident command server . Incident command server notifies collaboration engine of the designation which notifies headless participant . After receiving an acknowledgment of the configuration collaboration engine server may push the information to the participants. A subscriber stub obtains the information and invokes collaboration engine to access shared information from headless participant . Collaboration engine may also provide for remote parameter manipulation configuration content delivery and security.

Modifications additions or omissions may be made to collaboration server without departing from the scope of the invention. Interface logic memory and applications may be integrated or separated according to particular needs. For example the present invention contemplates the functions of both logic and memory being provided using a single device. If any components are separated the separated components may be coupled using a wireline wireless or other suitable link. Moreover the operations of collaboration server may be performed by more fewer or other modules. Additionally operations of collaboration server may be performed using any suitable logic software hardware other logic or any suitable combination of the preceding.

Incident command server determines a response in accordance with the rules. Incident command server may identify a rule that corresponds to the incident category and determine the response from the rule. The rule may specify respondent endpoints to engage collaboration applications to launch from application manager and data to retrieve from data sources .

Incident command server requests that application manager launch an application at step . In response the application launched by application manager processes the appropriate data. Incident command server instructs collaboration server to create a headless collaboration session at step . After the session starts application manager sends data from the application to collaboration server at step . Incident command server may notify respondents of incident at step as set forth in the rules. Respondents engage in the collaboration session in step . Collaboration server provides multimedia information to dispatcher at step and to respondents at step . After providing the information the method terminates.

Modifications additions or omissions may be made to the method without departing from the scope of the invention. The method may include more fewer or other steps. Additionally steps may be performed in any suitable order without departing from the scope of the invention.

Certain embodiments of the invention may provide one or more technical advantages. A technical advantage of one embodiment may be that multimedia information may be communicated to respondent endpoints in real time. Communicating multimedia information in real time may allow for respondent endpoints to more effectively respond to an incident.

Another technical advantage of one embodiment may be that a collaboration server may launch an application to provide information to respondent endpoints. The respondent endpoints are not required to launch the application to receive information. Yet another technical advantage of one embodiment may be that an incident command server may initiate a series of processes in response to detecting a trigger event such as receiving a notification from dispatcher endpoint.

While this disclosure has been described in terms of certain embodiments and generally associated methods alterations and permutations of the embodiments and methods will be apparent to those skilled in the art. Accordingly the above description of example embodiments does not constrain this disclosure. Other changes substitutions and alterations are also possible without departing from the spirit and scope of this disclosure as defined by the following claims.

