---

title: Tapered roller bearing, a tapered roller bearing assembly and a pinion-shaft supporting assembly using the same
abstract: A tapered roller bearing is designed to have a roller loading ratio in the range of 0.7 to 0.92 and a ratio of roller length to roller diameter in the range of 1.1 to 1.7 whereby oil agitation loss and rolling viscous resistance are reduced for achieving the reduction of running torque. Crownings are provided which are designed to have an outer-ring crowning parameter (=RCO/LRO) in the range of 30 to 150 and an inner-ring crowning parameter (=RCI/LRI) in the range of 50 to 260, provided that RCO denotes the radius of an outer ring crowning, LRO denotes the raceway length of an outer ring, RCI denotes the radius of an inner ring crowning and LRI denotes the raceway length of an inner ring. Thus, the rolling viscous resistance is reduced for achieving the reduction of running torque.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07677809&OS=07677809&RS=07677809
owner: JTEKT Corporation
number: 07677809
owner_city: Osaka-Shi, Osaka
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050414
---
The present invention relates to a tapered roller bearing for use in a differential gear assembly or the like of automotive vehicles and industrial machines.

The tapered roller bearing has higher load carrying capacity and higher rigidity than a ball bearing. Therefore the tapered roller bearing is used in a vehicular pinion shaft supporting assembly such as an automotive differential gear assembly or a transaxle assembly. However the tapered roller bearing also suffers a drawback of having a great running torque loss . In this connection proposals have been made to reduce rolling friction by forming crownings on raceways of inner and outer rings or on rolling contact surfaces of tapered rollers see for example Japanese Unexamined Patent Publications No.2003 130059 and No.2001 65574 .

The above prior art examples are designed to improve the performance of the tapered roller bearing by defining the configuration of the crowning on the raceway or on the rolling contact surface. However the crowning has never been approached from the viewpoint of quantity. Hence no attempt has been made to reduce the running torque of the tapered roller bearing by defining the quantity or the like of the crowning. On the other hand rolling viscous resistance of the tapered rollers and oil agitation loss constitute major factors of the great running torque of the tapered roller bearing such as mounted in the differential gear assembly or the like. However a guideline for reducing these resistances has not been defined.

In view of the foregoing it is an object of the invention to effectively reduce the running torque of the tapered roller bearing by taking multiple factors into considerations.

According to the present invention a tapered roller bearing comprises an outer ring an inner ring a plurality of tapered rollers interposed between these rings and a retainer for retaining the tapered rollers and is characterized in that

a roller loading ratio represented by z DW dm is in a range of 0.7 to 0.92 and a ratio of roller length to roller diameter as represented by LWR DW is in a range of 1.1 to 1.7 provided that z denotes a number of rollers LWR denotes an effective length of the roller DW denotes a mean diameter of the roller and dm denotes a Pitch Circle Diameter PCD of the roller and wherein

an outer ring crowning parameter RCO LRO is in a range of 30 to 150 and an inner ring crowning parameter RCI LRI is in a range of 50 to 260 provided that RCO denotes a radius of an outer ring crowning LRO denotes a raceway length of the outer ring RCI denotes a radius of an inner ring crowning and LRI denotes a raceway length of the inner ring.

In such a tapered roller bearing the oil agitation loss and the rolling viscous resistance may be reduced by reducing the roller length roller diameter ratio with the roller loading ratio maintained in the small numerical range. Furthermore the rolling viscous resistance may be reduced by setting the above crowning parameters in the aforementioned ranges. Thus the running torque may be reduced effectively.

According to another aspect of the invention a tapered roller bearing comprises an outer ring an inner ring a plurality of tapered rollers interposed between these rings and a retainer for retaining the tapered rollers wherein

a roller loading ratio represented by z DW dm is in the range of 0.7 to 0.92 whereas a ratio of roller length to roller diameter as represented by LWR DW is in the range of 1.1 to 1.7 provided that z denotes the number of rollers LWR denotes the effective length of the roller DW denotes the mean diameter of the roller and dm denotes the Pitch Circle Diameter of the roller and wherein

raceways of the outer ring and the inner ring and a rolling contact surface of the tapered roller are each provided with a crowning 

a total crowning amount an outer ring crowning amount an inner ring crowning amount a roller crowning amount 2 is 50 m or more 

an outer ring crowning rate the outer ring crowning amount the total crowning amount is 40 or more and

In such a tapered roller bearing the oil agitation loss and the rolling viscous resistance may be reduced by reducing the roller length roller diameter ratio with the roller loading ratio maintained in the small numerical range. Furthermore the rolling viscous resistance may be reduced by setting the above crowning parameters in the aforementioned ranges.

In the above tapered roller bearing a roller diameter parameter 2DW D d may be in a range of 0.44 to 0.52 provided that d denotes a bore diameter of the inner ring and D denotes an outside diameter of the outer ring.

In this case the bearing has a greater roller diameter than that of a conventional product of the same size. Accordingly a free space within the bearing is increased in volume to facilitate the oil flow through the bearing so that the oil agitation loss is reduced.

A tapered roller bearing assembly may comprise oil inflow restricting means for restricting the inflow of oil the restricting means being provided at an axial one end of space between the inner ring and the outer ring of the above tapered roller bearing. The oil inflow restricting means may comprise a labyrinth seal defined between the inner ring and an annular portion which is formed at an end of a small diameter portion of the retainer as extended radially inwardly from place adjacent to the outer ring and which adjoins the inner ring at an inside circumferential end thereof. The tapered roller bearing assembly may have an alternative constitution wherein an additional member not constituting the tapered roller bearing is provided as the oil inflow restricting means. For example the labyrinth seal may be provided in a bearing housing.

In this case the oil inflow into the bearing is restricted so that the rolling viscous resistance and the oil agitation loss are reduced. In this manner the running torque is reduced.

In the above tapered roller bearing a contact angle of the outer ring may be in a range of 25 to 30 .

In this case the bearing is increased in a pumping action to promote the oil discharge so that the oil agitation loss is reduced. Thus is reduced the running torque.

In the above tapered roller bearing an inner ring crowning rate the inner ring crowning amount the total crowning amount may be 10 or more.

In this case the bearing may be reduced in contact load on areas of axially opposite ends of a contact surface between the inner raceway and the rolling contact surface. In the event of a so called edge load as well the bearing is adapted to reduce the action of the edge load so that the bearing may be prevented from suffering the decrease of service life.

According to the invention a vehicular pinion shaft supporting assembly comprises tapered roller bearings disposed on a pinion gear side of a pinion shaft and on the opposite side therefrom and is characterized in that a tapered roller baring disposed on the pinion gear side is the tapered roller bearing assembly including the oil inflow restricting means.

In such a vehicular pinion shaft supporting assembly the inflow of oil into the head side tapered roller bearing which is susceptible to the oil inflow may be restricted by way of the oil inflow restricting means such as the labyrinth seal . Hence the running torque may be reduced.

Next description is made on preferred embodiments of the invention with reference to the accompanying drawings. is a sectional view showing an automotive differential gear assembly which is used as a vehicular pinion shaft support assembly employing a tapered roller bearing according to an embodiment of the invention. The differential gear assembly includes a pinion shaft driven into rotation by an unillustrated drive shaft and a differential transmission mechanism the pinion shaft and the differential transmission mechanism accommodated in a case . A pinion gear is disposed at a distal end of the pinion shaft and is meshed with a ring gear of the differential transmission mechanism . The pinion shaft is rotatably supported relative to the case by means of a tapered roller bearing H on a pinion gear side hereinafter referred to as head side and a tapered roller bearing T on the opposite side therefrom hereinafter referred to as tail side . The case is formed with a lubricating oil feeding path between the pair of tapered roller bearings H T such as to introduce a lubricating oil as indicated by arrows in the figure for lubricating raceways of the bearings.

Now description is made on a lubricating operation of the above differential gear assembly . A lubricating oil not shown is stored in a bottom of the case for lubricating the overall interior of the differential gear assembly . The ring gear of the differential transmission mechanism is driven into rotation in a direction of an arrow in the figure when a vehicle is driven into forward movement. The lubricating oil stored in the bottom of the case is lifted upward by way of the rotation of the ring gear . The lubricating oil so lifted is guided through the lubricating oil feeding path to space between the pair of tapered roller bearings H T. Thus the lubricating oil is fed into the bearings. The lubricating oil flowing through the head side tapered roller bearing H is returned to the bottom of the case . The lubricating oil flowing through the tail side tapered roller bearing T is returned to the bottom of the case via an unillustrated return path. In this manner the lubricating oil is circulated in the interior of the differential gear assembly .

In each of the tapered roller bearings H T the inner ring is formed with a great rib and a small rib on a great diameter side thereof the right hand side as seen in the figure and on a small diameter side thereof the left hand side as seen in the figure respectively. The great rib and the small rib serve to restrict an axial movement of the tapered rollers . The head side tapered roller bearing H shown in is also formed with a cylindrical portion which is extended from the small rib to a left end of the inner ring and has a smaller outside diameter than that of the small rib . On the other hand the retainer is formed with an annular portion at an end on a small diameter side thereof the left hand side as seen in the figure the annular portion extended radially inwardly from place adjacent to the outer ring. An inside circumferential end of the annular portion is in adjoining relation with an outer periphery of the cylindrical portion of the inner ring and with a side surface of the small rib of the inner ring whereby a labyrinth seal S is formed. In this manner the labyrinth seal S is formed between the retainer and the inner ring so that the lubricating oil is prevented from flowing into the bearing from the left hand side as seen in the figure. It is noted that the tail side tapered roller bearing T is not provided with such a labyrinth seal.

If the aforesaid labyrinth seal S is not provided in the head side tapered roller bearing H a large quantity of lubricating oil is fed through a front side of the bearing H the left hand side of the tapered roller bearing H shown in and through a back side thereof the right hand side as seen in the figure . Hence the head side tapered roller bearing H receives a larger quantity of oil inflow than the tail side tapered roller bearing T. Accordingly the head side tapered roller bearing H is increased in the oil agitation loss. On the other hand the tail side tapered roller bearing T is supplied with less lubricating oil at cold engine start so that the bearing is prone to seizing.

On this account the head side tapered roller bearing H is provided with the aforesaid labyrinth seal S for restricting the oil inflow therein so that the tapered roller bearing H is reduced in the oil agitation loss. In the meantime some of the lubricating oil to be allowed to flow into the head side tapered roller bearing H without the labyrinth seal S is supplied to the tail side tapered roller bearing T. Thus the lubrication of the tail side tapered roller bearing T is improved so that the bearing is less prone to seizing. In a case where the tail side tapered roller bearing T is supplied with an excessive quantity of lubricating oil a suitable labyrinth seal may also be provided in the tapered roller bearing T.

An effective way to reduce the running torque of the tapered roller bearings H T is to reduce the oil agitation loss and the rolling viscous resistance. Firstly the oil agitation loss may be reduced by quickly discharging the lubricating oil flown into the bearing. Therefore means for promoting oil outflow may be provided. Specifically a roller loading ratio is decreased to provide an increased circumferential gap between the tapered rollers. However the decrease of the roller loading ratio leads to the decrease of the load carrying capacity. To compensate for this drawback the tapered roller is increased in the diameter mean diameter . In addition the tapered roller is decreased in the area of contact with the lubricating oil by reducing the length thereof. Furthermore the bearing may be enhanced in a pumping action by increasing a contact angle of the outer ring. On the other hand the restriction of the oil inflow itself is thought to contribute to the reduction of the oil agitation loss. Therefore the labyrinth seal S as inflow restricting means may be provided at least in the head side tapered roller bearing H as described above.

The decreased roller loading ratio and the configuration of the roller increased in the diameter but decreased in the length or the thick short roller configuration lead to the reduction of the area of rolling contact surface and hence the rolling viscous resistance is reduced. Furthermore the rolling viscous resistance may also be reduced by providing the crowning on the raceway or the rolling contact surface.

While the differential gear assembly has been described as one example of the vehicular pinion shaft supporting assembly a transaxle assembly similarly serving to support the pinion shaft may be constituted the same way.

A concept of the general crowning is described by way of example of the inner ring. depicts a contour of an axial section of the inner ring having a crowning provided on the inner raceway the crowning shown in an exaggerated form. The inner raceway in rolling contact with the rolling contact surface of the tapered roller is formed with a crowning slightly projected radially outwardly. The crowning is a composite crowning having a substantial trapezoidal shape an upper side of which is defined by an arc.

A method of calculating a quantity of the crowning on the inner ring hereinafter also referred to as the inner ring crowning amount is described as below. In SK denotes the width of the inner raceway with respect to an axial direction of the inner ring denotes the taper angle of the inner raceway and L L denote the dimensions of chamfers formed at the opposite ends of the inner raceway . The length LRI of the raceway is calculated based on the following equation 1 cos 12 1 

A length LRI defined by LRI 0.6LRI is taken in a manner to extend in opposite directions from a midpoint of the raceway length LRI as shown in the figure whereas points located on the inner raceway in correspondence to the opposite ends of the length LRI are defined as points A and B . In this case the points A B are located inwardly of end points Ae Be of the arc. However the points A B may also coincide with the respective end points Ae Be of the arc.

The configuration of the inner ring crowning may include not only the substantial trapezoidal shape having the arcuate upper side as shown in but also other various shapes such as a shape defined by a single arc a shape defined by plural arcs a logarithmic crowning shape and an elliptical crowning shape. The aforementioned concept of the crowning amount is applicable to all these crowning configurations.

In addition the aforementioned concept of the crowning and the definition of the crowning amount may be similarly applied to the roller and the outer ring.

It is noted that a crowning composed of a combination of plural shapes formed in the range of the raceway length the length of the rolling contact surface is referred to as composite crowning whereas a crowning composed of a single arcuate shape formed in the range of the raceway length is referred to as full crowning.

Next description is made on a concept of the full crowning and a concept of a crowning amount based on the above concept.

On the other hand schematically shows a configuration of a section of a crowning formed between the end point A and the end point B of the raceway length LRI of the inner raceway shown in . Referring to the straight line M passing through the midpoint C of the chord G of the crowning with respect to the raceway length LRI and through the center point O of the crowning arc intersects perpendicularly to the chord G and passes through the center point C of the crowning arc with respect to the raceway length LRI.

The present inventors define the distance between the center point C of the crowning arc and the midpoint C of the chord thereof as the inner ring crowning amount CRI. Provided that RCI denotes the radius of the crowning arc as shown in the figure the inner ring crowning amount CRI is determined based on the following equation 2 2 2 

The present inventors define the quantity of the crowning on the tapered roller hereinafter also referred to as roller crowning amount to be the distance between a center point of a crowning arc defined by the effective roller length LWR of the rolling contact surface and a chord of the crowning arc. A method of calculating the roller crowning amount is described as below.

Referring to the aforesaid effective roller length LWR is determined based on the following equation 3 cos 2 12 3 where L denotes the width of the rolling contact surface with respect to the central axis of the tapered roller denotes the taper angle of the rolling contact surface and S S denote the indicated dimensions of curved surfaces of the chamfered portions formed at the opposite ends of the rolling contact surface .

The dimensions S S in the above equation 3 are set to given widths according to the size of the bearing.

Referring to the straight line M passing through the midpoint C of the chord G of the crowning with respect to the effective roller length LWR and through the center point O of the crowning arc intersects perpendicularly to the chord G and passes through the center point C of the crowning arc with respect to the effective roller length LWR.

The present inventors define the distance between the center point C of the crowning arc and the midpoint C of the chord thereof as the roller crowning amount CR. Provided that RC denotes the radius of the crowning arc as shown in the figure the roller crowning amount CR is determined based on the following equation 4 2 4 .

Next depicts a contour of an axial section of the outer ring having a full crowning provided on the outer raceway the crowning shown in an exaggerated form. Referring to the inner periphery of the outer ring is formed with the outer raceway in rolling contact with the rolling contact surface of the tapered roller . The outer raceway is provided with the full crowning protruded radially inwardly. The outer raceway is formed with chamfered portions which are extended from the opposite ends of the outer raceway to respective axial end faces of the outer ring . These chamfered portions are formed to smoothly continue into a small diameter end face and a great diameter end face of the outer ring .

The present inventors define the quantity of the crowning of the outer ring hereinafter also referred to as outer ring crowning amount to be the distance CRO between the center point of a crowning arc defined by a raceway length LRO of the outer raceway and a chord of the crowning arc. A method of calculating the outer ring crowning amount CRO is described as below.

Referring to the aforesaid raceway length LRO is determined based on the following equation 5 cos 70 5 where SB denotes the width of the outer raceway with respect to the axial direction of the outer ring denotes the taper angle of the outer raceway and C CL denote the indicated dimensions of curved surfaces of the chamfered portions formed at the opposite ends of the outer raceway .

The dimensions C CL in the above equation 5 are set to given widths according to the size of the bearing.

On the other hand schematically shows a configuration of a section of the crowning formed between an end point A and an end point B of the raceway length LRO of the outer raceway shown in . Referring to a straight line M passing through the midpoint C of a chord G of the crowning with respect to the raceway length LRO and through the center point O of the crowning arc intersects perpendicularly to the chord G and passes through the center point C of the crowning arc with respect to the raceway length LRO.

The present inventors define the distance between the center point C of the crowning arc and the midpoint C of the chord thereof to be the outer ring crowning amount CRO. Provided that RCO denotes the radius of the crowning arc shown in the figure the outer ring crowning amount CRO is determined based on the following equation 6 2 6 .

In the aforementioned manners the tapered roller and the inner and outer rings each provided with the full crowning may be determined for the crowning amounts.

It goes without saying that the crowning amounts of the tapered roller and the inner and outer rings which are each provided with the full crowning may be calculated based on the concept of the general crowning as described above. Specifically the same method as that of determining the length LRI in may be taken to determine a length LWR corresponding to the length LWR with respect to the tapered roller or to determine a length LRO corresponding to the length LRO with respect to the outer ring . Subsequently the respective center points of the individual arcs may be determined so as to determine the crowning amounts. The crowning amount thus determined based on the concept of the general crowning substantially coincides with the quantity determined based on the concept of the full crowning .

Next the crowning radius RCO of the outer ring and the raceway length LRO thereof determined in the aforementioned manner are used to define RCO LRO as an outer ring crowning parameter. On the other hand the crowning radius RCI of the inner ring and the raceway length LRI thereof are used to define RCI LRI as an inner ring crowning parameter.

The present inventors applied the aforementioned roller crowning amount the inner ring crowning amount and the outer ring crowning amount to the following equations 7 8 9 and 10 for calculating a total crowning amount an outer ring crowning rate a roller crowning rate and an inner ring crowning rate. Total crowning amount Outer ring crowning amount Inner ring crowning amount Roller crowning amount 2 7 Outer ring crowning rate Outer ring crowning amount Total crowning amount 8 Roller crowning rate Roller crowning amount 2 Total crowning amount 9 Inner ring crowning rate Inner ring crowning amount Total crowning amount 10 

Next the present inventors experimentally measured the running torques of the tapered roller bearings according to the embodiments of the invention in order to investigate relations between the running torque and each of the above crowning parameters between the running torque and the total crowning amount and between the running torque and each of the crowning rates. The investigation results are described as below.

The following method was used for taking measurements of the rotational toque of the tapered roller bearing. A bearing testing machine for example was used whereas a tapered roller bearing as an exemplary product of the invention was mounted in the testing machine. Subsequently either one of the inner ring and the outer ring was rotated while measurement was taken on a running torque acting on the other one of the inner and outer rings. The test conditions are as follows. The tapered roller bearing equivalent to JIS30306 bearing product constituted as taught by the above embodiment was used whereas a gear oil for differential gear assembly was used as the lubricating oil. An axial load of 4 kN was applied to the bearing as a pseudo preload. The bearing was rotated at two rotational speeds of 300 r min and 2000 r min .

Lubrication conditions during the test are as follows. In the case of the rotational speed of 300 r min a suitable amount of lubricating oil at normal temperatures was only applied to the bearing prior to the test. While the test was conducted the bearing was not subjected to the subsequent lubrication. In the case of the rotational speed of 2000 r min on the other hand the test was conducted with a lubricating oil at a temperature of 323K 50 C. circulatingly supplied at a rate of 0.5 litter per minute. The reason for adopting the method of changing the lubricating oil supplying method according to the rotational speed of the bearing is that the influence of the oil agitation loss which results from an excessive supply of the lubricating oil is minimized by supplying only the minimum required amount of lubricating oil with respect to each of the rotational speeds thereby extracting the running torque based on rolling friction. The tapered roller bearings subjected to the test were exemplary products of the invention which individually had the total crowning amounts and the respective crowning rates set to different values. Measurement was taken on the running torque of the respective test products so as to determine the respective relations of the running torque to the total crowning amount and to the respective crowning rates. Based on the relations thus determined a numerical range for the reduction of the running torque was specified.

Next is a scatter graph showing a relation between the outer ring crowning rate and the torque ratio of the tapered roller bearing. Apparently the graph indicates a tendency that with the increase of the outer ring crowning rate the maximum value of the torque ratios is progressively decreased in the case of the outer ring crowning rate of less than 40 . In the case of the outer ring crowning rate of 40 or more the torque ratios are stably distributed in a range of lower values as compared with the case of the outer ring crowning rate of less than 40 . If the outer ring crowning rate exceeds 85 the bearing may be decreased in service life when edge load is applied between the inner ring and the rollers. Accordingly the outer ring crowning rate may preferably be 85 or less.

As described above the torque ratio of the tapered roller bearing or specifically the relations of the running torque to the total crowning amount and to the respective crowning rates were investigated through experiments. Based on the experiment results the inventors have obtained a finding that the running torque of the tapered roller bearing can be reduced by satisfying the conditions including a total crowning amount of 50 m or more an outer ring crowning rate of 40 or more and a roller crowning rate of 20 or less.

Next data on Examples 1 2 of the tapered roller bearing each including a head side bearing and a tail side bearing and Comparative Example 1 including a head side bearing and a tail side bearing are listed in Table 1. The bearings have specifically set numerical values. As to the crowning the bearing of Example 1 has the crowning amount and ratios set in the numerical ranges shown in the table thus satisfying the aforementioned conditions the total crowning amount of 50 m or more the outer ring crowning rate of 40 or more and the roller crowning rate of 20 or less . On the other hand the bearing of Comparative Example 1 has the crowning amount and ratios set in such numerical ranges as not to satisfy these conditions. In addition data on Example 3 and Comparative Example 2 of the head side bearing as well as on Example 4 and Comparative Example 3 of the tail side bearing are listed in Table 2. In Tables 1 and 2 the unit for the numerical values representing the lengths is millimeter.

In Tables 1 and 2 the bearing of Example 1 is provided with full crownings the sectional shape of the raceway is defined only by an arc on both of the inner ring and outer ring. In the other examples and comparative examples only the outer ring is provided with the full crowning whereas the inner ring is provided with the composite crowning the raceway has the substantially trapezoidal sectional shape having the arcuate upper side .

Measurements were taken on the running torque of the bearings of Examples 1 2 and Comparative Example 1 shown in Table 1. The results are shown in and . is a graph showing the results of the head side tapered roller bearings whereas is a graph showing the results of the tail side tapered roller bearings. The running torque was measured under the conditions including an axial load of 4 kN rotational speeds of 250 to 4000 r min a lubricating oil of gear oil 75W 90 and an oil temperature of 50 C. The lubricating oil was supplied in such an amount to completely fill the back side of the bearing.

Measurements were taken on the running torque of the bearings of Example 3 and Comparative Example 2 shown in Table 2. The results are shown in .

Measurements were taken on the running torque of the bearings of Example 4 and Comparative Example 3 shown in Table 2. The results are shown in .

As seen from and Examples 1 2 as contrasted with Comparative Example 1 achieve notable reductions of the head side running torque across the rotational speed range of 250 to 4000 r min . In respect of the tail side running torque Examples 1 2 also achieve greater reductions than Comparative Example 1. Particularly Example 1 provided with the oil inflow restricting mechanism dramatically reduces the running torque.

In as well Example 3 achieve a much greater reduction of the head side running torque than Comparative Example 2 across the rotational speed range of 250 to 3000 r min .

As described above all the Examples 1 to 4 achieve the greater reduction of running torque than the comparative examples. In respect of some of the items listed in Table 1 and Table 2 a comparison of the numerical range is made between the examples and the comparative examples. The results are listed in the following Table 3.

As apparent from Table 3 there are significant numerical differences between the examples and the comparative examples in respect of the roller length diameter ratio the roller diameter parameter the outer ring crowning parameter and the inner ring crowning parameter. Particularly the difference between the examples and the comparative examples is obvious in respect of the roller length diameter ratio the outer ring crowning parameter and the inner ring crowning parameter which are apparently predominant factors of the reduction of running torque. It is understood that the rolling viscous resistance may be reduced by setting the crowning parameters of the above factors to some values in the above numerical ranges. Accordingly the rolling viscous resistance may be reduced by defining the crowning based on a different viewpoint from the aforementioned approach to specify the total crowning amount the outer ring crowning rate and the roller crowning rate. That is the rolling viscous resistance may be reduced by defining the crowning based on the outer ring crowning parameter and the inner ring crowning parameter whereby the reduction of the running torque may be achieved.

It is noted however that the aforesaid numerical ranges of the above crowning parameters should take into account some plus or minus error margin or the numerical differences from those of the comparative example. For achieving the reduction of the running torque the outer ring crowning parameter RCO LRO should be set to a value in the range of 30 to 150 whereas the inner ring crowning parameter RCI LRI should be set to a value in the range of 50 to 260.

As to the roller loading rates listed in Table 3 the numerical range of the examples include the numerical range of the comparative examples. That is the examples exhibit no significant difference from the comparative examples in this respect. However it is obvious that the increase of the roller loading ratio generally results in the increase of the running torque. Because of the relation with the load carrying capacity the roller loading ratio may not be simply reduced. The roller loading ratio is closely related with the roller length diameter ratio. Therefore what produces the effect to reduce the running torque attributable to the oil agitation loss and the rolling viscous resistance is to reduce the roller length diameter ratio while maintaining the roller loading ratio as small as possible.

Specifically the roller loading ratio z DW dm may preferably be in the range of 0.7 to 0.92 which includes the numerical range of the examples shown in Table 3. The reason for defining the lower limit to be 0.7 is that if the roller loading ratio is less than 0.7 the bearing suffers insufficient load carrying capacity or rigidity. The reason for defining the upper limit to be 0.92 is that if the roller loading ratio exceeds 0.92 the bearing is decreased in the oil discharging effect due to an insufficient pumping action so that the oil agitation loss and the rolling viscous resistance are not fully reduced.

The roller length roller diameter ratio LWR DW may preferably be in the range of 1.1 to 1.7 which includes the numerical range of the examples shown in Table 3. The reason for defining the lower limit to be 1.1 is that if the roller length roller diameter ratio is less than 1.1 the roller diameter is so great that the rolling viscous resistance is increased. The reason for defining the upper limit to be 1.7 is that if the roller length roller diameter ratio exceeds 1.7 the roller diameter is so small that the load carrying capacity is decreased.

On the other hand the roller diameter parameter 2DW D d may preferably be in the range of 0.44 to 0.52 which includes the numerical range of the examples shown in Table 3. The reason for defining the lower limit to be 0.44 is that if the parameter is less than 0.44 a free space within the bearing has such a small volume that the oil flow is slowed. Hence the bearing fails to achieve a sufficient effect to reduce the oil agitation loss. The reason for defining the upper limit to be 0.52 is that if the parameter exceeds 0.52 the roller diameter is too great relative to the bearing size diameters of the inner and outer rings so that the configuration of the whole body of the bearing lacks in balance. This makes it difficult to apply the bearing to common machines.

Examples 1 and 2 satisfying the aforementioned conditions determined based on the scatter graphs to the total crowning amount of 50 m or more the outer ring crowning rate of 40 or more and the roller crowning rate of 20 or less have obvious differences from Comparative Example 1 in respect of the running torques shown in and . This also demonstrates the fact that the reduction of the running torque may be achieved by satisfying the above conditions.

The restriction of the oil inflow by means of the labyrinth seal is also thought to contribute to the reduction of the running torque. The outer ring is designed to have a great contact angle of 28.811 such as to promote the oil discharge. This is also thought to produce the effect to reduce the running torque. The outer ring may have the contact angle in the range of 25 to 30 such as to provide a similar effect.

