---

title: Declarative, non-transformational layout of data
abstract: Briefly, in accordance with one embodiment of the invention, a form author may declaratively state a condition under which a break event may occur to insert a break between data items in a list of data items. Optionally, formatting, a leader subform, and/or a trailer subform may be inserted between the data items in the event the condition is satisfied. Such a declarative condition may be introduced into an XFA template specification. A condition that may be evaluated may include mathematical operation, a Boolean expression, an integer expression, a floating point expression, a string expression, and/or a data item evaluation. A new layout of the list of data items may be implemented without transformation of the original layout of the list of data items wherein the list of data items may revert to the original layout of the list of data items, for example after performing an operation on the new layout of the list of data items.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08352851&OS=08352851&RS=08352851
owner: Adobe Systems Incorporated
number: 08352851
owner_city: San Jose
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050819
---
In records and data management a file may include a list of data items in contiguous order often organized for example in the form of records. At times it may be desirable to present display print and or otherwise output the data in one or more alternative layouts based on a desired context. For example in a list of employees that includes the departments the employees work in it may be desirable to insert a break between the employee data items when the department name changes.

It will be appreciated that for simplicity and or clarity of illustration elements illustrated in the figures have not necessarily been drawn to scale. For example the dimensions of some of the elements may be exaggerated relative to other elements for clarity. Further if considered appropriate reference numerals have been repeated among the figures to indicate corresponding or analogous elements.

In the following detailed description numerous specific details are set forth to provide a thorough understanding of claimed subject matter. However it will be understood by those skilled in the art that claimed subject matter may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known methods procedures components and or circuits have not been described in detail.

Some portions of the detailed description that follows are presented in terms of algorithms programs and or symbolic representations of operations on data bits or binary digital signals within a computer memory for example. These algorithmic descriptions and or representations may include techniques used in the data processing arts to convey the arrangement of a computer system and or other information handling system to operate according to such programs algorithms and or symbolic representations of operations.

An algorithm may be generally considered to be a self consistent sequence of acts and or operations leading to a desired result. These include physical manipulations of physical quantities. Usually though not necessarily these quantities take the form of electrical and or magnetic signals capable of being stored transferred combined compared and or otherwise manipulated. It has proven convenient at times principally for reasons of common usage to refer to these signals as bits values elements symbols characters terms numbers and or the like. It should be understood however that all of these and or similar terms are to be associated with the appropriate physical quantities and are merely convenient labels applied to these quantities.

Unless specifically stated otherwise as apparent from the following discussions it is appreciated that throughout the specification discussion utilizing terms such as processing computing calculating determining and or the like refer to the action and or processes of a computer and or computing system and or computing platform and or similar electronic computing device that manipulate or transform data represented as physical such as electronic quantities within the registers and or memories of the computer and or computing system and or similar electronic and or computing device into other data similarly represented as physical quantities within the memories registers and or other such information storage transmission and or display devices of the computing system and or other information handling system.

Embodiments claimed may include apparatuses for performing the operations herein. This apparatus may be specially constructed for the desired purposes or it may comprise a general purpose computing device selectively activated and or reconfigured by a program stored in the device. Such a program may be stored on a storage medium such as but is not limited to any type of disk including floppy disks optical disks CD ROMs magnetic optical disks read only memories ROMs random access memories RAMs electrically programmable read only memories EPROMs electrically erasable and or programmable read only memories EEPROMs flash memory magnetic and or optical cards and or any other type of media suitable for storing electronic instructions and or capable of being coupled to a system bus for a computing device and or other information handling system.

The processes and or displays presented herein are not inherently related to any particular computing device and or other apparatus. Various general purpose systems may be used with programs in accordance with the teachings herein or it may prove convenient to construct a more specialized apparatus to perform the desired method. The desired structure for a variety of these systems will appear from the description below. In addition embodiments are not described with reference to any particular programming language. It will be appreciated that a variety of programming languages may be used to implement the teachings described herein.

In the following description and or claims the terms coupled and or connected along with their derivatives may be used. In particular embodiments connected may be used to indicate that two or more elements are in direct physical and or electrical contact with each other. Coupled may mean that two or more elements are in direct physical and or electrical contact. However coupled may also mean that two or more elements may not be in direct contact with each other but yet may still cooperate and or interact with each other. Furthermore the term and or may mean and it may mean or it may mean exclusive or it may mean one it may mean some but not all it may mean neither and or it may mean both although the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

In one or more embodiments an object may refer to an item that may be selected and or manipulated for example shapes pictures images text and or text boxes that may appear on a display as rendered by a computing platform coupled to the display. In one or more embodiments the term render may refer to displaying an object on a display coupled to a computing platform and or to manipulating the object on the display. In one or more embodiments graphic may refer to a pictorial and or image representation of an object and in one or more alternative embodiments may refer to an object itself. In one or more embodiments a graphic element may be single and or fundamental graphic object and or a portion thereof. In one or more embodiments a letterform may be a shape and or design of a letter of an alphabet. In one or more embodiments a font may refer to a design for a set of characters and or letters for printing and or displaying. In one or more embodiments text may refer to letters and or characters that may be manipulated and or combined as words lines and or pages. However these are merely example definitions of the above terms phrases and or concepts wherein other definitions may apply as well and the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects. In one or more embodiments to parse may refer to dividing computer code into elements that can be analyzed and or identified. In one or more embodiments file may refer to a collection of data code instructions and or other information that may be readable accessible and or able to be acted on by a computing platform and or the like. In one or more embodiments a format may refer to a predefined organizational structure for data code instructions and or other information that may be readable accessible and or able to be acted on by a computing platform and or the like.

In one or more embodiments a graphical user interface GUI may refer to a program interface that utilizes displayed graphical information to allow a user to control and or operate a computing platform and or the like. A pointer may refer to a cursor and or other symbol that appears on a display screen that may be moved and or controlled with a pointing device to select objects and or input commands via a graphical user interface of a computing platform and or the like. A pointing device may refer to a device used to control a cursor to select objects and or input commands via a graphical user interface of a computing platform and or the like. Pointing devices may include for example a mouse a trackball a track pad a track stick a keyboard a stylus a digitizing tablet and or similar types of devices. A cursor may refer to a symbol and or a pointer where an input selection and or actuation may be made with respect to a region of in a graphical user interface. In one embodiment content reflow may refer to where the contents of a document may be rearranged to alter the layout order and or readability of the content of the document. In one or more embodiments transient may refer to being in a state for a brief and or temporary period of time and or passing with time and or a temporary state of being. In one or more embodiments an icon may refer to a smaller sized picture that may represent an object a file and or a program and in some embodiments an icon may be a thumbnail wherein a thumbnail may refer to a smaller sized image and or picture of an object a file and or a program and or a portion thereof. However these are merely example definitions of terms relating to graphical user interfaces and or computing platforms and or the like and the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

In one or more embodiments a database may refer an organization of information created stored accessed edited and or otherwise utilized by a computing platform. In one or more embodiments a tag may refer to a command contained in a file object and or document that may specify how the file object and or document and or a portion thereof may be formatted. In one or more embodiments metadata may refer to information pertaining to data contained in a file object and or document for example formatting information date of creation date of editing date saved how data was obtained and or from where data was obtained. Such metadata for example may be utilized in for database management purposes and or for data warehousing of multiple databases although the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. In one or more embodiments an application programming interface API may refer to a set of routines protocols and or tools utilized to cause a program to operate in conjunction with an operating system. In one or more embodiments an operating system may refer to a program to execute on a computing platform to handle input and or output commands file management printing displaying storing and or communicating of information for the computing platform. However these are merely examples of database and or operating system functions and the scope of claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

Referring now to a diagram of a computer program to transform data at least in part in a declarative non transformative fashion in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. As shown in computer program may include graphical user interface to display file that may include list of records and or data items where the records and or data items may include first record second record up to N number of records and or data items ending with Nth record in list . One or more of the records and or data items may include data which may be no data and or a single datum where the data may be represented in one or more fields. In one or more embodiments computer program may be for example such as Adobe Acrobat 7.0 Professional Adobe Acrobat 7.0 Standard Adobe InDesign CS2 Adobe FrameMaker 7.1 available from Adobe Systems Incorporated of San Jose Calif. USA and or any other suitable computer program product available from Adobe Systems Incorporated or the like type of computer program product. In general computer program may be any suitable computer program product able to render print manipulate display and or otherwise output data contained in list of file or the like for example using records and or data items such as record record and or up to record to contain the data. In one or more embodiments a record may include one or more fields in which a datum and or data may be entered and or stored. In one or more embodiments a field may refer to unit and or space into which a datum and or data may be stored. However these are merely examples of elements that may be utilized for entering storing and or organizing data and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects. In general file may comprise a list of data items which may be for example data lines having an associated datum and or data and such data items may be arranged and or organized using various structures such as lists fields records objects and so on however the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects. In one or more embodiments a subform may refer to information formatting and or a command that may be inserted between data items for example page breaks leaders trailers returns spaces sections breaks and so on however the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

In one or more embodiments a break such as break between records and or data items may be inserted between record and record for example for providing a desired layout for printing displaying and or otherwise outputting list . Such a break and or subforms may be conditionally inserted between data items based at least in part on one data item satisfying a condition and or a comparison between a data item and at least one or more other data items satisfying a condition. Likewise a break such as break may appear between record and record for example for providing a desired layout for printing displaying and or otherwise outputting list . In one or more embodiments such a break and or breaks may be transitory for such that a layout resulting there from may not transform the original data contained in file and or the records and or data items at least in part. For example in accordance with one or more embodiments a user using program may generate a layout of file and or the records and or data items for purposes of printing and or displaying. When a desired printing and or displaying operation is completed the layout of file and or the records and or data items may preserve the original data of file without changing the data. Such generating at least in part of the layout of file while preserving the original data in one or more embodiments may be referred to as a non transformational layout and or formatting of the data contained in file and or the records and or data items of file . However such generating at least in part a particular layout of data without transforming the data of a file and or the records and or data items contained in the file is merely one example of a non transformational layout of information and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Referring now to a diagram of a list having data that may be transformed at least in part in a declarative non transformative fashion that may in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. As shown in list may include one or more records and or data items such as record record and or record . Record may include one or more fields record may include one or more fields and or record may include one or more fields . In the example shown in fields fields and or fields may include a record number field with a number as field data a name field with a name as field data a department field with a department as field data a ZIP code and or a postal code field as field data and or an amount field having a dollar amount as field data. However these are merely examples of the types of fields that may be contained in a given record and or data item and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. In accordance with one or more embodiments it may be desirable to conditionally insert a break between records and or data items upon satisfaction of a condition for example when a dollar amount exceeds a given predetermined value such as 500. Thus in such an example break may be inserted between record and record since the dollar amount 457.99 in the amount field of record is less than 500 but the dollar amount 510.52 in the amount field of record is greater than 500. In an alternative example it may be desirable to conditionally insert a break between records and or data items for example when the running total dollar amount of consecutive fields when added together exceeds a predetermined value such as 900. Thus in such an example break may be inserted between record and since the total of the dollar amount 457.99 in record and the dollar amount 510.52 in record results in a sum of 968.51 which is greater than 900. In another example it may be desirable to conditionally insert a break between records and or data items for example after every tenth record. Thus in such an example break may be inserted between record and record since record is record number . As yet another example it may be desirable to conditionally insert a break between records and or data items for example when the data in the department field changes from one department to another second department. In such an example break may be inserted between record and record since the department name changes from shipping in record to receiving in record . As yet another example it may be desirable to conditionally insert a break between records and or data items when the forward sortation area FSA of the zip code field or generically of a postal code field has changed from one record to the next where the FSA is the first three numbers and or characters of a postal code. Thus in such an example break may be inserted between record and record since the FSA of the zip code field of record is and the FSA of the zip code field of record is . In such examples given for when it may be desirable to conditionally insert a break between records and or data items such a determination of when and or where to insert a break may be based at least in part on a comparison of data in one field of a record with the data in at least one or more other records and or data items and or alternatively based on an evaluation of a single data item satisfying a predetermined condition. Such a comparison may comprise for example mathematical operation a Boolean expression an integer expression a floating point expression a string expression and or a data item evaluation such as discussed in the above examples. Furthermore other types of comparisons may be utilized for example a fuzzy logic type operation a rules based type operation an expert system type operation and so on and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

Referring now to a flow diagram of method by which data may be transformed at least in part in a declarative non transformative fashion in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. depicts one example order of the blocks of method however method is not necessarily limited to the particular order of the blocks as shown in wherein the blocks of method may occur in one or more other orders and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. Likewise method may comprise more or fewer blocks than shown in and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. In one or more embodiments an expression which may be an object expression to control a break between records and or data items may be created at block . A condition of the expression may be evaluated at block for example between the data of a first record and the data of a second record. In one or more embodiments a user may declare a condition and or conditions under which a break may be inserted into list which may be referred to as a declarative condition upon which data of file may be output in a new layout. A determination may be made at block whether the condition of the expression is satisfied. In the event the condition is satisfied a break may be introduced between the records and or data items at block . Optionally at block one or more specified formatting elements and or subforms may be inserted at and or nearby the section break. For example a section break may be inserted between the records and or data items and a predetermined number of lines and or returns may be inserted between the records and or data items after the first record and or before the second record. Likewise a section break may be specified as page break and or a page break may be inserted between the records and or data items in addition to the section break. Other types of formatting may be inserted as well for example the insertion of a leader record a trailer record a break to a new page and or to a new content area and or new content may be inserted at and or near the inserted break and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. It should be noted block and or block may be optional such that the introduction of breaks and or formatting may be handled by block at least in part wherein block and or block may not be required in at least one or more embodiments although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

At block a determination may be made whether the end of the list of data items such as list is reached. Block may also be executed in the event the condition of the expression at block is not satisfied. In the event the end of the list is not yet reached method may continue with the next record at block to subsequently evaluate the condition of the expression at block . In the event it is determined that the end of the list is reached and or any other condition that may be set to cease evaluation of the object condition at block the list such as list may be output with the inserted breaks and or the optionally inserted formatting. For example such output at block may include rendering the list displaying the list printing the list transmitting the list saving the list and so on in a new layout that includes at least in part the inserted breaks and or the optionally inserted formatting. When an action of such output is completed for example after printing of the list in the new layout the list may revert to an original form at block although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. In one or more embodiments method may be implemented using Adobe PostScript and or any other similar type of language for example to provide a layout for printing although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. In one or more embodiments block may be optional and or not included in method . In such embodiments the original list of data in file may be a binary data file having no formatting and or breaks inserted. In processing the data for output at block the data may be read as part of execution of method for generating a new file and or copy of file that includes one or more breaks and or formatting. Such a new file may be saved printed displayed stored and so on optionally without affecting at least in part the original data of file although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

In one or more embodiments a conditional expression such as evaluated at block may include a conditional break statement which may be defined for example via modification of an Extensible Markup Language XML Forms Architecture XFA template specification statement. In one or more embodiments such a conditional break statement may be similar to a break statement but a conditional break statement but may be controlled by script. Such a conditional break statement which may be referred to as a Break on Change Event in one or more embodiments may be a script or script like process that may execute in the event it is desired to test for a record field value change from one record to another record. By making the conditional break statement a scriptable and or a script like event more complex changes in the data of one or more records and or data items may be tested as a conditional event for example in the evaluation of a condition of an expression at block .

In one or more embodiments such conditional break processing such as the evaluation at block may comprise any one or more of the following to determine whether a break should occur to optionally insert a leader subform and or to optionally insert a trailer subform. In one embodiment these three processing events may occur and in one or more alternative embodiments fewer than and or greater than these three processing events may occur and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

In one or more embodiments the break element and the conditional break element may be symmetrical wherein the break element may be equivalent to a conditional break element when the script returns TRUE although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. For example 

The specification of either a leader and or a trailer may indicate such a leader and or trailer subform may be inserted before and or after a subform break occurs. The value may be a space delimited list of identifications IDs such that the occur values will be used to determine what leaders and or trailers are available as the list is processed from left to right. In such an arrangement it is possible to specify subforms to insert between subforms as desired. When used in conjunction with a conditional break the user may have control over whether a break is to occur and optionally to insert subforms before and or after the break although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

In one or more embodiments for example a user may desire to insert a break between detail lines with different Postal Code values to leave a trailer subform before leaving the old page at a page break and or to start a leader on the new page following the page break although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect. Such an event may be defined as follows 

Referring now to a block diagram of an information handling system able to transform data at least in part in a declarative non transformative fashion in accordance with one or more embodiments will be discussed. Information handling system may be utilized to tangibly embody computer program and or graphical user interface of by providing hardware components on which computer program and or graphical user interface may be executed for example to execute method of . Such a computer program and or machine readable instructions may be tangibly stored on a computer and or machine readable medium such as a compact disk CD digital versatile disk DVD flash memory device hard disk drive HDD and so on. As shown in information handling system may be controlled by processor . Processor may comprise a central processing unit such as a microprocessor or microcontroller for executing programs performing data manipulations and controlling the tasks of information handling system . Communication with processor may be implemented via bus for transferring information among the components of information handling system . Bus may include a data channel for facilitating information transfer between storage and other peripheral components of information handling system . Bus further may provide a set of signals utilized for communication with processor including for example a data bus and address bus and or a control bus. Bus may comprise any bus architecture according to promulgated standards for example industry standard architecture ISA extended industry standard architecture EISA Micro Channel Architecture MCA peripheral component interconnect PCI local bus standards promulgated by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE including IEEE 488 general purpose interface bus GPIB IEEE 696 S 100 and so on although the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Other components of information handling system may include for example main memory and or auxiliary memory . Information handling system may further comprise auxiliary processing processor which may be another processor a digital signal processor and so on. Main memory may provide storage of instructions and data for programs to be executed by processor . Main memory may be for example semiconductor based memory such as dynamic random access memory DRAM and or static random access memory SRAM and or the like. Other semi conductor based memory types may include for example synchronous dynamic random access memory SDRAM Rambus dynamic random access memory RDRAM ferroelectric random access memory FRAM and so on. Auxiliary memory may be utilized to store instructions and or data that to be loaded into main memory before execution. Auxiliary memory may include semiconductor based memory such as read only memory ROM programmable read only memory PROM erasable programmable read only memory EPROM electrically erasable read only memory EEPROM and or flash memory and or any block oriented memory similar to EEPROM. Auxiliary memory may also include any type of non semiconductor based memories including but not limited to magnetic tape drum floppy disk hard disk optical laser disk compact disc read only memory CD ROM write once compact disc CD R rewritable compact disc CD RW digital versatile disc read only memory DVD ROM write once DVD DVD R rewritable digital versatile disc DVD RAM and so on. Other varieties of memory devices are contemplated as well. Information handling system optionally include auxiliary processor which may be an auxiliary processor to manage input output an auxiliary processor to perform floating point mathematical operations a digital signal processor and or any special purpose microprocessor having an architecture suitable for fast execution of signal processing algorithms a back end processor and or any slave type processor subordinate to processor an additional microprocessor and or controller for dual and or multiple processor systems and or a coprocessor and or additional processor. Such auxiliary processors may be discrete processors and or or may be arranged in the same package as processor for example in a multicore and or multithreaded processor however the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in these respects.

Information handling system further may include display system for connecting to display and further may include input output I O controller to connect to one or more I O devices including for example I O device I O device up to an Nth I O device I O device . Display system may comprise a video display adapter having components for driving display including for example video memory a buffer and or a graphics engine. Such video memory may be for example video random access memory VRAM synchronous graphics random access memory SGRAM windows random access memory WRAM and or the like. Display may comprise a cathode ray tube CRT type display such as a monitor and or television and or may comprise an alternative type of display technology such as a projection type CRT type display a liquid crystal display LCD projector type display an LCD type display a light emitting diode LED type display a gas and or plasma type display an electroluminescent type display a vacuum fluorescent type display a cathodoluminescent and or field emission type display a plasma addressed liquid crystal PALC type display a high gain emissive display HGED type display and so forth. Input output controller may comprise one or more controllers and or adapters to prove interface functions between one or more of I O device I O device and or I O device . For example input output controller may comprise a serial port parallel port universal serial bus USB port and IEEE 1394 serial bus port infrared port network adapter printer adapter radio frequency RF communications adapter universal asynchronous receiver transmitter UART port and or the like to interface between corresponding I O devices such as a keyboard mouse trackball touchpad joystick trackstick infrared transducers printer modem RF modem bar code reader charge coupled device CCD reader scanner compact disc CD compact disc read only memory CD ROM digital versatile disc DVD video capture device TV tuner card touch screen stylus electroacoustic transducer microphone speaker audio amplifier and or the like. Input output controller and or I O device I O device and or I O device may provide and or receive analog and or digital signals to communicate between information handling system and external devices networks and or information sources. Input output controller and or I O device I O device and or I O device may implement industry promulgated architecture standards including for example Ethernet IEEE 802 type standards such as IEEE 802.3 for broadband and or baseband networks IEEE 802.3z for Gigabit Ethernet IEEE 802.4 for token passing bus networks IEEE 802.5 for token ring networks IEEE 802.6 for metropolitan area networks and or the like Fibre Channel digital subscriber line DSL asymmetric digital subscriber line ASDL frame relay asynchronous transfer mode ATM integrated digital services network ISDN personal communications services PCS transmission control protocol Internet protocol TCP IP serial line Internet protocol point to point protocol SLIP PPP and so on. Information handling system of is merely one example of an information handling system and or computing platform and the scope of the claimed subject matter is not limited in this respect.

Although the claimed subject matter has been described with a certain degree of particularity it should be recognized that elements thereof may be altered by persons skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and or scope of the claimed subject matter. It is believed that declarative non transformational layout of data and or many of its attendant advantages will be understood by the forgoing description and it will be apparent that various changes may be made in the form construction and or arrangement of the components thereof without departing from the scope and or spirit of the claimed subject matter or without sacrificing all of its material advantages the form herein before described being merely an explanatory embodiment thereof and or further without providing substantial change thereto. It is the intention of the claims to encompass and or include such changes.

