---

title: System and method for calling attention to a location of departure in a display
abstract: A system and method that calls attention to a location of departure in a display includes and interaction system and a content presentation system. The interaction system identifies each interaction with an area in a first display. The content presentation system upon return to the first display from a second display changes the first display to draw attention to the identified area with an animation. The animation expires after a first period of time.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08468452&OS=08468452&RS=08468452
owner: Xerox Corporation
number: 08468452
owner_city: Norwalk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051214
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 636 278 filed Dec. 15 2004 which is herein incorporated by reference in its entirety.

This invention relates to a system and method using an animation for a period of time to provide a user with subtle sensory cues with respect to an area or areas of departure within a display.

Typical hypertext documents such as MS Word MS Excel MS Power Point or Web pages and other types of displays such as a window impose an undue amount of cognitive overhead on readers. For instance traversing hyperlinks within a source page determining their relevance and returning to the source page may disrupt a reader s attention and fragment the reading process. Similarly within a window a user may have difficulty in determining which links have already been traversed and which one was most recently traversed.

With respect to documents which are displayed the use of fluid hypertext documents has significantly improved the reading process. Fluid documents use special user interface techniques to provide users with smooth lightweight and contextual access to additional supporting information i.e. annotations associated with the primary information in a document. This approach involves altering the graphics or typography of a document to show the annotations in the context of the primary information they annotate. When a reader expresses interest in an annotation space must be made within the document to display the annotation.

Several fluid graphical techniques are used for displaying annotations such as the fluid interline margin call out and overlay methods in accordance with one or more embodiments disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 230 170 to Zellweger et al. titled SPATIAL MORPHING OF TEXT TO ACCOMMODATE ANNOTATIONS which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Referring to the fluid interline technique is shown. A display shows a hypertext fluid document including a Nome information link in source information within passage . When a reader wants to know more about Nome Ak. but does not desire leaving the current page in the document they may express their interest by moving a cursor over the Nome information link using a mouse for example and the interline information is displayed as shown in . In particular the top and bottom margins of the passage are moved closer to each other the line spacing within passage is reduced and the size of the interline information is gradually scaled up from a small size e.g. a small unreadable point on the display to a relatively larger readable size in between the first portion and the second portion .

Referring to the fluid margin call out technique is shown. Here the technique involves gradually drawing a line on the display beginning at the Nome information link moving away from the Nome information link towards the nearest right margin where the line is then drawn to extend in a vertical direction e.g. up and or down as the margin call out gradually increases in size the same way the interline information does as discussed above in connection with . As the size increases drawing the line gently guides a reader s eyes toward the margin call out .

Referring to the fluid overlay technique is shown. As the overlay increases in size the same way the interline information does as discussed above in connection with the text in the source information directly underneath the overlay gradually fades to a lighter shade of color to enable the overlay to stand out against the source information as it floats over it.

Fluid documents employing the above described techniques help readers maintain their reading context in a document. However fluid documents and other types of displays do not distinguish traversed hyperlinks annotations and other areas from those that have not been traversed for example. Since users often arbitrarily visit pages associated with hyperlinks in a document it has been noticeably difficult for users to re orient themselves to the location in a page they were accessing upon their return from the traversed page. More generally users have trouble re orienting themselves in a display such as a window whenever they interrupt their interaction to work with another application or engage in another task.

A system that calls attention to a location of departure in a display in accordance with embodiments of the present invention includes and interaction system and a content presentation system. The interaction system identifies each interaction with an area in a first display. The content presentation system upon return to the first display from a second display changes the first display to draw attention to the identified area with an animation. The animation expires after a first period of time.

A method and a computer readable medium having stored thereon instructions for execution by a processor for calling attention to a location of departure in a display in accordance with embodiments of the present invention includes identifying each interaction with an area in a first display. Changing the first display to draw attention to the identified area with an animation upon return to the first display from a second display. The animation expiring after a first period of time.

The embodiments of the present invention provide a number of advantages. For example the present invention provides for intuitive and smooth content perusal within a display such as a document or window. Additionally the present invention enables users to conveniently and naturally determine areas previously interacted within a display while not imposing an undue amount of effort. Additionally the embodiments of the present invention provide for a smooth and pleasant reading experience using subtle sensory cues.

A system and method for drawing attention to a location of departure in a display such as a document or window upon return to the display in accordance with embodiments of the present invention is shown in . The system includes a server coupled to computers by way of a local network and a wide area network WAN although system may comprise other types and numbers of systems devices and networks and in other configurations. The present invention enables users to conveniently determine an area or areas of prior interest within a display without an undue amount of effort. Additionally the present invention provides for a smooth and pleasant reading experience by using subtle sensory cues such as animations.

Referring to the server includes a server processor a server memory and a server I O unit which are coupled together by one or more bus systems or other communication links although the server can comprise other types and numbers of elements and in other arrangements. The server processor executes at least a portion of the programmed instructions for drawing attention to a location of departure in a display upon return to the display in accordance with embodiments of the present invention as described herein and as set forth in . The instructions may be expressed as executable programs written in a number of computer programming languages such as BASIC Pascal C C C Java Perl COBOL FORTRAN assembly language machine code language or any other computer code or language that can be understood and executed by the server processor .

Further these programmed instructions are stored in the server memory for execution by the server processor although some or all of these instructions may be stored and executed elsewhere such as computer . The server memory comprises one or more types of fixed or portable memory accessible by the server processor such as ROM RAM SRAM DRAM DDRAM hard and floppy disks CDs DVDs magnetic tape optical disk ferroelectric and ferromagnetic memory electrically erasable programmable read only memory flash memory charge coupled devices smart cards or any other type of computer readable media although memory can comprise other types and numbers of elements and in other arrangements. The server memory is used to store these programmed instructions as well as other information. Server I O unit enables the server to communicate with computers by way of WAN although the unit may be coupled directly to computers .

Referring to the computer includes a computer processor a computer memory and a computer I O unit which are coupled together by one or more bus systems or other communication links although the computer can comprise other types and numbers of elements and in other arrangements. Further computer may include user input devices such as a keyboard and a mouse not illustrated . The computer processor executes one or more aspects of the present invention including at least a portion of the programmed instructions for drawing attention to an area in a display upon return to the display in accordance with embodiments of the present invention as described herein and as set forth in .

The instructions may be expressed as executable programs written in the same types of programming languages described above with respect to the server or any other computer code or language that can be understood and executed by the computer processor . These programmed instructions are stored in the computer memory for execution by the computer processor although some or all of these instructions and data may be stored elsewhere such as server . The computer memory can be of the same types as the server memory used by the server . Computer I O unit enables the computer to communicate with server by way of WAN although the computer may communicate directly with server . Additionally the computer comprises the same elements as computer .

Local network couples computers to each other and to WAN . Local network may comprise an Ethernet network developed by the assignees of the present invention although local network may comprise other types of private or public networks or other types of communication systems.

WAN couples the server to the local network . In embodiments of the present invention WAN comprises the Internet although WAN may comprise other types of public and private networks or other types of communication systems.

Referring to the operation of system for drawing attention to an area or areas within a document in accordance with embodiments of the present invention will now be described with reference back to . Although described with reference to a document this operation can be used for drawing attention to a location or locations of departure in other types of displays such as to an area or areas of interest in a window in a display device.

Beginning at step computer is operated to execute an application for viewing content such as a Web browser window or other type of display. In these embodiments computer requests a fluid document from server although the document or the instructions for generating it may be stored elsewhere such as at computer .

At step server transmits to computer the instructions to be executed by computer for generating fluid document where it is displayed by the display device of the computer although again instructions for generating other types of displays can be transmitted and used. These instructions may be transmitted in the form of HTML and or JavaScript code although Java Applets CGI scripts and or other types of code may be used.

Freezing an annotation is shown by making a color darker although other manners for showing that an annotation is frozen can be used. For color animation to identify a location of departure the hue of the most recently visited can be shifted or transitioned to the hue of the previously visited although other types of color animations can be used such as shifting or transitioning a fourth temporary hue to the hue of most recently visited. This color animation draws the user s attention to the location of departure in the display.

Referring to sightseeing annotation is associated with the Nome hyperlink and is shown in dark red the Iditarod annotation is associated with the Jeff King hyperlink and is shown in dark green the Doug Swingley annotation is associated with the days hours and minutes hyperlink and is shown in bright green the photo annotation is associated with the Doug Swingley hyperlink and is shown in bright red and the weather annotation is associated with the weather hyperlink and is shown in blue although other colors may be used. The Sightseeing Iditarod Doug Swingley photo and weather annotations each provide additional information about their associated hyperlink or its destination and help readers decide whether or not to follow a hyperlink before a user leaves the document .

At step computer executes a polling routine to detect signals sent from an input device e.g. mouse coupled to computer for tracking the movements of the mouse or when mouse buttons are pushed down or unreleased although other systems for tracking can be used such as tracking the position of a stylus or an eye tracker system that tracks the coordinates of previously viewed locations. The computer tracks the movements to determine whether a user has moved the mouse for manipulating a cursor displayed by the display device although other ways for tracking interaction with an area or areas in this and other displays can be used. Computer executes various instructions depending on the detected movements as described further herein. Thus for example the computer may detect that the user has moved the cursor over the Doug Swingley hyperlink causing computer to execute the instructions transmitted from server for increasing the size of the photo annotation in the same manner described above with respect to the interline information in . By way of example manipulations of the input device include dwelling over the hyperlink with a cursor using a button to click on the hyperlink and combining a button click with a keyboard entry.

The user may decide the Doug Swingley hyperlink is not relevant and may move the cursor away from the hyperlink to cause computer to detect the movement of the mouse and execute instructions for reducing the size of photo annotation until it is no longer present on the document after a predetermined amount of time has elapsed not illustrated hereinafter referred to as an example of animation or motion animation. In this example computer is programmed to initiate reducing the size of the annotation from about 300 msec to about one or more seconds from the point in time computer detects that the cursor was moved away from the hyperlink although other amounts of time may be used. Although a motion animation is disclosed other types of animations that disappear after a period of time can be used such as color changes existing graphical objects that change size shape and or location or new graphical objects that are introduced and are animated. Alternatively the user may decide to traverse the hyperlink and may move the cursor with the mouse over the annotation or the hyperlink and push the mouse button down to signal computer to execute instructions for retrieving loading and displaying a page hyperlinked to the document that is associated with the annotation and the hyperlink in that it provides additional more detailed information not illustrated .

At step in this example for a document computer detects that the mouse has moved the cursor over the Iditarod annotation and that one of the mouse buttons has been pushed such as a right click although again other ways for tracking interaction with an area or areas in this and other displays can be used. In response to the movement and right click computer receives and executes the instructions for increasing the size of the annotation not illustrated in the same manner described above with respect to the interline information in .

Alternatively the computer detects that the mouse has moved the cursor over the annotation and that one of the mouse buttons has been pushed such as a left click although again other ways for tracking interaction with an area or areas in this and other displays can be used. In response computer receives and executes the instructions for changing the color of the annotation and causing the annotation to remain displayed in the document hereinafter referred to as freezing and variations thereof although another area or areas which have been accessed in other types of displays can also be frozen. In this example the computer provides an animation by changing the color of Iditarod annotation from its initial bright shade of green not illustrated to the darker shade of green shown in to provide visual feedback to the user of its frozen state. The user may then move the cursor away from the annotation or other area in another display without causing it to be removed from document as described above in step with respect to the photo annotation .

Further the user may cause the computer to change the status of annotation or other area in this or another display from being frozen back to being unfrozen hereinafter referred to as thawing by moving the cursor over the annotation and pushing the mouse button down to signal computer to execute the appropriate instructions. When computer detects the cursor is no longer over the annotation it executes the instructions for the animation illustrating the size of the annotation being reduce until it is no longer present in the document . The above described freezing and thawing allows users to arrange the Sightseeing Iditarod Doug Swingley photo and weather annotations in the document to suit their current interests and improve the overall reading process.

At step in this example the computer detects that the mouse has moved the cursor over the weather annotation or other area in another display and that one of the mouse buttons has been pushed down although the computer could detect that the cursor has been moved over the weather hyperlink another hyperlinks or in other embodiment over another area in another display. In response computer receives and executes instructions for displaying the weather annotation as having a blue color which in embodiments of the present invention indicates annotation is the most recently traversed annotation. Computer then executes instructions to freeze the weather annotation or other area in another display as described above in connection with step . The user may then move the cursor away from the annotation without causing it to be removed from document as described above in step with respect to the photo annotation .

The annotation and hyperlink can be seen in the document by the user until the computer executes the instructions to retrieve load and display its associated hyperlinked page. Upon the user s return to document from the hyperlinked page computer displays weather annotation having the last traversed color blue as explained above for a first period of time from about second to about several seconds for example although other periods of time may be used. Although not shown computer gradually changes the color of the weather annotation which again is blue in this example back to the previously visited frozen color which is dark green not illustrated although again other colors may be used. This color change occurs over a second period of time from about second or less a process hereinafter referred to as color animation although again other periods of time may be used.

The above described animation features enable users to conveniently scan the document or other display such as a window for the last traversed color or other animation to find their previous reading location such as weather annotation on document upon returning. Further the animation reduces the user s need to explicitly scan the document or other display looking for the last traversed color or other animation. Second the last traversed color disappears after it has successfully drawn the user s attention to their previous location in document or other display and thus avoids cluttering the document or display or needlessly continuing to draw the user s attention.

In embodiments of the present invention while the annotations and in document are displayed using an exemplary fluid interline technique as described above in steps fluid call out or overlay techniques may also be used.

A portion of an alternative process for the operation of system for drawing attention to an area or areas within a document in accordance with embodiments of the present invention will now be described in connection with and with reference back to and . Beginning at step computer generates and displays fluid document in the same manner described above in connection with steps with respect to document except as described herein. Again although described with reference to a document as the display the present invention can be used with other types of displays such as a window. In this example different colors from those described with reference to Table 1 are used. More specifically for the browsing condition of most recently visited the representative color is now red for the browsing condition of not visited the representative color is now blue and for the browsing condition of previously visited the representative color remains green although again other colors can be used. Again freezing is shown by making a color darker although other manners for showing freezing can be used.

Further the fluid document includes a sweetness annotation associated with a sweetness hyperlink and shown in dark red and a fermentation annotation associated with a fermentation hyperlink and shown in bright red. The underlined portions of the sweetness hyperlink and the fermentation hyperlink are generated and displayed by computer as having a black color which in embodiments of the present invention indicate that the hyperlinks have not been traversed although again other colors and animations may be used in the document and in other types of displays.

Computer executes instructions to track the movements and actions of the mouse and hence the cursor displayed in display device to determine whether the user wants to view annotations within document although other ways of tracking interactions with an area or areas of a display can be used.

At decision box in this example computer determines the user would like to view the sweetness annotation by detecting that the cursor was moved over the sweetness hyperlink . The YES branch is followed and step is performed as described herein.

At step computer executes instructions for the animation to increase the size of the sweetness annotation to reach its current readable size in the same manner described above with respect to . Although not shown initially computer generates an empty descriptor and displays it near the left margin of the sweetness annotation to provide users with an indication that annotation is temporary. Moreover and again not shown computer displays the sweetness annotation as having a bright shade of red to also aid in indicating to the user that the annotation is temporary or thawed.

At decision box in this example computer determines the user would like to freeze the sweetness annotation by detecting that the user has pushed the mouse button down while detecting cursor movement over annotation although the computer could determine that the user would like to freeze another area of another type of display. The YES branch is followed and step is performed as described herein.

At step computer executes instructions to change the color of the sweetness annotation from its initial bright shade of red again not illustrated to the dark shade of red shown in to provide the user with visual feedback of its frozen state. Computer then generates the solid diamond descriptor as also having the darker shade of red to match the color of the sweetness annotation although any type of numeric alphanumeric or graphic symbol may be used. The solid diamond descriptor replaces the initial empty descriptor not illustrated mentioned above in step and is displayed near the left margin of the annotation for providing users with an additional animation that indicates that the annotation is frozen.

At decision box in this example computer determines that the user does not want to traverse any more annotations or hyperlinks in document when it does not detect any cursor movements or mouse buttons being pushed and thus the NO branch is followed. In other embodiments for other types of displays the computer determines that the user does not want to traverse any more areas in the display when it does not detect any cursor movements or mouse buttons being pushed. Thereafter steps may be performed as described above until execution of the computer is terminated or the YES branch in decision box is followed because computer determines that the user wants to traverse one or more annotations and hyperlinks .

Another portion of the alternative process for the operation of system for drawing attention to an area or areas within a document in accordance with embodiments of the present invention will now be described in connection with and with reference back to and . Again although described with reference to a document as the display the present invention can be used with other types of displays such as a window.

Referring back to steps are performed as described above except at decision box the computer detects that the cursor has been moved over the fermentation annotation and that one of the mouse buttons has been pushed down. Thus the YES branch is followed and step is performed as described herein.

At step computer receives and executes instructions to increase the size of fermentation annotation to reach its current readable size in the same manner described above with respect to although in other embodiments other areas in other types of displays can be animated in other manners. Computer generates an empty diamond shaped descriptor and displays it near the left margin of the annotation to provide users with an indication that annotation is thawed although other types of symbols can be used such as a numeric alphanumeric or graphic symbol. In this example computer displays the fermentation annotation as having a bright shade of red in comparison to the dark shade of red of the sweetness annotation . This helps indicate to the user that the annotation is thawed.

At decision box in this example computer determines the user would not like to freeze the sweetness annotation by detecting that the cursor has left the area of the annotation without the mouse button being pushed down while detecting cursor movement was over annotation although the computer could determine that the user would not like to freeze the annotation in other manners. The NO branch is followed and step is performed as described herein.

At decision box computer in this example detects cursor movement over the annotation and that one of the mouse buttons has been pushed down although cursor movement over the associated hyperlink may be detected. While the computer continues to detect that the button remains pushed down computer executes instructions for changing the color of the fermentation annotation to a red color which is not shown in . Also the color of the hyperlink i.e. black does not change yet. When the computer detects that the mouse button has been released it executes instructions for retrieving loading and displaying in display device a page hyperlinked to the document that is associated with the annotation and the hyperlink . The YES branch is followed and step is performed as described herein.

At step and referring now to in this example the user returns from the traversed page to the original or prior display. Computer executes instructions for generating and displaying fluid document although in other embodiments other types of displays can be returned to such as returning to a previously viewed window. Computer generates and displays fluid document in the same manner as document except the computer executes instructions for displaying the fermentation annotation as having a red color. The red color is used to indicate to a user that the fermentation annotation is the most recently traversed annotation although other colors may be used. Further computer executes instructions for displaying the hyperlink in bright red to show that the hyperlink has been traversed although again other colors may be used. Performing the color animation described in step avoids distracting the user when the user returns to document from the traversed page since the appearance of document is the same as document except as described above.

At step and referring now to the computer executes instructions for animating the location of departure. In this example the computer executes instructions for reducing the size of the fermentation annotation to generate document . Document is the same as fluid document except the fermentation annotation and the empty diamond shaped descriptor are shown having a reduced size. Further computer initiates reducing the size of annotation about 1.3 seconds after the user returns from the traversed page although the elapsed time may vary from about less than one second to about one or more seconds and other amounts of time may be used. Again in other embodiments these and other animations can be executed on other areas in other displays.

Referring to computer in this example executes the instructions for reducing the size of the annotation until it is no longer present to generate document . Document is the same as fluid document except the fermentation annotation and the empty diamond shaped descriptor are not present. Further in this example computer takes about 300 msec from the point in time it initiates reducing the size of annotation until it is no longer present in the document although the elapsed time may vary from about less than one second to about one or more seconds and other amounts of time may be used.

The color and motion animation examples described above in steps and provide several advantages. For instance reducing the size of the fermentation annotation as described in step subtly draws the user s attention back towards the fermentation annotation to promote an intuitive return to their previous reading processing activity. This advantageous effect of the animation is a basic fact of human visual perception and reduces the user s need to explicitly scan documents looking for where they left off when traversing the hyperlinked documents. Another advantage is that there is less clutter in the documents and thus users are not unduly distracted by automatically removing thawed or temporary annotations such as the fermentation annotation as described above in connection with step .

An alternative process for drawing attention to an area or areas within a document in accordance with embodiments of the present invention will now be described with reference back to and . Again although described with reference to a document as the display the present invention can be used with other types of displays such as a window.

Steps are performed as described above and at decision box the computer detects that the cursor has been moved over the fermentation hyperlink and that one of the mouse buttons has been pressed to indicate the user s desire to traverse the fermentation hyperlink although the computer may detect the cursor over the sweetness hyperlink . In this example the associated annotation does not appear in the document as a result of traversing fermentation hyperlink .

When this occurs the anchor text in the fermentation hyperlink such as fermentation changes color or color animates to another color such as from a black color to a bright red color not illustrated to provide the user with departure feedback until the new traversed page is displayed not illustrated although other techniques and colors may be used to provide departure feedback such as a colored background highlight surrounding the anchor text in the hyperlink . The YES branch is followed and step is performed as described above. When the user returns from the traversed page the anchor text in the hyperlink is color animated back to its original color although the colored background highlight may be shrunk down towards and into the middle portion of the anchor text upon return where the colored highlighting technique is used for providing departure feedback. Thereafter step is performed as described and steps are repeated until operation is terminated as described above.

Although the animation at a location of departure in a display upon return to the display is described above with reference to an unfrozen annotation in a document the animations can be used in other applications to call attention to a location of departure in a display upon return to the display. For example in an application where an operator is traversing links between displays which have a frozen annotation or no annotations a descriptor object could be placed by the link anchor marking the most recently traversed link before the display or page is replaced with the destination display or page of the link. When the user returns to the prior page the display looks the same as before including the descriptor object which helps with spatial recall. Immediately on return the computer could execute instructions to animate the departure location. In this example computer would execute instructions to shrink the descriptor object adjacent the frozen annotation or the traversed link using a short motion animation. This motion animation would effectively draw the user s attention to the location of departure.

The embodiments of the present invention provide a system and methods for drawing attention to an area or areas within a display such as documents and using a combination of color and motion animation and timing techniques to intuitively apprise the user of the content they have interacted with. Further the embodiments of the present invention enable users to conveniently determine areas of prior interest within a display while not requiring an undue amount of effort on the part of the user. Additionally the embodiments provide for a smooth and pleasant reading experience using subtle sensory cues.

In embodiments of the present invention the annotations and in document and the annotations in documents as described above in connection with steps and are displayed using a fluid interline technique as described above in connection with . It should be appreciated however that the fluid call out or overlay techniques described above with respect to as well as other techniques may be used. It should also be appreciated that some or all of the instructions which are described as being stored and executed at either the server or the computer in connection with embodiments of the present invention may all be stored and executed together at one device such as at the server or at the computer . Further the configuration of the system as shown in is provided for ease of description and illustration only. As such the embodiments of the present invention as described herein should not be construed to limit the system of the present invention or its associated operations.

While particular embodiments have been described alternatives modifications variations improvements and substantial equivalents that are or may be presently unforeseen may arise to applicants or others skilled in the art. Accordingly the appended claims as filed and as they may be amended are intended to embrace all such alternatives modifications variations improvements and substantial equivalents. Further the recited order of processing elements or sequences or the use of numbers letters or other designations therefor is not intended to limit the claimed processes to any order except as may be specified in the claims.

