---

title: Wireless network interference mitigation
abstract: Wireless network interference is mitigated with client devices having wireless network interference mitigation logic and/or utilizing a usable bandwidth channel quality metric. In a described example implementation, a client device includes wireless network interference mitigation logic that monitors at least one channel condition of a wireless network and participates in a wireless network interference mitigation procedure based on the at least one channel condition. In another described example implementation, a usable bandwidth of a wireless channel is ascertained with respect to a native network, the usable bandwidth reflecting a difference between (i) a total channel capacity of the wireless channel and (ii) a portion of the total channel capacity that is consumed by wireless communications of one or more foreign networks. By way of example only, the at least one channel condition may be usable bandwidth. The wireless network interference mitigation logic may also be employed in non-client devices.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07751377&OS=07751377&RS=07751377
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07751377
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050628
---
The adoption of wireless communications is proceeding at breakneck speed. In addition to well known wireless telecommunication capabilities e.g. through cellular networks wireless local area network LAN technology is also available. An example of wireless LAN technology is the IEEE 802.11 standard which may be implemented in many different manners e.g. a b e g etc. .

Instead of communicating over the wires of a traditional LAN communications in wireless LANs are effectuated over wireless links. The wireless communications of a wireless LAN often terminate at an element that forwards the communication over a wired medium of another network such as the Internet. This fixed element that acts as a gateway between wired network s and mobile clients of the wireless LAN is often termed an access point AP . However APs may alternatively have more and or different functions besides being a gateway.

An AP thus facilitates wireless communications between a given mobile client and other networks. The AP however may also be responsible for acting as an intermediary between two or more mobile clients within a single wireless LAN. Unfortunately for either case interference can jeopardize and actually prevent the successful reception of a wireless communication being sent from between a sender and receiver of a wireless LAN.

Wireless network interference is mitigated with client devices having wireless network interference mitigation logic and or utilizing a usable bandwidth channel quality metric. In a described example implementation a client device includes wireless network interference mitigation logic that monitors at least one channel condition of a wireless network and participates in a wireless network interference mitigation procedure based on the at least one channel condition. In another described example implementation a usable bandwidth of a wireless channel is ascertained with respect to a native network the usable bandwidth reflecting a difference between i a total channel capacity of the wireless channel and ii a portion of the total channel capacity that is consumed by wireless communications of one or more foreign networks. By way of example only the at least one channel condition may be usable bandwidth. The wireless network interference mitigation logic may also be employed in non client devices.

This Summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the Detailed Description. This Summary is not intended to identify key features or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter. Furthermore other method system approach apparatus device media procedure application programming interface API arrangement etc. implementations are described herein.

As explained above the communication capabilities of wireless networks are frequently curtailed by interference. In this context interference in a given native network can arise from devices in foreign networks devices in the native network multipath fading physical obstacles some combination thereof and so forth. If the effects of interference are managed in a wireless network the communication capabilities thereof can be improved. Unfortunately wireless networks in a home or small business environment have the following characteristics that make their management difficult.

First the performance of wireless networks in the home and other indoor environments is highly dynamic and error prone because wireless communications suffer greatly from severe multi path fading within physical structures. Additionally there are interference sources within homes and small offices such as microwave ovens. Second the placement of wireless devices is usually geographically constrained. For instance family members usually wish to use their wireless client devices at any and all locations within and often around a home. Moreover an optimal placement of the wireless AP device in a given room may be occupied by furniture or may be aesthetically unpleasing.

Third the capacity of wireless networks is constrained because they have to compete with other types of wireless devices e.g. Bluetooth devices DECT phones etc. that share the same wireless spectrum. More significantly wireless networks have to share the same wireless spectrum with other nearby wireless networks that are deployed in the vicinity especially given the recent proliferation of wireless networks. Fourth wireless networks within homes and small offices are usually operated and managed by non professionals. Consequently simplified deployment and management of such wireless networks is welcomed. More specifically most home users and small business owners prefer that wireless network performance management be performed relatively automatically with little or no user oversight.

Wireless AP vendors often provide setup tools to enable operation e.g. deployment and or management of APs. However the default settings of these setup tools that are provided by AP vendors only make wireless networks workable. They rarely if ever produce an optimal network configuration. Moreover using the default settings is likely to result in greater interference between and among different proximate wireless networks particularly if their APs are from the same vendor.

Any management type tools that are provided by AP vendors focus on the AP portion of the wireless network to the exclusion of client devices. Consequently such AP management type tools are not aware of at least the specifics of the wireless interference effects that the client devices are experiencing. Additionally AP management type tools are targeted toward professionals that have been trained to manually tune a network s configuration.

Some client devices do include logic to facilitate connecting to a wireless network. However such client devices do not include logic for managing the wireless network. Accordingly existing approaches to wireless network operation fail to involve client devices require the expertise and knowledge of trained professionals and or do not provide any wireless network management functions.

Fortunately wireless networks that are deployed in home or small business environments are usually of a relatively small scale. For example the number of wireless APs deployed in typical home or small business is around one or two APs. Although implementations that are described herein are not limited to small scale wireless networks they are particularly effective in such situations due to the relative feasibility of automatically managing wireless networks with one or two APs.

Certain described implementations enhance wireless network performance by automatically adjusting wireless network configuration parameters. Examples of wireless network configuration parameters that may be automatically adjusted include but are not limited to i tuning the wireless channel ii changing the power level of a wireless AP and or iii indicating a superior AP to which a wireless client device should associate when multiple APs are deployed within a single wireless network.

In a described example implementation wireless network management architecture enables wireless client devices of a wireless network to collectively report on network conditions and to potentially improve the performance of the wireless network based on the reported network conditions in conjunction with one or more wireless APs. Wireless network parameters such as the channel and power level may then be controlled in an automated manner based on channel quality information from each of the wireless client devices.

In another described example implementation a reported network condition is termed usable bandwidth of a native wireless network. Usable bandwidth of the native wireless network comprises the difference between a total capacity of a given channel and the capacity of the given channel that is consumed by foreign wireless networks. In other words usable bandwidth from the perspective of a particular client device of a native network comprises the bandwidth that may be utilized by client devices of the native network after subtracting from a total channel capacity the bandwidth that is already consumed by wireless communications from foreign networks.

This description is separated into three additional sections. A first section references and is entitled Wireless Network Interference Mitigation Examples with Client Devices . A second section references B and and is entitled Wireless Network Interference Mitigation Examples with Usable Bandwidth . There is also a third section that references and is entitled Example Operating Environment for Computer or Other Device .

As shown client device B client device D and client device N are in wireless communication with AP as indicated by the wireless links that are represented by lightning bolt symbols. Client device C is shown connected to AP via a LAN . Nevertheless client device C may also be capable of communicating with AP via a wireless link. Wireless network may also include one or more other APs . In there is one second AP . Client device A is in wireless communication with the second AP .

As illustrated client device A is a tablet personal computer PC client device B is a personal digital assistant PDA client device C is desktop PC client device D is a mobile phone e.g. a so called smart or intelligent phone and client device N is a laptop computer. However wireless client devices may generally be any client device with a wireless capability hence client device C may also be considered a wireless client device as well as a wired client device if it possesses a wireless capability. Additional examples of client devices that may have wireless capabilities are described further herein below with particular reference to .

As specifically illustrated for client device N one or more including all client devices comprise wireless network interference mitigation logic . Wireless network interference mitigation logic may be hardware software firmware some combination thereof and so forth. Wireless network interference mitigation logic is capable of monitoring network conditions and is adapted to mitigate interference based on the monitored network conditions. More specifically the wireless network interference mitigation logic of associated client devices are adapted to jointly mitigate wireless interference within the wireless network in which the associated client devices are operating.

In a described implementation wireless network interference mitigation logic is generally adapted to monitor channel conditions at client devices and to participate in a wireless network interference mitigation procedure or protocol. A particular client device is elected coordinator. The elected coordinator is empowered to analyze collected channel condition information and to make wireless network interference mitigating decisions that result in adjustments to the wireless network configuration. Although a number of channel quality metrics may be employed to monitor channel conditions usable bandwidth which is introduced and described below is employed in an example implementation.

More specifically wireless network interference mitigation logic is capable of monitoring a channel condition. It is adapted to detect when the monitored channel condition violates a predetermined threshold. Upon the condition violation detection the detecting wireless network interference mitigation logic sends a report to the wireless network interference mitigation logic that is the elected coordinator.

The elected coordinator solicits channel condition information from the wireless network interference mitigation logic of other client devices . An analysis is performed on the collected channel condition information to determine a better if not optimal wireless network configuration. The adjustments to create the improved wireless network configuration that mitigates interference are then sent to AP and or client devices .

With an AP based wireless network management system any existing managing entity defaults to the AP. With a client capable wireless network management system on the other hand multiple client devices are operating within a single wireless network . Consequently there is no particular default controller coordinator for a client capable wireless network management system. Hence in a described implementation a client coordinator is initially elected.

Coordinator elector is capable of exchanging coordinator election data with other client devices having wireless network interference mitigation logic . Coordinator elector is adapted to participate in an election process to elect a network coordinator. The election may be random or based on any one or more of a variety of factors. If based on one or more factors the election may be based on i the first client device that is deployed ii the client device with the best signal from AP iii the client device that is connected to wireless network most frequently and for the greatest percentage of time iv the client device with the greatest computing power or battery life or one that is plugged in v the client device with the most up to date version of wireless network interference mitigation logic iv some combination thereof and so forth.

In a described implementation the client device with the best signal connection is elected as the coordinator by coordinator electors . Thus coordinator election data in this implementation includes at least signal connection data. Signal connection e.g. channel quality data may be provided from channel condition monitor to coordinator elector . Under this criterion client device C of is elected the coordinator because it has the best signal connection to AP via LAN . However other wireless networks may elect a client device that does not posses a wired connection to AP . The coordinator may also be re elected i on a periodic basis ii when the current coordinator s signal quality connection decreases iii on the occurrence of some other event iv and so forth.

Channel condition monitor is capable of monitoring the condition of at least one channel of wireless network . Channel condition monitor is adapted to notify channel condition reporter with notification if the condition of the currently utilized channel becomes unsatisfactory.

In an example implementation channel condition monitor includes a channel quality ascertainer A and a channel quality evaluator E. Channel quality ascertainer A accepts as input at least one channel quality attribute that is associated with the currently used channel. It is adapted to ascertain the channel quality responsive to the received channel quality attribute .

Channel quality evaluator E is capable of evaluating the ascertained channel quality in terms of an acceptable level of the channel quality. It is adapted to determine if the ascertained channel quality becomes unacceptable by violating the accepted level. If the accepted channel quality level is violated then a notification of the channel condition violation is provided to channel condition reporter from channel condition monitor .

Channel condition reporter receives a channel condition violation notification from channel condition monitor . In response channel condition reporter sends a channel condition report to the elected coordinator. In a described implementation the channel condition report includes an ascertained channel quality for each of the channels that are available within wireless network . In such an implementation the channel condition of the available channels may be ascertained on a regular basis. This regular basis may be any given period of time for example the channel conditions of available channels may be ascertained every 1 2 hours e.g. 10 12 times per day . Alternatively channel condition monitor may ascertain the channel conditions of the available channels after a channel condition violation is detected by channel quality evaluator E.

On the other hand fewer than all of the possible channels may be monitored and or included in the channel condition report. For example the channel condition of the currently utilized channel may be solely included in the channel condition report. In such an implementation channel conditions of the other available channels may be sent to the coordinator and possibly ascertained upon receipt of a channel condition information solicitation from the elected coordinator as described further below with particular reference to channel condition collector and channel condition information solicitation . The channel condition report implicitly indicates the existence of a channel condition violation and or includes an explicit channel condition violation indication.

The general functions of wireless network interference mitigation logic are represented by coordinator elector channel condition monitor and channel condition reporter . The coordinator functions of wireless network interference mitigation logic are represented by channel condition collector network configuration analyzer and network configuration adjuster . is described further below in terms of wireless network interference mitigation logic being the elected coordinator for wireless network .

Channel condition collector receives the channel condition report from a channel condition reporter . In response to receiving the channel condition report that indicates a channel condition violation channel condition collector is adapted to collect channel condition information from the other client devices of wireless network . To elicit the channel condition information channel condition collector sends a channel condition information solicitation to the other client devices of wireless network .

When wireless network interference mitigation logic of another client device receives a channel condition information solicitation from the channel condition collector of the elected coordinator it is provided to channel condition reporter . In response to receiving the channel condition information solicitation from the coordinator channel condition reporter sends channel condition information back to the channel condition collector of the elected coordinator. If channel condition reporter does not possess current channel condition information channel quality ascertainer A of channel condition monitor may be prompted to ascertain updated channel condition information from channel quality attributes .

An example of channel condition information is described further below with particular reference to . When a channel condition reporter and a channel condition collector of the same wireless network interference mitigation logic are communicating they may exchange reports solicitations information etc. via an internal communication pathway without using the incoming communication paths and or the outgoing communication paths and .

After sending out a channel condition information solicitation channel condition collector usually receives channel condition information from each of the client devices of wireless network . However if less than all of the client devices of wireless network are participating in the interference mitigation channel condition collector will not receive channel condition information from each and every client device . A client device may not be participating if for example it does not include wireless network interference mitigation logic it elects not to participate for security power or other reasons and so forth.

The channel condition information for most likely multiple client devices of wireless network is forwarded from channel condition collector to network configuration analyzer . Network configuration analyzer is capable of analyzing the channel condition information from multiple client devices across multiple available channels. Network configuration analyzer is adapted to determine a new network configuration that enhances the overall communication situation for the nodes of wireless network based on at least one criterion. Examples of network configuration analysis and analysis criteria are described further herein below with particular reference to .

Thus network configuration analyzer determines an enhanced network configuration for wireless network responsive to one or more channel conditions and based on at least one criterion. This enhanced network configuration is forwarded from network configuration analyzer to network configuration adjuster .

Network configuration adjuster is adapted to implement or otherwise effectuate the enhanced network configuration by formulating network configuration adjustment commands and sending them to other nodes of wireless network . These other nodes may be client devices APs both client devices and APs and so forth. Examples of network configuration adjustment commands include but are not limited to tuning the wireless channel s on which client devices are communicating changing a power level of AP and or AP instructing a client device to associate with a different AP some combination thereof and so forth.

Generally the five 5 blocks are performed by each client device and the three 3 blocks are performed primarily by the client device that has been elected coordinator. At block a coordinator is elected. For example a client based wireless network management coordinator may be elected by the coordinator electors of multiple client devices of wireless network based on one or more factors such as signal connection strength.

At block the condition of at least the current channel is monitored. For example channel quality ascertainer A of channel condition monitor may ascertain the channel quality of at least the currently utilized channel. In a described implementation channel condition monitor also monitors each available channel of wireless network every given period e.g. every hour or two in order to be prepared to create a channel condition report that includes the condition of the available channels and or to provide channel condition information in response to receiving a channel condition information solicitation.

At block it is determined if the monitoring detects a channel condition violation. For example it may be determined by channel quality evaluator E of channel condition monitor if when the ascertained channel quality violates a predetermined channel condition. An example channel condition monitoring procedure is described further below with particular reference to . If the monitoring does detect a channel condition violation at block then the method of flow diagram continues at block . If on the other hand the monitoring does not detect a channel condition violation at block then the method of flow diagram continues at block .

Thus if the monitoring does not detect at block a channel condition violation it is determined at block if a channel condition information solicitation is received. For example it may be determined by channel condition reporter if a channel condition information solicitation is received from the elected coordinator. If no channel condition information solicitation has been received then the method of flow diagram continues at block with ongoing channel condition monitoring. If on the other hand a channel condition information solicitation has been received as determined at block then channel condition information e.g. the most recent channel condition information is reported to the elected coordinator at block . For example channel condition reporter may report channel condition information to the elected coordinator.

Also if the monitoring does detect at block a channel condition violation then at block a channel condition violation is reported to the elected coordinator. For example if channel condition monitor does detect a channel condition violation then channel condition monitor may forward a channel condition violation notification to channel condition reporter . In response to receiving the channel condition violation notification channel condition reporter may send a channel condition report to the elected coordinator. The channel condition report implicitly or explicitly indicates a channel condition violation to the elected client level coordinator.

At block the conditions of channels are collected from network devices. For example responsive to a received channel condition report a channel condition collector may issue a channel condition information solicitation to wireless client devices . Generally the greater the number of wireless devices which are participating in a given network from which channel condition information is collected the better e.g. the more accurate will be the resulting analysis. In other words acquiring channel condition information via one or from only a relatively few devices in a network cannot usually provide the same overall view of a wireless network situation. Thus to achieve the most holistic view of radio conditions across a wireless network channel condition information is collected from as many client devices and optionally APs as possible. In response to the solicitation channel condition collector receives channel condition information from the wireless client devices .

At block the collected channel condition information is analyzed with respect to current and potential network configurations. For example network configuration analyzer may analyze the collected channel condition information based on at least one criterion. The analysis may result in an enhanced wireless network configuration. The likelihood of determining an accurate enhanced wireless network configuration increases as the number of participating devices that report channel condition information increases and as the distribution of reporting wireless devices expands.

At block the wireless network is reconfigured responsive to the analysis. For example wireless network may be reconfigured by network configuration adjuster responsive to the analysis results of network configuration analyzer that identifies an enhanced wireless network configuration.

At block a current channel quality metric CQM is ascertained. For example channel quality ascertainer A of channel condition monitor may ascertain a current CQM responsive to the received channel quality attribute .

At block it is determined if the ascertained current CQM comports with a predetermined threshold. For example channel quality evaluator E of channel condition monitor may determine if the ascertained CQM meets e.g. is less than or exceeds depending on the CQM a predetermined threshold. The predetermined threshold may be preset user selectable variable based on network conditions updateable by firmware some combination thereof and so forth. Examples of suitable CQMs are described below.

If the current CQM comports with the predetermined threshold as determined at block then at block the channel condition monitoring pauses to wait for a CQM update period. After expiration of the CQM update period the current CQM is again ascertained at block . The CQM update period may also be preset user selectable variable based on network conditions updateable by firmware some combination thereof and so forth. In an example implementation the CQM update period is one to two hours.

If on the other hand the current CQM does not comport with the predetermined threshold as determined at block then at block a channel condition violation report is sent to the elected coordinator. For example channel condition monitor in conjunction with channel condition reporter may send a channel condition report to a channel condition collector of the elected coordinator.

The CQM that is used in any given implementation may be any ascertainable channel quality metric or channel quality metrics. Examples of applicable CQM types include but are not limited to i signal to interference noise ratio SINR ii channel capacity iii available bandwidth iv usable bandwidth and or some combination thereof.

Generally the higher the SINR is the better the channel condition is. Channel capacity is the maximum achievable data rate in the associated wireless channel. Available bandwidth in a wireless channel is the difference between the channel capacity and the data rate of the cross traffic. The cross traffic when ascertaining available bandwidth is traffic on the associated observed channel from both foreign network s and other client devices in the native network of the client device that is ascertaining the available bandwidth.

CQM types i and ii are somewhat interchangeable from a network configuration analysis perspective. However between the two the SINR is relatively harder to obtain at the application layer. CQM types ii and iii are application layer metrics and they can be obtained via probing techniques.

As introduced above usable bandwidth is the CQM used to reflect the channel condition in a wireless network in certain described implementations. The usable bandwidth is the difference between the total channel capacity of a given wireless channel and the data rate of the cross traffic but the cross traffic in the context of ascertaining usable bandwidth is the traffic in foreign networks that can be sensed by the wireless client device that is ascertaining the usable bandwidth. In other words traffic generated from other devices in the native network of the ascertaining wireless client device is excluded from the cross traffic total.

Usable bandwidth is therefore typically a more accurate channel quality metric than channel capacity because usable bandwidth considers both capacity and the traffic in the channel. Also usable bandwidth is therefore typically a fairer channel quality metric than available bandwidth because usable bandwidth considers the traffic from other foreign networks but not the traffic from the native network. Usable bandwidth is described further below with particular reference to .

In there are two foreign wireless networks FN and one native wireless network NN . As indicated by the legend the lightning bolt symbols represent wireless communications on channel X . There is also a client device CD pictured as part of native network NN . Client device CD is ascertaining the usable bandwidth of channel X from its perspective. The wireless communications on channel X may originate from wireless devices of one of foreign networks FN or another wireless device besides the pictured client device CD of native network NN .

To ascertain the usable bandwidth of channel X from the perspective of client device CD client device CD determines the bandwidth consumption of channel X that is attributable to foreign networks FN . In other words and by way of example only client device CD detects wireless communications on channel X . It then permits the continued inclusion of those wireless communications on channel X that originate in a foreign network FN while removing those wireless communications on channel X that originate within native network NN . Alternatively client device CD may originally detect those wireless communications on channel X that originate in a foreign network FN while excluding those wireless communications on channel X that originate within native network NN .

Regardless the bandwidth consumption of channel X that is attributable to foreign networks FN is determined and used to ascertain the usable bandwidth of channel X for the native network from the perspective of the ascertaining client device CD . This ascertainment is illustrated in .

In a total channel capacity for channel X is illustrated. Total channel capacity is divided into two parts a bandwidth consumption of foreign networks and a usable bandwidth for the native network . Hence the usable bandwidth of channel X for the native network from the perspective of the ascertaining client device can be ascertained by subtracting the bandwidth consumption of foreign networks from the total channel capacity . In this context the bandwidth consumption of foreign networks and the total channel capacity are both determined by and from the perspective of client device CD .

As illustrated matrix includes multiple columns and multiple rows for wireless channels and wireless devices respectively. More specifically each respective column corresponds to a respective channel . . . n and each respective row corresponds to a respective device A B C D . . . N. The variables n and N may be any integer of one or greater.

As part of i a channel condition report and or ii channel condition information that is provided in response to a solicitation a wireless device provides at least one CQM value per channel to the elected coordinator. In other words each device provides a row of matrix to the elected coordinator to facilitate the wireless network configuration analysis. For example at some moment device C ascertained a CQM value of 3 on channel a CQM value of 5 on channel a CQM value of 10 on channel a CQM value of 8 on channel a CQM value of 2 on channel . . . a CQM value of 6 on channel N. These ascertained CQMs per channel are subsequently sent from device C to the elected coordinator.

As described above the wireless network configuration analysis that potentially produces a new wireless network configuration is effectuated responsive to one or more channel conditions and based on at least one criterion. The coordinator possesses the one or more channel conditions in the form of matrix . The at least one criterion may be any one or more of many possible criteria. In a described implementation however the at least one criterion is to maximize the minimum CQM as indicated at block .

For explanatory purposes the minimum CQM for each channel is explicitly indicated at an additional row . The values of row indicate that the minimum CQM from the devices A N is 2 5 1 4 2 . . . 3 for channels . . . n respectively. The maximum minimum CQM is determined from the minimum CQMs of row . As indicated by block the maximum minimum CQM is 5 which corresponds to channel . Hence the wireless network configuration analysis result is that the wireless network should be reconfigured to transmit on channel channel is therefore selected as indicated by block . A channel tuning command to tune to channel is then transmitted from the elected coordinator to the AP and or to the other wireless client devices.

In a described implementation the at least one criterion on which the wireless network configuration analysis is based comprises determining the channel on which the maximum minimum usable bandwidth exists as measured by the client devices. Another criterion or criteria besides adjusting the wireless network based on the maximum minimum CQM may be employed.

For example a maximum average CQM may be used as the at least one criterion. With the maximum average CQM criterion in the context of matrix channel is selected because it has the highest average CQM at 37 5 assuming N E 5. Other example criteria are i maximum average CQM with each wireless client device being guaranteed some predetermined minimum CQM for fairness reasons ii maximum sum of the In logarithm of the CQM of each wireless client device i.e. so called proportional fairness some combination thereof and so forth.

Regardless of the criterion or criteria that is or are employed the coordinator may be empowered to ensure that the planned wireless network configuration adjustments will not break any application specific requirements of the wireless client devices. For example an application on client device N may be currently engaged in a real time communication in the form of a videoconference. To this end any such application specific requirements of the wireless client devices may be communicated to the elected coordinator and an enhanced wireless network configuration can be selected from those possibilities that provide any stipulated application specific bandwidth requirements.

After the wireless network configuration analysis the network configuration adjuster may decide to perform a channel and or a power adjustment on the AP e.g. via Simple Network Management Protocol SNMP communications . For example when the measured CQM cannot satisfy the QoS requirements of the application s in some wireless client s the power level of an AP may be increased to obtain a better CQM. The power level e.g. at an AP may also be decreased to reduce interference to wireless client s that are communicating with other AP s to produce a better channel condition.

When multiple APs are deployed in a wireless network the coordinator may also or alternatively suggest a better AP to which the complaining wireless client device may associate. For example when a wireless client detects that the measured CQM with respect to some other wireless AP is better than that of the AP to which it is currently associated the wireless client may be instructed to associate with the AP having the better CQM.

Although no specific security measures are described herein it is contemplated that there exists possibilities for malicious wireless devices to send false channel condition information reports to the elected coordinator or to pretend to be the elected coordinator of a wireless network. A standardized wireless security protocol e.g. Wi Fi Protected Access WPA Wired Equivalent Privacy WEP IEEE 802.11 i etc. can be utilized to prevent unauthorized wireless devices from joining a protected wireless network. Also proprietary security protocols can be incorporated into the wireless network interference mitigation implementations that are described herein to ensure that no unauthorized users can change the configuration of a wireless network e.g. acting under the guise of being a legitimate elected coordinator .

The devices actions aspects features functions procedures modules data structures components etc. of are illustrated in diagrams that are divided into multiple blocks. However the order interconnections interrelationships layout etc. in which are described and or shown are not intended to be construed as a limitation and any number of the blocks can be modified combined rearranged augmented omitted etc. in any manner to implement one or more systems methods devices procedures media apparatuses APIs arrangements etc. for wireless network interference mitigation. Furthermore although the description herein includes references to specific implementations including a general device of the illustrated and or described implementations can be implemented in any suitable hardware software firmware or combination thereof and using any channel quality metric s channel condition monitoring approach es channel condition violation threshold s coordinator election mechanisms s network configuration analysis criterion criteria and or wireless network configuration adjustment s and so forth.

Example operating environment is only one example of an environment and is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the applicable device including computer network node entertainment device mobile appliance general electronic device etc. architectures. Neither should operating environment or the devices thereof be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or to any combination of components as illustrated in .

Additionally implementations for wireless network interference mitigation may be realized with numerous other general purpose or special purpose device including computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known devices systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use include but are not limited to personal computers server computers thin clients thick clients personal digital assistants PDAs or mobile telephones watches hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics video game machines game consoles portable or handheld gaming units network PCs videoconferencing equipment minicomputers mainframe computers network nodes distributed or multi processing computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices some combination thereof and so forth.

Implementations for wireless network interference mitigation may be described in the general context of processor executable instructions. Generally processor executable instructions include routines programs protocols objects functions interfaces components data structures etc. that perform and or enable particular tasks and or implement particular abstract data types. Realizations of wireless network interference mitigation as described in certain implementations herein may also be practiced in distributed processing environments where tasks are performed by remotely linked processing devices that are connected through a communications link and or network. Especially but not exclusively in a distributed computing environment processor executable instructions may be located in separate storage media executed by different processors and or propagated over transmission media.

Example operating environment includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer which may comprise any e.g. electronic device with computing processing capabilities. The components of computer may include but are not limited to one or more processors or processing units a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including processor to system memory .

Processors are not limited by the materials from which they are formed or the processing mechanisms employed therein. For example processors may be comprised of semiconductor s and or transistors e.g. electronic integrated circuits ICs . In such a context processor executable instructions may be electronically executable instructions. Alternatively the mechanisms of or for processors and thus of or for computer may include but are not limited to quantum computing optical computing mechanical computing e.g. using nanotechnology and so forth.

System bus represents one or more of any of many types of wired or wireless bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a point to point connection a switching fabric a peripheral bus an accelerated graphics port and a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example such architectures may include an Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus a Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus an Enhanced ISA EISA bus a Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus a Peripheral Component Interconnects PCI bus also known as a Mezzanine bus some combination thereof and so forth.

Computer typically includes a variety of processor accessible media. Such media may be any available media that is accessible by computer or another e.g. electronic device and it includes both volatile and non volatile media removable and non removable media and storage and transmission media.

System memory includes processor accessible storage media in the form of volatile memory such as random access memory RAM and or non volatile memory such as read only memory ROM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules instructions that are immediately accessible to and or being presently operated on by processing unit .

Computer may also include other removable non removable and or volatile non volatile storage media. By way of example illustrates a hard disk drive or disk drive array for reading from and writing to a typically non removable non volatile magnetic media not separately shown a magnetic disk drive for reading from and writing to a typically removable non volatile magnetic disk e.g. a floppy disk and an optical disk drive for reading from and or writing to a typically removable non volatile optical disk such as a CD DVD or other optical media. Hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are each connected to system bus by one or more storage media interfaces . Alternatively hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive may be connected to system bus by one or more other separate or combined interfaces not shown .

The disk drives and their associated processor accessible media provide non volatile storage of processor executable instructions such as data structures program modules and other data for computer . Although example computer illustrates a hard disk a removable magnetic disk and a removable optical disk it is to be appreciated that other types of processor accessible media may store instructions that are accessible by a device such as magnetic cassettes or other magnetic storage devices flash memory compact disks CDs digital versatile disks DVDs or other optical storage RAM ROM electrically erasable programmable read only memories EEPROM and so forth. Such media may also include so called special purpose or hard wired IC chips. In other words any processor accessible media may be utilized to realize the storage media of the example operating environment .

Any number of program modules or other units or sets of processor executable instructions may be stored on hard disk magnetic disk optical disk ROM and or RAM including by way of general example an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . These processor executable instructions may include for example one or more of wireless network interference mitigation logic and the components thereof channel quality metric CQM matrix some combination thereof and so forth.

A user may enter commands and or information into computer via input devices such as a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse . Other input devices not shown specifically may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish serial port video camera scanner and or the like. These and other input devices are connected to processing unit via input output interfaces that are coupled to system bus . However input devices and or output devices may instead be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port a game port a universal serial bus USB port an infrared port an IEEE 1394 Firewire interface an IEEE 802.11 wireless interface a Bluetooth wireless interface and so forth.

A monitor view screen or other type of display device may also be connected to system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . Video adapter or another component may be or may include a graphics card for processing graphics intensive calculations and for handling demanding display requirements. Typically a graphics card includes a graphics processing unit GPU video RAM VRAM etc. to facilitate the expeditious display of graphics and performance of graphics operations. In addition to monitor other output peripheral devices may include components such as speakers not shown and a printer which may be connected to computer via input output interfaces .

Computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computing device . By way of example remote computing device may be a peripheral device a personal computer a portable computer e.g. laptop computer tablet computer PDA mobile station etc. a palm or pocket sized computer a watch a gaming device a server a router a network computer a peer device another network node or another device type as listed above and so forth. However remote computing device is illustrated as a portable computer that may include many or all of the elements and features described herein with respect to computer .

Logical connections between computer and remote computer are depicted as a local area network LAN and a general wide area network WAN . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets the Internet fixed and mobile telephone networks ad hoc and infrastructure wireless networks mesh networks other wireless networks gaming networks some combination thereof and so forth. Such networks and logical and physical communications connections are additional examples of transmission media.

When implemented in a LAN networking environment computer is usually connected to LAN via a network interface or adapter . When implemented in a WAN networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other component for establishing communications over WAN . Modem which may be internal or external to computer may be connected to system bus via input output interfaces or any other appropriate mechanism s . It is to be appreciated that the illustrated network connections are examples and that other manners for establishing communication link s between computers and may be employed.

In a networked environment such as that illustrated with operating environment program modules or other instructions that are depicted relative to computer or portions thereof may be fully or partially stored in a remote media storage device. By way of example remote application programs reside on a memory component of remote computer but may be usable or otherwise accessible via computer . Also for purposes of illustration application programs and other processor executable instructions such as operating system are illustrated herein as discrete blocks but it is recognized that such programs components and other instructions reside at various times in different storage components of computing device and or remote computing device and are executed by processor s of computer and or those of remote computing device .

Although systems media devices methods procedures apparatuses techniques schemes approaches procedures arrangements and other implementations have been described in language specific to structural logical algorithmic and functional features and or diagrams it is to be understood that the invention defined in the appended claims is not necessarily limited to the specific features or diagrams described. Rather the specific features and diagrams are disclosed as exemplary forms of implementing the claimed invention.

