---

title: Method for aerial rearmament of aircraft
abstract: The invention provides a method for the aerial transfer of munitions from a rearming aircraft to the weapons pylon of the recipient combat aircraft. The invention also provides for the selection of munitions from a database of munitions and aircraft types in response to an Air Tasking Order. The invention allows a variety of combat aircraft to be adapted to aerial rearmament. The invention also allows the release of precision guided munitions directly from a rearming aircraft so that orbiting combat aircraft can guide these munitions to the target by remote control.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07059569&OS=07059569&RS=07059569
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force
number: 07059569
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050131
---
The present application is a divisional application of and claims priority from related and commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 685 879 filed on Oct. 15 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 932 299 entitled Apparatus and Method for Aerial Rearmament of Aircraft also by John A. Beyerle and Gary L. Illingworth. Accordingly U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 685 879 is herein incorporated by reference.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalty thereon.

This invention relates to the field of military aircraft munitions loading specifically to the provision of a method employing a series of mechanical and electronic components collected and assembled to provide the means for loading munitions onto aircraft while in flight.

Shrinking defense budgets combined with the increasing needs of the United States to project its military power often on short notice throughout the world requires the armed forces to do more with less equipment and fewer personnel. Recently as can be seen in the case of the war against Iraq there has been a lack of consensus among allies forcing the United States to go it alone when prosecuting the war against terrorism. The nations of Europe for example lying closer as they do to areas of turmoil such as the Middle East are often reluctant to take hard stances against terrorists who lie within an automobile ride from their borders. As can be seen most recently with Turkey during operation Iraqi Freedom nations are often reluctant to promptly provide forward operating locations or to grant flyover rights for United States military aircraft lest these nations seem to be associated too closely with United States military initiatives. The delays caused by these diplomatic barriers can seriously impact United States combat operational planning.

What is needed therefore is a method to not only refuel U.S. military aircraft while in flight so as to extend mission operational effectiveness but also a means to continually reload the munitions which have been expended during combat operations without having to return to either a distant friendly nation s ground bases or in the case of naval airpower to a distant aircraft carrier to obtain more munitions.

Military combat aircraft require both fuel and munitions to complete their assigned missions. While the re fueling of combat aircraft can be accomplished either while on the ground or in the air the loading of munitions has thus far been limited to the ground. Because of this the weapons mounts currently found on the pylons of military combat aircraft are designed specifically to be single shot in function and they are re serviced each time the aircraft lands and takes off. Additionally aerial rearmament would benefit the extension of airframe serviceable life of combat aircraft which is otherwise degraded each time a combat aircraft s heavy wing loads are stressed during take off. With an aerial re armament system combat aircraft would no longer need to take off with any munition as they can all be loaded on the aircraft while in flight. Re arming the aircraft while in flight would also offer added advantages in terms of military intelligence in that observers spies on the ground would not know where a combat aircraft s targets lie in terms of proximity to the ground base nor what munitions would be employed against a target list. With aerial re armament surprise would be achieved and maintained throughout aerial combat operations.

What is needed therefore is a system for aerial re armament of combat aircraft so as to enhance the response time combat effectiveness deployment options and reach of United States combat air forces.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide a method for aerial rearmament of combat aircraft.

One object of the present invention is to provide a method which transfers munitions from a rearming aircraft to the weapons pylons of a combat aircraft while both aircraft are in flight.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a method to automate the process of guiding the transfer of munitions from a rearming aircraft to the weapons pylons of a combat aircraft.

Yet another object of the present invention is to provide a method to facilitate the adaptation of any combat aircraft s weapons pylons to munitions transferred from a rearming aircraft in flight.

Still another object of the present invention is to provide a method for storing in a database all combinations of munitions rearmament aircraft and combat aircraft types and to configure such combinations in response to an Air Tasking Order ATO .

Still yet another object of the present invention is to a method by which the rearming aircraft can alternatively directly release munitions near a target wherein a combat aircraft would provide the guidance for the munition to the target.

The invention described herein provides a method for rearming combat aircraft in flight. Said invention comprises a method for the aerial transfer munitions from a rearming aircraft to the weapons pylon of the recipient combat aircraft. Invention further comprises a method for the selection of munitions from a database of munitions and aircraft types in response to an Air Tasking Order. Invention further comprises a method to adapt a variety of combat aircraft to aerial rearmament.

According to an embodiment of the present invention method for aerial rearmament of aircraft comprises the steps of extending a boom where the boom is attachable to and extendible from a rearming aircraft affixing a munition to the boom aerodynamically lifting and directionally controlling the boom with the munition affixed adapting through a means for adapting an aircraft which is to be rearmed so as to receive the munition from the boom and positioning and orienting the munition for transfer from the boom to the adapter of the aircraft to be rearmed and captively engaging the munition onto the aircraft to be rearmed.

According to another feature of this embodiment of the present invention method for aerial rearmament of aircraft comprises a first step of first sensing the position of the boom a second step of sensing the position of the means for adapting and cooperating between the first step of sensing and the second step of sensing so as to guide the boom to the means for adapting.

According to yet another feature of this embodiment of the present invention method for aerial rearmament of aircraft comprises the steps of processing data generated by the first step of sensing and the second step of sensing generating and forwarding instructions from the step of processing data to a guidance unit actuating a plurality of control mechanisms so as to effectuate positioning of the boom capturing an image of the positioning and the orienting of the munition and displaying the image on a means for viewing by an operator.

According to still another feature of this embodiment of the present invention method for aerial rearmament of aircraft comprises the steps of selecting combinations of rearming aircraft aircraft to be rearmed and munitions storing and accessing the selected combinations in a database determining the quantity availability and compatibility of rearming aircraft aircraft to be rearmed and munitions and displaying selected combinations.

According to still yet another feature of this embodiment of the present invention method for aerial rearmament of aircraft comprises the steps of determining and indicating the azimuth angle elevation angle and yaw angle of the boom determining and indicating the distance between the munition on the boom to the adapter on the aircraft to be rearmed determining and indicating whether or not said munition is docked determining and indicating whether or not the munition is hooked and determining and indicating whether or not the munition is armed .

According to an alternate embodiment of the present invention method for the direct release of a munition from a rearming aircraft comprises the steps of attaching and extending a boom from the rearming aircraft conveying using a conveying means attached to the boom the munition from the rearming aircraft to end of the boom providing aerodynamic lift to the boom and holding using a holding means attached to the conveying means the munition to the conveyor until the holding means is commanded to release the munition.

There are several advantages and new features of the present invention relative to the prior art. Important advantages include providing a method for striking strategic targets without regard to forward operating locations or airspace agreements extending indefinitely the Close Air Support mission in support of forces on the ground providing a fleet of virtual bombers without the cost or time involved in developing more aircraft that are specifically bombers in mission orientation. The invention thus fills the traditional void in airpower theory that airpower cannot be effective in fighting the unconventional war against insurgents using the present invention and an aerial task force as soon as targets pop up they can be hit immediately.

A related advantage stems from the fact that once the present invention has been deployed the effective airframe life of combat fighter aircraft will be extended because they will not have to takeoff or land with heavy munitions loads on their wings. A new weapons mount designed for multiple loads or multiple shots facilitates such advantage and is part of the present invention.

Referring to method for aerial rearmament comprises a boom a first sensor a Plexiglas faring covering sensor a weapons platform a weapons mount and a second sensor located on weapons mount . A rearming aircraft and a combat aircraft being rearmed are likewise depicted. In this figure boom is depicted in its extended position. First sensor is located on weapons platform and protected from the slipstream by a transparent Plexiglas fairing . First sensor is guided to second sensor located on the leading edge of the weapons mount located on the starboard wing pylon of the combat aircraft . By way of an example munition a General Purpose Mark bomb is shown already loaded onto the port wing of combat aircraft while another is shown in position on weapons mount for placement on the starboard wing.

Referring to depicting the perspective from a combat aircraft being rearmed viewing toward rearming aircraft with the boom extended. Control surfaces or elevons located on boom provide both lift and guidance for boom . The weapons platform and an example munition in this example a General Purpose Mark bomb resting on the weapons platform is being delivered to the combat aircraft s see weapons mount see .

Referring to an electrical power source from the rearming aircraft provides power for the hydraulic pump the guidance unit the computer and monitor a closed circuit television CCTV camera and sensors located on the weapons platform at the end of the boom .

Hydraulic power is provided through hydraulic control valves to the boom and through the boom to the elevons which act as control surfaces to provide lift and maneuverability to the boom when extended into the slipstream behind the rearming aircraft .

Data in the form of guidance instructions are provided by the computer to and from the guidance unit the hydraulic control valves the elevons and the weapons platform .

Data from sensors located on the weapons platform at the end of the boom is transmitted to the computer where it is monitored by the computer guidance software and the human operator. This sensor data is then interpolated into guidance instructions and sent to the guidance unit continually refreshing the position of the boom and weapons platform in relation to the position of both the combat aircraft and the rearming aircraft . Data on the precise location of the boom and the munition located on the weapons platform is provided by additional sensors located on the weapons mount of the combat aircraft .

A closed circuit television CCTV camera located on the weapons platform at the end of the boom allows the human operator to adjust the camera if necessary to visually monitor the process. Night operations lights also located on the weapons platform illuminate the area of activity and allow the human operator to similarly monitor the process visually during darkness.

Referring to boom see is telescopically extended outward from the rear of the rearming aircraft see . Boom is guided by sensors see and the computer see on the rearming aircraft toward the weapons mount located on the pylon of the combat aircraft . Weapons mount is fixed to the pylon by ground crew while the combat aircraft is on the ground through the use of a first pair of standard mounting loops . Once the weapons mount is fixed on the combat aircraft pylon all other munitions loading can be accomplished while the combat aircraft is airborne.

A second pair of standard loops are located in tandem on the top surface of the weapon and are forced upward with the motion of the boom until the loops engage the hooks on the weapons mount . Any slight variations in movement necessary to perform this part of the process are facilitated by the articulating pivoting cradle located on the weapons platform . Until the second pair of standard loops on the munition are fully engaged to the hooks on the weapon mount of the combat aircraft the weapon is held to the weapons platform and the boom through clamping action provided by a set of calipers which open by computer control once electronic and visual verification of attachment is achieved by the human operator.

During attack runs on the target the combat aircraft pilot releases the munition in the normal way when he does this the repeating gas canister gun fires its round similar to an eight gauge shotgun shell which forces the hooks open and simultaneously forces an assisting plunger downward pushing the munition away from the weapons mount and towards its target on the ground.

Referring to a computer screenshot is shown which depicts some of the facets of the present invention aerial rearmament system as it might be implemented within a typical Unix based Command and Control system such as the Theater Battle Management Core System TBMCS . In this screenshot all items along the top Tool Bar have their drop down menus visible. In actual operation each of these drop down menus is collapsed until desired by clicking on it with a mouse or other pointing device. In preparation for the aerial rearmament mission the human operator selects one item from each of the drop down menus filling out the online form which then constitutes a database. Each item selected is then inserted into the database file which is saved with a unique name. This information then becomes part of the Air Tasking Order ATO within the TBMCS. When the operator reopens this database file all the information needed to complete the aerial rearmament mission is available at a glance to the human operator. This database file can either be filled out on the ground before the mission s and then either transmitted up to the rearmament aircraft electronically or loaded into the rearmament aircraft s computer on a floppy disk or other mechanical means or filled out by the human operator on the rearmament aircraft while in flight and transmitted to the command and control facility located on the ground. Each time a rearmament mission is completed the remaining available inventory of munitions stores located on the rearmament aircraft is updated in the database and reported to Command and Control personnel on the ground.

Referring to a computer screen shot depicts the computer software indicating guidance progress of the boom see and the munition see and to be loaded onto the combat aircraft. The physical location of the first sensor located on the end of the telescoping boom is depicted in relation to its position with respect to the second sensor see and located on the front of the weapons mount see which is attached to the appropriate pylon of the combat aircraft see .

The distance indication in meters of the first sensor i.e. located on the end of the boom is calculated by the guidance software. In a like manner the azimuth in degrees of the weapons platform elevation angle in degrees and yaw angle in degrees are updated and shown in their respective boxes. When the weapons platform reaches its correct position under the weapons mount it is said to be docked and this condition is then depicted on the display as a green light in the Docked Yes No . Until the docked condition is achieved a red indicator light remains illuminated.

The munition only remains in the docked position momentarily then it is raised slightly to engage its standard loops see into the two L shaped hooks see located in tandem in the weapons mount. These loops are in standard locations on every munition regardless of type. When the hooked condition exists a green light is illuminated. Prior to this condition a red light is lit.

The last procedure is the arming state of the munition. An armed state is indicated by a green light which remains illuminated with a red light until armed.

Referring to the present invention is depicted in an additional role directly dropping munitions such as the Guided Bomb Units GBUs shown from the boom while extended through the rear of a rearming aircraft see such as a C 141 C 130 or C 17 etc. The extended boom together with elevons weapons platform and protective fairing are shown. An endless conveying system is attached underneath the boom which allows munitions to be conveyed rearward and then released. Once released the calipers and sway braces which hold the munition to the endless conveying system temporarily until release continue their progress on the conveyor returning to their starting position inside the rearming aircraft in the munitions build area where another munition can be built and conveyed.

While the preferred embodiments of the invention have been particularly described in the specification and illustrated in the drawing it should be understood that the invention is not so limited. Many modifications equivalents and adaptations of the invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims.

