---

title: Apparatus for changing the attack angle of a cavitator on a supercavatating underwater research model
abstract: An apparatus for changing the angle of attack of a cavitator on a supercavitating underwater research model. The apparatus has a nose assembly that has a pivotable cavitator tilt plate, an actuator member and a drive system engaged with the actuator member to drive the actuator member so as to tilt the cavitator tilt plate to a desired angle. Power components are remotely located and accessible to an operator so as to enable an operator to vary the angle of the cavitator tilt plate while the supercavitating underwater research model is underwater and in motion.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07428870&OS=07428870&RS=07428870
owner: The United States America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07428870
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050718
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention generally relates to an apparatus for changing the attack of a cavitator on a supercavitating underwater research model.

Supercavitating underwater vehicles and projectiles are known in the art. One such supercavitating underwater projectile is described in Harkins et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 955 698. This projectile uses a supercavitating nose section that provides a cavitation bubble of sufficient size to encompass the body of the projectile which reduces hydrodynamic drag. The cavitating nose section described in the Harkins et al. is a fixed position cavitating nose section and cannot be maneuvered so as to vary the angle of attack of the projectile. Brown et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 929 370 discloses another underwater projectile having a fixed position nose assembly.

The development of supercavitating underwater vehicles depends heavily upon supercavitating underwater research models. Typically the supercavitating underwater research model is positioned in a large tow tank that is filled with water. In order to change the angle of attack of the supercavitating underwater research model the tow tank must be drained so as to enable personnel to adjust some of the mechanical components on the nose assembly. However this is a time consuming endeavor because a significant amount of time is needed to fill and drain the tow tank. What is needed is an apparatus that that can vary the angle of attack of the cavitator on a supercavitating underwater research model while the tow tank is filled with water and the supercavitating underwater research model is still in motion. The prior art discloses several moveable nose assemblies however such assemblies are not suitable for use with supercavitating underwater research models. For example Patterson U.S. Pat. No. 3 069 112 discloses a missile nose assembly that pivots about the missile s longitudinal axis. Thomson U.S. Pat. No. 4 579 298 discloses a pivotable nose assembly having a plurality of pivoting actuators that are coupled to the nose s base. Kranz U.S. Pat. No. 4 793 571 discloses a pivotable nose assembly having a plurality of actuating plungers coupled to an end plate of the nose. Moskovitz U.S. patent No. discloses a rotatable nose assembly for an aircraft. Becker et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 631 442 discloses a pivotable warhead assembly having a plurality of bellows that cooperate to cause a charge to pivot about a ball joint. None of these prior art patents disclose an apparatus that addresses the aforementioned problem of changing the angle of attack of a supercavitating underwater research model while such model is in motion and underwater.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide an apparatus that can efficiently quickly and accurately vary the angle of attack of a supercavitating underwater research model while the research model is in motion.

It is another object of the present invention to provide an apparatus that can vary the angle of attack of a supercavitating underwater research model that is inexpensive to manufacture and implement.

It is a further object of the present invention to provide an apparatus that can vary the angle of attack of a supercavitating underwater research model from a remote location.

Thus the present invention is directed to an apparatus for changing the angle of attack of a cavitator on a supercavitating underwater research model. The apparatus comprises a nose assembly that has a pivotable cavitator tilt plate an actuator rod engaged with the cavitator tilt plate and a drive system for driving the actuator rod so as to tilt the cavitator tilt plate to a desired angle. Power components are remotely located and accessible to an operator so as to enable an operator to vary the angle of the cavitator tilt plate while the supercavitating underwater research model is in motion.

In one aspect the present invention is directed to an apparatus for changing the angle of attack of a cavitator on a supercavitating underwater research model. The apparatus generally comprises a nose assembly having a pivotable cavitator tilt plate and a watertight compartment an actuator member that is supported by the nose assembly and has a first distal end movably attached to the cavitator tilt plate and a second distal end opposite the first distal end and located within the watertight compartment and a drive system positioned in the watertight compartment for axially moving the actuator member in a first direction and in a second direction that is opposite the first direction. The drive system has inputs for receiving electrical power signals that control the drive system to move the actuator member in a desired direction. The apparatus further comprises an electrical power system positioned at a remote location for providing the electrical power signals to the drive system when the supercavitating underwater research model is either at standstill or in motion. Thus the apparatus of the present invention allows the angle of attack of the cavitator to be changed even when the tow tank is filled with water and the supercavitating underwater research model is submerged therein.

Although the apparatus of the present invention is configured to be used with a super cavitating underwater research model the ensuing description is in terms of the supercavitating underwater research model being simulated by other components and structures. Referring to the supercavitating underwater research model is simulated by forward shell and aft shell . Forward shell is connected to aft shell to form a simulated super cavitating underwater research model hereinafter model . Model is supported by sting . Aft shell covers sting to simulate the length an actual super cavitating underwater research model. Sting is attached to model by a ball joint assembly . The other end of sting is fastened to a strut not shown . The apparatus of the present invention comprises nose assembly which is sized to partially fit in forward shell .

Referring to A B and C there is shown a cross sectional view of nose assembly . Nose assembly comprises cavitator tilt plate to which cone cavitator is attached. In one embodiment cone cavitator is attached to cavitator tilt plate by corrosion resistant nuts and bolts not shown . Cone cavitator is shown in a neutral position see . Cavitator tilt plate has several different mounting holes for mounting different types of cone cavitators. Cavitator tilt plate includes central opening for receiving wiring and cables. Nose assembly includes link member base plate and actuator rod . Base plate functions as a load bearing member for actuator rod . Link member is pivotally attached to base plate at pivot pin joint A. Cavitator tilt plate is pivotally attached to link member and actuator rod by pivot pin joints B and C respectively. In one embodiment pivot pin joints A B and C are hinge style pin joints. The attachment of cavitator tilt plate link member and actuator rod in this manner reduces stress on actuator rod . This is illustrated in . When cavitator tilt plate is in the neutral position and substantially parallel to base plate the distance D between pivot pin B and reference center line is generally equal to the distance D between pivot pin C and reference center line . When actuator rod moves outward so as to pivot cavitator tilt plate the force created by actuator rod pushing cavitator plate outward causes link member to pivot downward about pivot pin A. As a result the distance D decreases and pivot pin B moves closer to reference center line . However the distance D remains substantially the same thereby substantially eliminating any stress or strain on actuator rod or on any of the pivot pins A B and C.

Referring to nose assembly further includes deflector which has opening sized for receiving actuator rod . Cavitator tilt plate and link member are secured to deflector by base plate . Nose assembly includes cover to which deflector is attached. Cover is described in detail in the ensuing description. Nose assembly further includes plenum ring . Plenum ring is attached to housing described in the ensuing description and circumferentially extends about and is spaced from the cover plate and deflector . The space between plenum ring and cover plate defines plenum for the collection of gas. The space between plenum ring and deflector define passage which is in gaseous communication with plenum . Passage is used to introduce gas into plenum . A gas source not shown such as a gas generator is used to introduce gas into plenum or into other locations in nose assembly or model that are in gaseous communication with plenum .

Referring to and nose assembly includes O ring seal members and . Seal seals the connection between cover and housing so as to make compartment watertight. Seal seals the entrance of actuator rod into compartment . Cover further includes a hollow extending portion A generally annular body portion B and end portion C. Deflector is attached to hollow extending portion A. Cover also includes through hole for receiving actuator rod and openings for the distribution of wires and cables that are connected to electronics not shown that are mounted on cavitator tilt plate . Cover includes through holes that extend through cover and are in gaseous communication with plenum and function as gas passages. Cover further includes openings sized for receiving fastening screws not shown . In one embodiment cover also includes portion that is cut out or notched so as to provide operational space for actuator rod .

Referring to and nose assembly includes housing . Housing comprises hollow center portion shown in phantom in that is in communication with opening . Hollow center portion cooperates with end portion C of cover and seal to provide watertight compartment . Housing has a plurality of through holes to allow the passage of wiring and tubing. Through holes are aligned with corresponding through holes on cover . Housing further includes a plurality of threaded through holes to which gas lines are attached. Through holes are substantially aligned with corresponding through holes in cover .

Referring to and the apparatus of the present invention further includes drive system . Drive system generally comprises motor gear reduction drive train and lead screw . In one embodiment motor comprises a 24 volt motor. However motors having other suitable voltage ratings can be used as well. also shows remotely located power components that control the operation of drive system . These power components are described in the ensuing description. Drive system is engaged with actuator rod and moves actuator rod bi directionally in an axial direction indicated by arrow in . Specifically motor drives gear reduction drive train . Gear reduction drive train drives lead screw which in turn axially moves actuator rod . The movement of actuator rod is generally parallel to reference axis . As a result actuator rod pivots cavitator tilt plate back and forth in the direction indicated by arrow in . Drive system further comprises limit switches and that limit the movement of actuator rod . Limit switch functions as an in limit switch and is normally closed. Limit switch functions as an out limit switch and is normally open. When either limit switch and is tripped electrical power to motor is shut off. Drive system includes linear potentiometer the purpose of which is discussed in the ensuing description. Actuator rod includes projecting member that extends from actuator rod . As actuator rod nears its inward travel limit projecting member trips limit switch . When switch is tripped electrical power to motor is shut off. As actuator rod nears its outward travel limit projecting member trips limit switch thereby shutting off the electrical power to motor . Linear potentiometer includes terminals A and B and slide that is connected to fastening device . Fastening device connects slide of linear potentiometer to actuator rod so that slide moves along with actuator rod . Linear potentiometer is mounted to housing with any suitable mounting device or technique. Thus linear potentiometer senses the position of the actuator rod .

Referring to the power components used to power drive system are not located in compartment but are external to nose assembly and accessible to a user or operator of model . The power components include switch motor power supply regulated power supply and volt meter . The user or operator of model can increase or decrease the angle of cone cavitator by activating switch in the appropriate manner. Thus the manner in which switch is activated determines whether actuator rod moves cavitator tilt plate outward or retracts cavitator tilt plate . In a preferred embodiment switch is a momentary double pole double throw DPDT toggle switch. In order to move actuator rod outward so as to increase the angle of attack of cone cavitator the operator pushes switch lever in a first direction. As a result current travels through one side of switch through limit switch to motor back to the other side of switch and then back to motor power supply . Motor operates in a first operational state until actuator rod nears the end of its outward travel limit and closes limit switch . In order to decrease the angle of cone cavitator actuator rod must be retracted. The user or operator accomplishes this by maneuvering switch lever in an opposite direction in order to reverse the polarity of the voltage applied to motor so that motor operates in a second operational state that is opposite the first operational state. As a result current flows through switch through limit switch through the other side of switch and then to motor power supply . Thus motor operates in the second operational state until actuator rod nears the end of its inward travel limit and limit switch is opened. This configuration allows the operator to achieve fine adjustment of the angle of cavitator cone . The angle of cone cavitator is measured via linear potentiometer regulated power supply and volt meter . Regulated power supply provides a voltage to potentiometer terminals A and B. The voltage at slide of linear potentiometer is compared to the total voltage applied to linear potentiometer at terminals A and B. Voltage meter measures the voltage between slide and ground potential. At any given moment the voltage measured between slide and ground potential corresponds to a particular distance in which actuator rod has moved. This particular distance corresponds to a particular angle of cone cavitator . A conversion procedure is used wherein the voltage measured at slide is converted to a distance e.g. inches feet centimeters etc. which is the distance actuator rod has moved and this distance is then converted into the resulting angle of cavitator cone . In a preferred embodiment drive system is calibrated before any test data is recorded in order to ensure that the conversion procedure is updated to reflect any fluctuations in component performance due to temperature or component tolerances. In one embodiment the conversion procedure can be accomplished with a computer or microprocessor and data recorder . In such an embodiment computer receives the voltage measured at slide from voltmeter and converts the measured voltage to angle data that represents the angle of the cone cavitator . The angle data is then outputted into data recorder . In such an embodiment voltmeter is configured as a digital voltmeter having a digital output. Cables or wires are connected between drive system and the remotely located electrical component and thus are in contact with the water or fluid in the tow tank. Thus cables or wires are preferably moisture resistant or water proof. During testing of the present invention ball joint assembly see allowed model to pitch and yaw as the angle of cone cavitator was varied. In an alternate embodiment of the invention nose assembly and the associated power components can be modified to operate as a two axis system wherein cone cavitator can be moved along two axes. In such an alternate embodiment a second motor and second actuator rod are used to achieve movement of cone cavitator in two dimensions. In a further embodiment an air cylinder is used in instead of actuator rod . In such an embodiment a generator is used to introduce pressurized gas into the air cylinder and plenum . The gas bleed off from the air cylinder is then fed to plenum .

The apparatus of the present invention allows the angle of cone cavitator to be accurately and rapidly set to a desired angle while model is submerged in water and in motion. The angle of cone cavitator can be set determined and recorded from a remote location while model is in motion thereby eliminating the need to drain the tow tank. Since the cone cavitator angle can be changed while model is in motion the resulting dynamics of the change in attack angle can be observed. Nose assembly has supplemental gas ventilation i.e. through holes and for transporting gasses to the front of model . The dimensions of through holes and can be varied so as to accommodate different gas flow rates. Ventilation holes not used are easily blocked by suitable techniques known in the art. Nose assembly has wire passages to receive instrumentation cabling sensors and other instrumentation. Watertight compartment prevents water damage to such cabling sensors and instrumentation as well as other components of drive system . Nose assembly is compact can be easily transported and has flexibility for mounting many different sensors and load cells.

The principles preferred embodiments and modes of operation of the present invention have been described in the foregoing specification. The invention which is intended to be protected herein should not however be construed as limited to the particular forms disclosed as these are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive. Variations and changes may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. Accordingly the foregoing detailed description should be considered exemplary in nature and not as limiting the scope and spirit of the invention as set forth in the attached claims.

