---

title: Method and apparatus for compounding medications
abstract: An active ingredient, such as particles of a pharmaceutical agent, is uniformly distributed within a transdermal vehicle, such as a gel or other viscous material. The method comprises filling said first container with a non-uniform mixture of a transdermal vehicle and said active ingredient, mounting the first container on a support member, and securing a second container to the first container. The first container has a restricted opening at its proximal end and a piston mounted movably within the first container for movement between a first position proximate said first container distal end to a position proximate said first container proximal end. The second container has a restricted opening at its proximal end and a piston mounted movably within the first container for movement from a first position proximate the second container distal end to a position proximate said second container proximal end. The first container restricted opening and said second container restricted openings are in open communication. The first container's piston is moved from its position proximate the distal end to a position proximate the proximal end and thereby forcing said mixture from the first container into said second container. The positions of the first and second container relative to said support member, are reversed and the process is repeated moving the mixture back and forth between the two containers until a uniform mixture is achieved.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07748892&OS=07748892&RS=07748892
owner: 
number: 07748892
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050601
---
This application claims the benefit of provisional patent application Ser. No. 60 576 351 filed Jun. 2 2004 the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference as though recited in full.

The present invention relates generally to the compounding of medications and more particularly to the preparation of mixtures of a viscous carrier and the active pharmaceutical agents and to the preparation of unit doses delivery systems from compounded formulations of a viscous carrier and active pharmaceutical agents.

The need for pharmacists to be able to perform in house compounding of pluronic lecithin organogels herein after referred to as PLO gels is progressively increasing due to the improvement of transdermal carriers and the lack of availability of pre compounded formulations.

A problem encountered by a pharmacist compounding the formulation is the inability to readily blend the active ingredients and the PLO gel. A simple blending operation is inadequate to achieve the required uniform distribution of active ingredients in the PLO gel. This fundamental problem extends to the blending of active ingredients in other carriers to produce compounded ointments salves balms creams gel liniments emulsions colloids and the like.

A related or similar problem exists in the transferring of viscous carriers from mixing containers to unit dose syringes or similar dispenser. There is a critical need for the caregiver or patient to be able to measure the exact dose.

In a first embodiment the invention relates to a method of substantially uniformly distributing an active ingredient within a transdermal vehicle. The transdermal vehicle may be a viscous material such as a gel and the active ingredient is particles as for example of a pharmaceutical agent. The term carrier as used herein refers to viscous mediums used in the production of compounded ointments salves balms creams gel liniments emulsions colloids and the like. PLO gels are an example of compounded formulations. It should be understood that the references to PLO gels is by way of example and not by way of exclusion of other viscous mediums.

The disclosure of U.S. Pat. No. 6 652 866 is incorporate by reference for its recitation of transdermal medications. It is disclosed in the patent that vehicles such as DMSO and pleurolecithin organogel PLO or PLO gel have been used to increase permeability of the skin. This increased permeability caused by these compounds may be an interaction of the lipophilic liquids with the lipid bilayers of the stratum corneum leading to decrease of barrier resistance of the skin. The term transdermal vehicles is used herein to refer to any current known or future developed ingredient in a viscous form such as a paste or gel like form such as DMSO and PLO or their functional equivalents that increase the permeability of the skin or otherwise carry a medication pharmaceutical agent herbal ingredient or ingredients drug or the like through the skin of the patient receiving the medication. The active ingredient herein referred to interchangeably as a herb drug pharmaceutical medicinal agent or medication is generally in the form of a fine powder that is in particulate form and must be uniformly distributed throughout the transdermal vehicle.

A first container is filled with a non uniform mixture of the transdermal vehicle and the active ingredient and is mounted on a support member. A second container is secured to the first container. The first container and second container s restricted openings at their proximal ends and a piston mounted movably therein for movement between a first position proximate the distal end to a position proximate the proximal end. The two containers are in fluid communication through their restricted openings. The first container piston is driven from its position proximate the distal end to a position proximate the proximal end and thereby forcing the mixture from the first container through the first container s restricted openings into the second container. The positions of the first and second container relative to the support member are reversed and the second container piston is driven from the position proximate the distal end to a position proximate the proximal end and thereby forcing the mixture from the second container through the second container restricted opening and the first container restricted opening into the first container. The procedure is repeated until the active ingredient is substantially uniformly distributed within the transdermal vehicle.

In an embodiment of the invention the first container is threadedly connected at its proximal end to the second container proximal end as for example by means of a Luer connector. The Luer connector can be internally threaded to accept external threads of the two containers proximal ends or externally threaded to accept internal threads of the two containers proximal ends.

In another embodiment of the invention a driving member is fixed in relation to the support member and the first container and the second container are rotatably secured to an arm member secured to the support member. The positions of the first and second container relative to the support member are rotated substantially 180 degrees such that the first container piston is in direct contact with the driving member when the first and the second container are in a first rotated position and the second container piston is in direct contact with the driving member when the first and the second container are in a second rotated position.

In another embodiment of the invention the first container piston is releasably secured to the driving member when the first and the second container are in a first rotated position and the second container piston is releasably secured to the driving member when the first and the second container are in a second rotated position.

In an embodiment of the invention at least one of the first container and second container is a syringe and preferably both containers are syringes.

In an embodiment of the invention active ingredient that has been substantially uniformly distributed within the transdermal vehicle is transferred from a supply container to a plurality of measured dose containers preferably single dose containers such as syringes.

In an embodiment of the invention a transdermal vehicle having an active ingredient substantially uniformly distributed therein is transferred from a supply container to a plurality of dose containers. The transdermal vehicle in this embodiment is a viscous material and the active ingredient is in particulate form. The transfer is achieved by mounting the supply container on a support member securing a dose container to the supply container which has a restricted opening at its proximal end and a piston mounted movably within the supply container for movement between a first position proximate the supply container distal end to a position proximate the supply container proximal end. The dose container has a restricted opening at its proximal end and the dose container restricted opening and the supply container restricted opening are in open fluid communication. The supply container piston is driven from the position proximate the distal end to first position toward the proximal end thereby forcing a portion of the mixture from the supply container through the supply container restricted opening and the dose container restricted opening into the dose container until the dose container is substantially filled. The dose container is separated from the supply container and a second dose container is secured to the supply container. Each dose container has a restricted opening at its proximal end. As before the supply container is connected to the dose container in a manner such that the dose container restricted opening and the supply container restricted opening are in open communication. The supply container piston is driven from the first position toward the proximal end to a second position thereby forcing a second portion of the mixture from the supply container through the supply container restricted opening and the second dose container restricted opening into the second dose container until the second dose container is substantially filled. The process is repeated a plurality of times thereby filling at least third and fourth dose containers. The number of dose units that are filled is dependant only upon the quantity of compounded formulation in the supply container. The quantity of compounded formulation can correspond to a single patient s requirement for the medication for a predetermined period of time or can correspond to the requirements of a plurality of patients. Preferably the procedure is repeated until the supply container is substantially empty. Preferably the dose containers are in the form of single dose syringe but can be multiple dose units to provide as for example delivery of one days morning and evening doses. Where the delivery of an exact dose is critical single dose units can be provided.

In another embodiment of the invention the dose containers are in the form of open ended tubes. The tubes are filled through the threaded proximal end and the open distal end of each tube is sealed after each tube is filled. Preferably the open end of each tube is sealed by clamping the open end and fusing the fusible tube at the clamped end. Alternatively the tube can be a metal such as aluminum or a plastic and can be sealed by mechanical means such as folding and crimping or otherwise sealed as well known in the art.

In an embodiment of the invention the dose tube is a fusible polymeric material and the open is sealed by thermal or sonic welding.

In an embodiment of the invention the device for substantially uniformly distributing an active ingredient within a transdermal vehicle comprises a first container and a second container. The first container contains a non uniform mixture of a transdermal vehicle and the active ingredient and has a restricted opening at its proximal end and a piston mounted movably within the first container for movement between a first position proximate the first container distal end to a position proximate the first container proximal end. The first container is mounted on the support member and the second container is secured to the first container preferably by a threaded connector such as a Luer connector. The second container having a restricted opening at its proximal end and a piston mounted movably within the first container for movement from a first position proximate the second container distal end to a position proximate the second container proximal end the first container restricted opening and the second container restricted opening are in open communication. The first container piston is moved from the position proximate the distal end to a position proximate the proximal end whereby the mixture is forced from the first container through the first container restricted opening and the second container restricted opening into the second container. The position of the first and second container are reversible relative to the support member whereby moving the second container piston from the position proximate the distal end to a position proximate the proximal end forces the mixture from the second container through the second container restricted opening and the first container restricted opening into the first container. The movement of the pistons is by a drive means that is mounted in a fixed position relative to the support member. The drive has a drive means piston positioned to contact the first container piston when the first container piston is in a first location proximate the drive means and the second container piston when the position of the first container and the second container are reversed relative to the support member and the second container piston is in the first location and the first container piston is in a second location.

In an embodiment of the invention the drive means piston is selectively moved from the first container piston from the position that is proximate the distal end to a position proximate the proximal end of the second container piston. The second container piston is then driven by the drive means piston from the position proximate the second container s distal end to a position proximate the second container proximal end. Preferably a system of a lever and gears is employed to drive the drive means piston.

In an embodiment of the invention the first container proximal end is threadedly connected to the second container proximal end by an internally threaded Luer.

In an embodiment of the invention the first container and the second container are secured to an arm member. The first container and the second container are rotatable relative to the support member preferably substantially 180 degrees such that the first container piston is in direct contact with the drive means piston when the first and the second container are in a first rotated position and the second container piston is in direct contact with the drive means piston when the first and the second container are in a second rotated position. Preferably one or both of the containers are syringes.

In accordance with an embodiment of the invention a device is provided for use in transferring a transdermal vehicle having an active ingredient substantially uniformly distributed therein from a supply container to a plurality of dose containers. The supply container is filled with a substantially uniform mixture of a transdermal vehicle and the active ingredient and the first container is mounted on a support member. A dose container is threadedly secured to the supply container. The supply container having a restricted opening at its proximal end and a piston mounted movably within the supply container for movement between a first position proximate the supply container distal end to a position proximate the supply container proximal end. The dose container has a restricted opening at its proximal end and the dose container restricted opening and the supply container restricted opening are in open communication. Drive means is mounted in a fixed position and has a drive means piston positioned to contact the supply container piston. The drive means piston is driven to selectively incrementally move the first container piston from the position proximate the distal end toward a position proximate the supply container proximal end. Preferably the drive means piston is driven by a manually actuated lever and gears. Preferably the dose containers are single dose syringes. Alternatively the dose containers can be open ended tubes having sealable open ends. The open end of each tube can be sealed by clamping the open end and fusing the tube at the clamped end. Preferably the dose tube is a fusible polymeric material and the open end is sealed by thermal or sonic welding.

In an embodiment of the invention the supply container is threadedly connected to the dose container by a Luer connector. Preferably the Luer connector second end is internally threaded to receive external threads of the dose container.

It has now been found that blending can be carried out by forcing a crudely blended material from a first container to a second container. The blending can be achieved by passing the initial blend through a small connecting orifice between the two containers. The forcing of the material from a relatively large diameter container through a relatively small diameter channel and into a relatively large diameter second container produces a turbulent flow. That is the transition from large diameter to small diameter to large diameter produces a fluid motion having local velocities and pressures that fluctuate randomly. The fluid is violently agitated or disturbed thus producing an extremely efficient mixing system.

Nevertheless it is necessary to repeat the process as many as fifteen times to have an assurance of achieving the required distribution of the active ingredient in the carrier medium. It is preferred that the number of repetitions exceeds five in number and more preferably exceeds ten. A complete cycle that is the transfer from the first container to the second container and then back to the first container is defined as two repetitions.

The viscosity of the material being blended is generally so high as to make it very difficult to force the material through the narrow orifice or channel between the containers. The containers are fitted with a movable wall opposite the narrow orifice end that is moved in a piston like action. Advantageously the container can be in the form of a syringe. However it has been found that it takes a great deal of physical energy to drive the piston and force the gel through the connecting channel. Insufficient blending may produce an insufficient level of blending. While a motorized unit can supply the required driving force such units are expensive and may not be suited for use by many pharmacists.

It has been found that a lever mechanism can be used to facilitate the material transfer without the need for the user to be significantly strained by the manual operation. The mechanical advantage of the lever action or similar structure makes it unnecessary to resort to the use of a motorized device. The result is a simple structure that is low in cost and easy to use and maintain and can be used to compound formulations such as PLO gels in remote areas or undeveloped areas where electricity is unavailable or unreliable. Additionally the system of the present invention operates independently of the voltage provided since it is a manual system. Accordingly the same system can be used universally irrespective of the voltage variations between countries or continents.

The paired containers can be interconnected by a Luer Luer connector as well know in the art. While reference will generally be made to the containers as syringes it should be understood that other container structures can be used. The critical features of a container are a plunger a restricted orifice and an outlet port that can be removably secured to a mated corresponding structural design container. Generally the containers are of the same size but in one embodiment one container is a master container and the other is a smaller satellite container. An example of this embodiment is seen where a master container holds at least a month s supply of compounded material and the satellite container is filled with a single dose of compounded material. In this embodiment it is preferred that the lever mechanism is designed to transfer a single dose of compounded material to a single dose syringe. Advantageously the lever is designed to be moved either an incremental amount corresponding to a predetermined dose size or in another embodiment is moved through a full arc while the piston is moved by a preset amount. In this latter embodiment a ratchet system can optionally be used to move the piston by the preset incremental distance for each full swing of the lever. This embodiment provides the user with the full mechanical advantage of the lever and is suitable for use both with the mixing system and the single dose transfer system.

Drill press types of mechanisms are disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 163 410 5 634 748 and 6 692 201 the disclosures of which are incorporated here by reference as though recited in full.

Preferably the lever arm mechanism is positioned to move from a position roughly 10 to 30 degrees from a horizontal to a position that is 70 to 100 degrees from the horizontal. An arc of movement of about 45 to 90 is preferred. It is noted that it is usually easier for a person to push a lever through a downward arc than to pull a lever through an upward arc. Accordingly the design is preferably such that the lever is pulled from a position near the horizontal and is rotated toward a vertical orientation. Conversely the lever is pushed from the near vertical position toward a horizontal orientation.

Additionally incorporated by reference as though recited in full is the Boss Reloading Press disclosed By The Reloading Bench at website www.reloadingbench.com the Ponsness Warren Metallic II Ponsness Warren 768 Ohio Street Rathburn Id. 83858 and Reloading Presses from Huntington P.O. Box 991 601 Oro Dam Blvd. Oroville Calif. 95965 such as the RCBA Pro 2000 and the RCBA Ammomaster Press www.huntingtons.com Presses.html. The lever link mechanisms are well illustrated in the above referenced reloading presses.

As illustrated in the presses have a vertically moving platen or cylinder . Movement of the lever downward rotates the lever arm mechanism about a pivot . The lever arm is connected by a connector to the cylinder which is moved upwardly as the lever arm is pulled downwardly. The particular design of the lever mechanism is not narrowly critical and can be of any of the common ammunition reloader press designs noted above as well as equivalent structures. It is only critical that the downward rotation of the lever arm produce a straight line upward movement of the cylinder . Any design that provides a mechanical advantage can be used in order to minimize the force that must be applied to the lever arm relative to the resistance to the upward movement of the cylinder . It should be understood that while a motor driven mechanism can be used the use of a manual lever mechanism is preferred for economic reasons and for convenience.

The embodiment of illustrates the use of syringes as the transfer vessels. While other containers can be used the use of syringes is preferred. The upward movement of the cylinder causes the mixture to be transferred from the syringe to the syringe . The syringes are of typical configuration. The syringe or equivalent device includes a narrow threaded end a narrow opening to the exterior threaded end or tip a piston mechanism that includes a seal as well known in the art a piston shaft and a piston end .

Luer connectors are well known in the art and are described for example in literature from BD Becton Dickinson and Company . 1 Becton Drive Franklin Lakes. N.J. 07417 1886. website bd.com the disclosure of which are incorporated herein by reference as though recited in full.

In the embodiment of the Luer connector is secured to a stationary support arm . The support arm is fixed in position relative to the movable piston . The critical part of the relationship is that the piston or cylinder moves relative to the support arm . In the preferred embodiment the support arm is stationary and the piston moves relative to the stationary support arm. While vertical movement is preferred other orientations can be used.

The syringe or equivalent device includes a narrow threaded end a narrow opening or port to the exterior threaded end or tip a piston mechanism that includes a seal as well known in the art a piston shaft and a piston end .

The frame member is fixed to the vertically movable piston by means of a sliding connection as for example a dovetail fit. Alternatively another type of interlocking relationship can be provided such as that which is provided between members and . When the lever mechanism is activated the piston rises and the pistons and are simultaneous pushed and pulled respectively. The syringes and are held in place during this action by virtue of having their wings or extensions and secured within the support arms and respectively. The fit within the retaining groove can provide for slight vertical movement such that the syringes can be readily placed within the support arms or removed therefrom.

When the lever arm is fully rotated and the piston is fully depressed the two syringes can be slid away from the support arms and . The piston is returned to its lowered position and the syringes are reinserted in the inverse position. Thus the lower piston which is now piston can be moved upwardly by the piston until it reaches its fully depressed position. In this manner the medium within the syringes is transferred back and forth through the narrow port between the syringes and is subjected to an effective mixing action. It is noted that the syringes can be secured together by a Luer connector as described above.

In the embodiment of the support arms and are connected to a rotatable shaft . The rotatable shaft can be rotatably fixed to the stationary support member as for example by a rotating shaft member . In this embodiment the frame member is rotated sufficiently to disengage the dovetails interconnection and the piston is lowered to its starting position and the frame is rotated such that the dovetails interconnection is restored. The lever is then once again lowered driving the piston upwards and forcing the medium from the now lower syringe into the now upper syringe .

In another embodiment of the invention a stepwise filling mechanism is provided. A master container such as a large volume syringe an open ended container or the like contains a large quantity of the final mixture . The quantity can be sufficient for providing a patient with medication for an extended period such as a week or a month either in single dose units or multiple daily applications. In order to facilitate accurate dose application by the patient preferably the mixture is transferred to a plurality of single dose dispensing containers such as syringes syringe like devices dispensing tubes or the like. The syringe is secured to the master cylinder by a Luer connector or simply by threading the externally threaded syringe into the internally threaded syringe .

The master cylinder is secured to a fixed arm by any convenient means as for example any of those described above. The master cylinder or supply container can be of the type sold under the trademark UNGUATOR. The fixed arm is carried by a stand post that is fixed to a table a base or otherwise stably positioned on a table or the like. The master cylinder is connected to the unit dose member by a Luer internally threaded connector which can be of the same type as connector of . The lever arm provides a mechanical advantage and is rotated incrementally to a degree that corresponds to a single dose of medication. The piston moves the container seal member up by the predetermined amount in a stepwise manner such that a single dose of medication is transferred to the syringe . The gradations on the syringe can be used to identify that the requisite quantity of medication has been transferred to the syringe. The syringe can be transparent or translucent and the piston seal within the syringe can be viewed. In this manner the movement of the seal is used to indicate the amount of medication that has been transferred. Alternatively the unit dose container can be a tube having an externally threaded proximal end and an open unsealed distal. After the unit dose tube is filled it is sealed.

In an embodiment of the invention the transfer of medication can be in calibrated or measured quantities in order to assure that the required quantity of medication has been transferred. Preferably a ratchet mechanism is used such that the lever s movement is restricted to a single direction and to predetermined increments until such time as the supply container is emptied and the ratchet is reset to its starting position. A ratchet is defined as a mechanism that consists of a pawl that engages the sloping teeth of a wheel or bar permitting motion in one direction only. The pawl wheel or bar of this mechanism produces a single direction rotation in fixed increments. The incremental movement corresponds to a predetermined volume of medication. Thus a dose of medication can be equal to a single increment or a plurality of increments.

In an example in which two increments of lever motion transfer a single dose of medication to the syringe of the lever mechanism must be designed to provide 60 incremental movements in order to fill thirty syringes. The thirty syringes can represent for example a thirty day supply or a fifteen day supply of two applications per day. Preferably the measured dose of product in each syringe provides for delivery of a single dose but if desired several doses can be contained within the measured dose receiver .

The piston mechanism of the present invention is adaptable for use with a grinding mechanism suited for pulverizing tablets as noted above.

The piston of can be provided with a dovetail end for engaging with a mortar . The same configuration can be provided with the mixing apparatus and thus the same mechanism can be used for driving the mixing apparatus and the grinding apparatus.

The pestle unit indicated generally as is provided with an internally mounted spring that drives the grinding bit downward. The pestle includes a hollow cylindrical member that houses the spring and the grinding bit . A spiral channel guides the pin that is mounted on the grinding bit and travels with the grinding bit. It is noted that a structure such as the pin can also be referred to as a key.

As shown in the hollow cylindrical body is supported on a standard that is fixed to the stand . The stand is secured to a support surface such as a table by a clamping mechanism as well known in the art or by any other convenient mechanism. The systems used in ammunition presses for supporting a press or securing a press to a table or the like are suited for use with the structure of the present invention. The pestle is secured to the standard by clamping arms and or other convenient mechanism. Preferably the clamping mechanism can be adjusted vertically along the standard in order to position the pestle at a desired distance from the mortar. Each of the clamping arms and are independently movable in order to accommodate pestles of varying lengths and diameters.

The mortar has a hollow interior for receiving a substance that is to be pulverized. As shown in the piston is elevated as describe above in relation to the mixing mechanism thus compressing the pulverizable material between the mortar and the pestle . The upward force of the piston lifts the mortar and forces the pestle upward. Since the pestle is keyed to the hollow cylindrical body of the pestle device the pestle is forced to rotate as it travels upwardly. In the embodiment of the key travels within the channel and thus the grinding bit turns counterclockwise as indicated by arrow . Obviously the mechanism can be configured for clockwise upward rotation. When the piston is lowered the mortar moves away from the grinding bit and the grinding bit rotates clockwise relative to the rotationally stationary mortar . Thus there is a rotational movement of the pestle relative to the mortar as the powder is compressed and pulverized. The piston is caused to rise and lower a sufficient number of times until the desired degree of comminution is attained. The movement of the piston is effected by a lever or motor as described above.

The grinding bit can be enhanced through the use of a grinding cap as illustrated in . The grinding cap can be provided with projections that can be hard particles bonded to the exterior surface of the cap member . The grit size shape and material can be a ceramic material or other inert abrading material as well known in the art. Through the use of a cap on the grinding bit the process is simplified since the cap can be disposable thus reducing or eliminating a clean step. Conversely the abrading material can be on the inner surface of the cap such that the cap functions as the mortar surface.

It should be understood that both a cap and a cup can be used. The cup can have a flat bottom so that it can positioned upright on a balance as a weight pan for crystalline product. The cup would then be placed into the mortar with the weighed contents for reduction to a fine powder.

I prepare my own pluronic 20 and 30 gel. The concentration of drug to gelling material using the 20 gel cannot exceed 28 to 30 drug to pluronic solution. Using the 30 pluronic gel the drug to gel can approach approximately 35 . The pluronic gel is a mixture of hydrophobic polymers and hydrophilic polymers. I use the following formula for mixing my pluronic gel.

This product is commercially sold under the trademark Polox Gel 20 Gallipot Chemical Co. NDC 51552 0549 8 . Lipoil lecithin isopropyl palmitate oil is commercially available from Gallipot Chemical Co. NDC 51552 0550 8.

Grind the 50 Seroquel 100 mg tablets in a Krups model 208B coffee mill for 2 bursts of 5 seconds tapping the coffee mill between bursts to redistribute powder for more uniform grinding. Seroquel is film coated and I remove as many of the pieces of film coat as possible by using an ordinary stainless steel tea strainer. The tea strainer I use fits into the upturned lid of the coffee mill. Using the lid as a receptacle for the sieved powder I dump the powdered drug from the coffee mill into the tea strainer. After a few quick taps to the rim of the sieve the most finely ground powder sifts into the coffee grinder lid. Left in the sieve are pieces of film coat too large to pass through the sieve and particles of Seroquel drug that were not ground fine enough to pass through the sieve. The object is to reduce the drug to as fine a powder as possible.

The residue left in the sieve is put into a Wedgwood mortar and triturated using a Wedgwood pestle until the particles are barely if at all palpable. This product is again sieved and the residue by this point consisting mostly of pieces of film coating is discarded. The remaining powdered drug is returned to the Wedgwood mortar for a vigorous trituration to reduce all particles as fine as possible with manual trituration.

A Cito Unguator brand mixer system was used to mix the ingredients. Unguator is a registered trademark of GAKO Konietzko GmbH. This system has proprietary plastic mixing jars of various sizes. For 100 ml batches I used the 100 ml mixing jar which actually holds about 120 ml.

The volume of the jar is calibrated to 100 ml using 100 nm of water measured in a 250 ml glass graduate. These jars have a push up bottom and thus provide a piston like dispensing design.

Once the volume of the jar is calibrated about 30 ml of pluronic 20 is poured into the jar. 24 ml of Lipoil is then added. 24 ml of Lipoil per 100 mls is the constant. To make a 50 ml PLO 12 mls of Lipoil is used. The powdered drug is then added. Pluronic 20 is then add to reach total volume of 100 ml. This is known as the sandwich a layer of pluronic a layer of Lipoil the drug and pluronic as the final layer.

The jar is then attached to the Unguator mixer and mixed for about 30 seconds manually moving the jar up and down to assure complete mixing as the circular mixing blade remains horizontally stationary turning at about 3000 RPM. This machine is similar to a soda fountain milk shake machine.

The mixture in the jar is now a usable PLO but there are still some visible and palpable particles of drug in the gel. To get the best bioavailability the particles should be as fine as possible.

The next step is to run the mixture through an Exakt 50 ointment mill. This procedure not only eliminates any drug particles powder nests but the pressure involved chemically binds the drug to the lecithin which is the optimal goal for this drug delivery system.

After 2 passes through the ointment mill the PLO is packaged into 20 ml syringes. These syringes are then dispensed to the patient.

There is no formula for conversion of dose from PO to PLO. Dosing is empirical. When we begin a patient on a PLO form of a PO drug we start them at the PO dose. This has been successful about 95 of the time. Because of the fragile and failing nature of our patient population hospice it is sometimes necessary to adjust the PLO dose due to failure of organ systems including skin integrity and disease progression to brain bone liver and kidneys etc.

PLO drug administration eliminates first pass effect. All of the drug is distributed throughout the body without being metabolized first. As a side note NSAIDs such as ketoprofen will still interfere with prostaglandin synthesis when given transdermally.

I have asked patients and caregivers if there is a film left after administration of the PLO. They report that there is nothing left on the skin except perhaps a slight stickiness. I had wondered if the excipients the binders and fillers that hold the tablet together other than the active drug would be transported along with the drug and I suspect they are.

The presence of the excipients when making PLOs from tablet or capsule powdered drug is the limiting factor on creating higher concentration ml dosing formulas. The concentration of drug per ml of PLO could be much higher using pure drug without the excipients .

The system of the present invention performs many tasks associated with the compounding of medication and the mixing of chemicals in the pharmacy hospital and laboratory as well as the filling of unit dose dispensers. The structures and methods of the system have general applicability in other applications.

The term emulsion as used herein refers to particles of one liquid finely dispersed in another liquid. Many oral mouthwashes are composed of several liquids added together. Each liquid ingredient will have its own viscosity viscosity is that property of fluids by virtue of which they offer resistance to flow . Some liquids are thin and runny like water or alcohol. Some have a consistency like grape jelly. Some have the consistency of thick honey.

It is the responsibility of the pharmacist to mix the prescribed ingredients together well using whatever means he has knowledge of and access to. The compounded product is said to be pharmaceutically elegant when its overall consistency color taste and feel if applicable presents a pleasing and uniform mixture or texture with no separation of products does not separate into liquids and solids or two or more different liquids . The more thoroughly the liquids are mixed the more stable and elegant the product becomes.

The greater the extent to which the liquids are homogenized the more accurate will be the dosing of the product. The intent of the prescriber and the pharmacist is that each unit of measure each teaspoonful for example of the product contain the same amount of active drug. In other words if the concentration of the compounded mixture is 10 mg of drug in every teaspoonful then the first teaspoonful poured from the bottle should contain 10 mg of drug and the last teaspoonful poured from the bottle should also contain 10 mg of drug. If the product is not properly mixed the drug may settle more quickly to the bottom of the bottle by force of gravity. This can yield a dose of less than 10 mg in the first teaspoonful poured from the bottle and toward the bottom of the bottle the concentration could grow to an undesirable level as the drug settles and concentrates in the last few doses.

The term homogenize as used herein refers to the use of force and pressure to break up globules and powder nests and disperse all ingredients uniformly throughout the product. The term powder nests refers to clumps of powder that must be broken up and for uniform dispersal throughout the product.

This formula is often used for patients who have a lowered resistance to infection due to illness radiation therapy or chemotherapy. It is used to treat fungal infections of the mouth and decrease the pain associated with diseased or burned oral mucosa to enable a patient to eat drink and talk without extreme pain.

Liquid antacid can be a thin runny liquid that has the appearance of skim milk but has the consistency of water. It contains magnesium hydroxide and aluminum hydroxide. Because water is the main ingredient the magnesium and aluminum tend to quickly settle to the bottom of the bottle and cake or become a hard mass. Liquid antacids should always be shaken very well before each use to suspend the magnesium and aluminum hydroxides.

Viscous lidocaine 2 as its name implies is viscous. It is clear and has a consistency and viscosity similar to a semi congealed gelatin dessert. Viscous lidocaine 2 is relatively difficult to uniformly disperse into solutions. It tends to form random stringy globules which are visually unattractive and which present a therapeutic dilemma when the goal is uniformity in the dispersion of drugs within the compound.

Nystatin oral suspension is a yellow liquid with the consistency of table syrup. Yellow nystatin powder is held in dispersion by the viscosity of the syrup.

The most used and fastest method for mixing this common compound has been is to add equal parts of each ingredient directly into a bottle shake well and dispense. As can be imagined from the above discussion there will be some mixing of the ingredients but the viscous lidocaine will remain in rather large globules and the nystatin will begin to migrate toward the bottom of the bottle as will the magnesium and aluminum hydroxides. There are issues with the accuracy of the volume markings on most pharmaceutical bottles designed for dispensing. This means that simply pouring each ingredient into the bottle up to a milliliter mark or ounce mark could be off by several milliliters. If each ingredient is measured into accurately calibrated graduates the accuracy of the measure becomes greater but the amount of dishes to wash and the time consumed in measuring and pouring becomes greater.

The greater the extent to which product is mixed shaken or homogenized the smaller the particles of each drug ingredient become. The smaller the drug particles become the better they stay dispersed in the solution. The more uniform the dispersion of particles the more uniform is the accuracy of the dose per volume of measure.

The present system offers an easy way to quickly and accurately measure and homogenize this preparation.

The present system employs a rotatable bar or arm that is attached to a stanchion. Supports on the rotatable bar or arm are adjusted to hold the flanges of two 140 ml syringes. The plunger is extracted from one of the syringes and laid aside. The plunger of the other syringe is pushed all the way in. These two syringes are connected tip to tip with a Luer to Luer connector.

The rotatable bar or arm is placed in a vertical position and the syringe flanges are inserted into the supports. The uppermost syringe is the syringe with no plunger piston and the bottom syringe has its plunger piston still in it. The liquids are poured into the top syringe in any order. The markings on the syringe are very accurate. In this formula we are using 40 ml of each of three ingredients. The first liquid is poured in until the level of liquid is even with the 40 ml mark on the barrel of the syringe. The second liquid is poured in until the level of liquid reaches the 80 ml mark. The third liquid is poured in until the level of liquid reaches the 120 ml mark.

The piston is then reinserted into the top syringe. The problem encountered in this procedure is that there may be a lot of air trapped between the end of the piston and the product in this case the liquids .

The present invention can employ a unique air elimination device that is inserted into the barrel of the upper open syringe. This device consists of three strands of approximately 1 mm fly fishing line. The three strands are approximately 12 inches long and are secured at one end with a loop or handle. The loose ends of the device are lowered into the barrel of the syringe and allowed to touch the product which is ready to be mixed. The piston is inserted into the barrel of the syringe and as it is pushed down the trapped air escapes through the creases that are made in the rubber of the piston seal as they slide along the fishing line device. When the piston has been inserted until there is little or no air left between it and the product the string device is removed from the barrel by simply pulling it out. The piston seal is restored and the air removal operation is complete. The product is now ready for mixing.

The proper size shoe is inserted into the top of the piston. This is the size that matches the surface area of the thumb grip or end of the piston. The rotatable bar or arm is rotated 180 degrees so that the loaded syringe is on the bottom.

The levers are then pulled forward until the piston shoe makes contact with the thumb grip of the plunger of the lower syringe. Pulling the levers with gentle steady pressure the plunger piston of the lower syringe compresses the product in the syringe until the contents of the lower syringe are expelled through the Luer to Luer coupler into the upper syringe. The levers are returned to the upright position. This lowers the piston shoe to allow the rotatable arm to be rotated for the next cycle.

The rotatable arm is rotated 180 degrees to place the newly loaded syringe in the bottom position. The term loaded syringe as used herein refers to the syringe that contains product. The levers are pulled forward until the piston shoe makes contact with the thumb grip of the plunger of the lower syringe.

The above described process is repeated several times preferably at least four or five times to produce a uniform mixture. The number of times the process must be repeated is dependant upon the uniformity requirement and the nature of the ingredients of the mixture.

This function includes such materials as colloids and gels such as Pluronic Lecithin Organogels or other transdermal gels

The term colloids as used herein refers to a state of matter in which finely divided particles of one substance the disperse phase are suspended in another the dispersion medium .

Pluronic Lecithin Organogels referred to herein as PLO gels or transdermal gels consist of granular soy lecithin dissolved in isopropyl palmitate mixed with pluronic F 127 a polyethylene glycol that has been hydrated in water to a concentration of 20 to 30 and active drugs and diluents as required.

This transdermal gel formula is most generally used for bone pain associated with breaks metastases to the bone and arthritis pain. It is usually mixed at a concentration of 100 mg or 200 mg per milliliter. A dose of 1 milliliter is applied to the inner wrist and rubbed in well. The maximum dose of ketoprofen is said to be 300 mg per day. The caregiver should wear vinyl or latex examination gloves when administering the drug to avoid absorbing the drug.

The system of the present invention is configured as above with two 140 ml syringes connected Luer to Luer. One syringe has the plunger removed and the other has its plunger pushed all the way in. The syringes are mounted in the supports of the rotatable arm. The open syringe is on the top and the syringe with its plunger completely inserted is on the bottom. The syringes are in a vertical line. The top syringe is open and ready to have ingredients poured into it.

Accurately weigh 10 Grams of ketoprofen powder and set aside. Pour 30 ml of pluronic F 127 into the top syringe. Pour 24 ml of lecithin solution into the syringe. 24 ml per 100 ml of PLO is the constant in PLO formulas. This can either be measured in a graduate and poured into the syringe or poured directly into the syringe using the measure markings on the syringe. The ketoprofen powder is then added to the syringe.

In order to arrive at a total volume of 100 ml the ketoprofen powder must be wetted . The term wetting as used herein refers to a process of mixing the powder and liquids together to surround the particles of the ketoprofen powder with a film of liquid. This decreases the volume of the mixture by eliminating air that had been surrounding the particles of powder. This preliminary mixing can be accomplished with a glass rod. The glass rod is inserted into the open end of the syringe and the mixture is stirred until it resembles thick pancake batter. After the larger lumps of powder have been broken up and the mixture is relatively smooth the glass rod is withdrawn with a twirling motion against the inner surface of the barrel of the syringe. This cleans most of the product from the rod. Pluronic F 127 liquid is then poured into the open end of the syringe until the level of liquid is at the 100 ml mark on the barrel of the syringe.

The plunger is inserted using the above describe venting device to vent the trapped air. The piston is then reinserted into the top syringe. The piston is inserted into the barrel of the syringe and as it is pushed down the trapped air escapes as described above. When the piston has been inserted until there is little or no air left between it and the product the venting device is removed from the barrel by simply pulling it out and the piston seal is restored. The air removal operation is complete and the product is now ready for mixing.

The proper size shoe is inserted into the top of the piston as described above. The rotatable are is rotated 180 degrees so that the loaded syringe is on the bottom. The levers are then pulled forward toward the operator until the piston shoe makes contact with the thumb grip of the plunger of the lower syringe. Pulling the levers with gentle steady pressure the plunger piston of the lower syringe compresses the product in the syringe until the contents of the lower syringe are expelled through the Luer to Luer coupler into the upper syringe. The levers are returned to the upright position. This lowers the piston shoe to allow the rotatable arm to be rotated for the next cycle.

The rotatable arm is rotated 180 degrees to place the syringe loaded with product in the bottom position. The levers are pulled forward until the piston shoe makes contact with the thumb grip of the plunger of the lower syringe. The above process is then repeated several times as noted above.

For a total volume of 120 ml subtract 2 of 120 2.4 from 120 to get 117.6 Grams. White petrolatum is the ointment base of this example. 117.6 Grams of white petrolatum is accurately weighed and set aside. 2.4 Grams of benzocaine is accurately weighed and set aside. The device of the present invention is configured as above with two 140 ml syringes connected Luer to Luer. One syringe has the plunger removed and the other has its plunger pushed all the way in. The syringe flanges are mounted in the supports of the vertically positioned rotatable arm. The open syringe is on the top and the syringe with its plunger completely inserted is on the bottom. The syringes are in a vertical line. The top syringe is open and ready to have ingredients poured into it. The white petrolatum is too viscous to pour and thus is scooped into the open syringe using a spatula. The petrolatum is worked to the bottom of the syringe using a glass rod. Benzocaine powder is poured into the syringe and gently stirred into the petrolatum using the glass rod. After the larger lumps of powder have been broken up and the mixture is relatively smooth the glass rod is withdrawn with a twirling motion against the inner surface of the barrel of the syringe. This cleans most of the product from the glass rod.

The plunger is inserted using the venting procedure described above to vent the trapped air. The product is now ready for mixing.

The proper size shoe is inserted into the top of the piston and the rotatable arm is rotated 180 degrees so that the loaded syringe is on the bottom. The levers are then pulled forward toward the operator until the piston shoe makes contact with the thumb grip of the plunger of the lower syringe. Pulling the levers with gentle steady pressure the plunger of the lower syringe compresses the product in the syringe until the contents of the lower syringe are expelled through the Luer to Luer coupler into the upper syringe. The levers are returned to the upright position as previously described.

The rotatable arm is rotated 180 degrees to place the loaded syringe in the bottom position. The levers are pulled forward until the piston shoe makes contact with the thumb grip of the plunger of the lower syringe. The above process is then repeated as described above.

Filling unit dose syringes is a tedious process that usually involves transferring the product from a storage or mixing container to a syringe so that the patient or caregiver can accurately measure the dose. There are commercial pumps that can fill syringes with liquids but they are expensive and only work to dispense liquids. They cannot handle viscous products such as PLOs gels ointments and creams.

After mixing the PLO in the above example 100 oral 1 ml syringes are filled for use for in topical administration. The procedure of the present invention is as follows 

Remove the 140 ml syringes from the supports on the rotatable arm. Disconnect the two syringes from each other. In the place of the Luer to Luer connector attach a Luer to Oral Slip connector to the loaded syringe. Luer to Oral Slip connectors are commercially available. Align the rotatable arm in a vertical position and install the flange of the loaded syringe into the bottom support with the Oral Slip connector pointing upward.

Gently pull the levers toward the operator until the shoe on the piston touches the thumb pad of the syringe. Continue pulling the levers toward the operator applying gentle pressure on the thumb pad of the syringe plunger to compress the PLO in the barrel of the syringe until product is visible in the orifice of the connector. Return the levers to the upright position to lower the piston of the machine and stop the flow of product into the connector. Insert the oral tip of a 1 ml oral syringe into the Oral Slip connector. Give the 1 ml oral syringe a gentle downward twist to seat it in the connector. Pull the handles gently toward the operator until the piston shoe gently touches the thumb pad of the 140 ml syringe. Continue gentle pressure as product is transferred from the 140 ml syringe to the 1 ml oral syringe until product fills the oral syringe to the 1 ml mark. Return the levers to the upright position to relieve pressure on the syringe and its contents. Remove the oral syringe with a gentle upward twist. Cap and label the oral syringe. Insert the oral tip of another oral syringe into the Oral Slip connector and repeat the process until all 100 oral syringes are filled.

Product in a commercially available push up bottom jar can easily be transferred directly to unit dose syringes using the system of the present invention. In cases in which a high pressure is needed to push up the bottom of the piston type jar a shoe can be used that inserts on the top of the machine s piston. This shoe not only accommodates the protrusion in the middle of the piston base of commercially available jar s but also provides uniform pressure over most of the surface area of the piston. The even distribution of pressure minimizes warping of the piston base under pressure and greatly decreases leakage around the piston seal.

An attachment that fits into the bottom support on the rotatable arm can be used to provide support over the surface of the lid of the jar as the contents of the jar are subjected to the pressure needed to expel the contents through the nozzle that is in the middle of the lid of the jar. To transfer product from push up bottom jars to unit dose syringes the nozzle in the lid of the jar is fitted with a unique connector that is threaded to fit the nozzle on one end and has a tapered orifice to accept the taper of the tip of the oral unit dose syringe on the other end.

The jar fitted with the tapered orifice connector is placed on the work surface of machine of the present invention and centered over the piston of the machine. The rotatable arm is in the vertical position and with the jar lid support attachment inserted into the lower rotatable arm support is lowered until the jar lid support attachment rests firmly on the lid of the jar. The connector is protruding upward through the attachment.

An empty unit dose syringe is now inserted in to the tapered receptacle with a gentle downward twist into the connector. Gently pull the levers of the machine toward the operator until the shoe of the piston makes contact with the bottom of the jar. The position of the plunger in the unit dose syringe is monitored the levers are pulled to force product from the jar into the unit dose syringe until the desire number of milliliters has been transferred.

To terminate the filling process the levers are returned to the upright position. This lowers the machine s piston relieving pressure on the bottom of the jar and stopping the product from being expelled from the jar into the connector. The unit dose syringe is gently twisted while lifting to remove it from the connector. The unit dose syringe is then capped and labeled for dispensing and the next empty unit dose syringe is inserted into the connector to be filled in the same manner.

Remove the 140 ml syringes from the supports on the rotatable arm. Disconnect the two syringes from each other. In the place of the Luer to Luer connector attach a Luer to ointment tube connector to the loaded syringe. Align the rotatable arm vertically and install the flange of the loaded syringe into the bottom support with the connector pointing up.

Screw the cap end of an ointment tube into the connector. Gently pull the levers of the machine toward the operator until the shoe of the piston touches the thumb pad of the syringe plunger. Determine from the milliliter markings on the syringe barrel the number of milliliters of product in the syringe. For example if the volume of product in the syringe is 100 mls and 30 ml of product is to be transferred to the ointment tube the levers will be gently pulled toward the operator until 30 mls have been expelled into the ointment tube. The plunger of the syringe will now be on the 70 ml mark to indicate that 30 mls of product has been transferred. 30 ml approximately 30 Grams .

The ointment tube is now unscrewed from the connector the cap is replaced on the ointment tube and the open end of the ointment tube is sealed. Since the tube is filled from the threaded connector side the open end is free of ointment and the tube can readily be sealed by a welding process such as thermal sonic or other fusing process.

Current methods for transferring product to ointment tubes generally require filling a cake decorating type bag with the product and squeezing the product into the open end of a vertically stabilized ointment tube by twisting the bag. Disadvantages of this procedure include waste of product which will inevitably be lost in the bag unknown quantity of product being transferred to the ointment tube air pockets being produced due to the uneven settling of product in the tube product soiling crimp area which must be cleaned well for proper sealing. By way of contrast the system of the present invention wastes no product transfers exact volume of product to the dose tube air pockets are virtually eliminated and the crimp area is not soiled.

As previously described a shoe that inserts on the top of the machine s piston can be used to distribute pressure uniformly over most of the surface area of the piston. The even distribution of pressure minimizes warping of the piston base under pressure which greatly decreases leakage around the piston seal. An attachment can be provided that fits into the bottom support on the rotatable arm that is designed to provide support over the surface of the lid of the jar as the contents of the jar are subjected to the pressure needed to expel the contents through the nozzle that is in the middle of the lid of the jar.

To transfer product from push up bottom jars to ointment tubes the nozzle in the lid of the jar is fitted with a connector that is threaded to fit the nozzle on one end and has female threads to accept the cap end of ointment tubes on the other. The jar fitted with the connector is placed on the work surface of machine of the present invention and centered over the piston of the machine. The rotatable arm is in the vertical position and with the jar lid support attachment inserted into the lower arm support and is lowered until the jar lid support attachment rests firmly on the lid of the jar. The connector is protruding upward through the attachment.

An empty ointment tube is now screwed into the connector. The levers of the machine are gently pulled toward the operator until the shoe of the piston makes contact with the bottom of the jar. The operator may look down into the open end of the ointment tube and continue to pull the levers to force product from the jar into the ointment tube. Since there is at this time no way of know precisely how much product has been transferred into the tube the correct volume must be estimated and the filling process terminated when the tube is estimated to be sufficiently filled. To terminate the filling process the levers are returned to the upright position. This lowers the machine s piston relieving pressure on the bottom of the jar and stopping the product from being expelled from the jar into the connector. The ointment tube is now unscrewed from the connector the cap is replaced on the ointment tube and the open end of the ointment tube is sealed.

Often a particular compound will be ordered again and again but each time the prescriber may prescribe a slightly different strength from what may be available. The solution to this problem is to make a quantity of the product at the highest strength written for and dilute a portion of it as needed for each prescription.

This example shows a supply in inventory of 100 ml of morphine 20 mg 1 ml PLO in the 140 ml syringe in which it was mixed. Also available are several hundred milliliters of PLO that has no drug added Plain PLO .

In this example a prescription has been received for 100 ml of morphine 5 mg 1 ml PLO. The requirement is thus 500 mg of morphine in 100 ml of PLO to make 5 mg 1 ml. Dividing 500 mg by the 20 mg per ml that is the stock morphine PLO indicates that 25 ml of the 20 mg 1 ml stock morphine PLO is needed to supply the 500 mg of morphine.

The 140 ml syringe containing the morphine 20 mg 1 ml PLO is fitted with a Luer to Luer connector. An empty 140 ml syringe with its plunger fully depressed is attached to the Luer to Luer connector. The flanges of these two syringes are fitted into the supports of the rotatable bar that is adjusted to be in a vertical position with the syringe loaded with product in the bottom position.

The levers of the machine are pulled gently toward the operator until the shoe that is fitted on the tip of the machine s piston comes into contact with the thumb plate of the plunger of the lower loaded syringe. With a gentle steady pressure the levers are pulled until 25 ml of the morphine 20 mg 1 ml is transferred into the upper syringe. The levers are returned to the upright position which lowers the machine s piston and relieves pressure on the bottom syringe plunger. This stops the flow of product from the lower syringe to the upper syringe. The syringes are removed from the arm supports. The stock morphine syringe is removed from the connector and capped. A 140 ml syringe containing plain PLO is attached to the connector. The flanges of the two syringes are inserted into the supports of the vertical rotatable arm with the plain PLO syringe on the bottom. The levers of the machine are pulled gently toward the operator until the shoe that is fitted on the tip of the machine s piston comes into contact with the thumb plate of the plunger of the lower loaded syringe. With gentle steady pressure the levers are pulled until 75 ml of the Plain PLO is transferred into the upper syringe.

The two syringes are removed from the supports and the syringe containing the plain PLO is removed from the connector and replaced with an empty syringe the plunger of which was fully depressed before connecting to the connector. The flanges of these two syringes are inserted into the supports of the rotatable arm or bar with the loaded syringe on the bottom. The levers are then pulled forward toward the operator until the piston shoe makes contact with the thumb grip of the plunger of the lower syringe. Pulling the levers with gentle steady pressure the plunger piston of the lower syringe compresses the product in the syringe until the contents of the lower syringe are expelled through the Luer to Luer coupler into the upper syringe. The levers are returned to the upright position thereby lowering the piston shoe to enable the rotatable support arm to be rotated for the next cycle.

The support arm is rotated 180 degrees to place the loaded syringe the loaded syringe is the syringe that contains product on the bottom. The levers are pulled forward until the piston shoe makes contact with the thumb grip of the plunger of the lower syringe. The above process is then repeated a sufficient number of times until the operator is satisfied that adequate mixing has occurred. The PLO in the syringe is now morphine 5 mg 1 ml. There has been no need to weigh morphine or measure or mix raw ingredients. The entire process is quick and clean. There is no chance for contamination because the transfers and mixing were all done in a closed environment. The morphine 5 mg 1 ml PLO can now be loaded directly into appropriate oral syringes for dispensing and labeled for topical use.

To transfer the contents of a 140 ml syringe to a push up bottom jar attach the unique Luer to jar connector to the tip of the 140 ml syringe. Insert the flanges of the 140 ml syringe into the bottom support of the vertically positioned rotatable support arm with the connector end of the syringe pointing upward. The nozzle of a push up bottom jar is then screwed into the connector. The jar is now upside down and joined by the connector to the 140 ml syringe. The levers of the machine are pulled slowly toward the operator until the shoe of the machine s piston just makes contact with the thumb pad of the syringe plunger. The number of milliliters or product in the 140 ml syringe is noted to make a record of what volume of product has been transferred to the jar. The operator continues pulling the levers toward the operator to expel product from the syringe through the connector and into the jar until the desired volume of product has been transferred. The next step is to unscrew the jar cap it and label as to contents and expiration if required. To transfer product from push up bottom storage jars to syringes the process is reversed. The connector is the same but the jar is on the bottom and the syringe is pointing downward into the connector.

The operator removes the rotatable support arm from the stanchion and attaches the grinder assembly to the stanchion. The next step is to remove the syringe jar shoe from the machine s piston and install the mortar cup on the machine s piston. The mortar liner cup can be used to weigh drug granules on a balance. The liner cup and its contents are placed into the mortar. A pestle cover is clipped onto the pestle.

With a gentle pressure the levers of the machine are pulled toward the operator until the mortar contents rise to come in contact with the pestle. The levers are gently pulled toward the operator until the pestle is fully retracted. By slowly pushing the levers away from the operator to lower the machine s piston and with it the mortar the product in the mortar is removed from contact with the pestle. The grinding process is continued until the product is as fine as necessary. The cup is removed from the mortar and product is transferred for its intended use.

