---

title: Methods, systems, and computer program products for providing automated call acknowledgement and answering services
abstract: A method, system, and computer program product for responding to an incoming communication attempt, sent from a sender to a recipient. The method includes receiving the incoming communication attempt and presenting options for responding to the incoming communication attempt. The options include at least one of acknowledgement message options and communication answering-related options. The method also includes receiving an option selection and responding to the incoming communication attempt according to the instructions of the selected option. The acknowledgement message options provide information to the sender without requiring that the recipient answer the incoming communication attempt.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08699687&OS=08699687&RS=08699687
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property I, L.P.
number: 08699687
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051220
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. application Ser. No. 10 666 512 filed Sep. 18 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 587 039 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates generally to voice and digital communications services and more particularly the invention relates to a method system and computer program product for providing automated call acknowledgement and answering services over a communications network.

The growing popularity of the Internet and the associated Internet protocol IP technology has carried over to the cellular industry which has embraced IP as the networking architecture of choice for creating and implementing new applications and service offerings. Recent trends toward open packet based wireless technology has facilitated an extraordinary expansion of global wireless subscribers which continues to grow each year.

This third generation 3G technology provides network operators and third party content and service providers with vast potential for delivering new services and value added content to mobile cellular subscribers that can be personalized in ways never before thought possible.

While the increase in mobile communications has provided great flexibility and convenience for the subscriber it has also created the need for improvements. For example a subscriber of telephony services often finds that incoming communications come through at inopportune moments such as while driving in a car sitting in a meeting or while the subscriber is otherwise occupied. However the subscriber while not in a position to answer the communication would still like to acknowledge to the sender that the communication attempt was observed and communicate to the sender information without engaging in an immediate conversation. The increase in traffic accidents by drivers distracted while talking on cell phones and the recent legislation restricting cell phone usage on the road is evidence of the need for additional service options for the mobile device user.

In most situations the called party has two choices answer the communication attempt or allow the communication attempt to go unanswered. There are circumstances that arise however whereby the caller is not able to answer the communication attempt and has no other option but to let the communication attempt pass. With caller identification service the called party may be aware of who is initiating the communication attempt but has no way of acknowledging the communication attempt or the caller without physically answering the communication attempt.

What is needed therefore is a convenient way to acknowledge to a caller that the called party is aware of the communication attempt and to communicate information as to how or when the two parties may alternatively communicate perhaps at a future time without physically answering the communication attempt. Further what is needed is a convenient way to provide communication acknowledgement options to the receiving party as to how to reply to an observed incoming communication attempt other than the conventional method of answering a voice call or otherwise responding in a manner so as to converse with the sender in real time through other means such as text based conversation. Communication acknowledgement options are options for a response to an incoming communication attempt that result in no immediate two way discussion between two parties. These options include 1 sending a customized voice reply to an incoming communication attempt and 2 automatically scheduling an alternate time to converse.

Further what is needed is a convenient way to provide communication answering options to the receiving party as to how to reply to an observed incoming communication attempt. Communication answering options are options for a response to an incoming communication attempt that result in an immediate two way interaction between at least two parties. These options include 1 using an incoming communication attempt to initiate an interactive real time communication session between two parties in disparate communication modes 2 using an incoming communication attempt to initiate another interactive application between the parties such as a shared gaming experience or other shared application 3 using an incoming communication attempt to initiate a closed captioning text presentation and recording of a voice conversation and 4 using an incoming communication attempt to initiate dual mode multiple disassociated conversations.

Exemplary embodiments relate to a method system and computer program product for responding to an incoming communication attempt sent from a sender to a recipient. The method includes receiving the incoming communication attempt and presenting options for responding to the incoming communication attempt. The options include at least one of acknowledgement message options and communication answering related options. The method also includes receiving an option selection and responding to the incoming communication attempt according to the instructions of the selected option. The acknowledgement message options provide information to the sender without requiring that the recipient answer the incoming communication attempt.

Other systems methods and or computer program products according to embodiments will be or become apparent to one with skill in the art upon review of the following drawings and detailed description. It is intended that all such additional systems methods and or computer program products be included within this description be within the scope of the exemplary embodiments and be protected by the accompanying claims.

Existing communications systems allow called parties two choices that is either to answer or not answer an incoming communication attempt. The automated call acknowledgement and answering services provide additional options to a called party allowing him her to acknowledge an incoming communication attempt and optionally to provide instructions as to how the two parties may communicate at a future time. Acknowledgement messages may include general boilerplate statements or may include customized pre defined statements defined by the called party. Acknowledgement messages can be text or voice based statements depending upon the type of communications devices utilized by the parties placing the calls. In addition the automated call acknowledgement features include sending a customized voice reply to an incoming communication attempt and automatically scheduling an alternate time to converse. Further call answering services are provided that include options for responding to an incoming communication attempt. These options include 1 using an incoming communication attempt to initiate an interactive real time communication session between two parties in disparate communication modes 2 using an incoming communication attempt to initiate another interactive application between the parties such as a shared gaming experience or other shared application 3 using an incoming communication attempt to initiate a closed captioning text presentation and recording of a voice conversation and 4 using an incoming communication attempt to initiate dual mode multiple disassociated conversations.

The automated call acknowledgement service is executed via a communications network as shown in the system of . depicts a variety of communications devices for which the automated call acknowledgement and answering services may be applied. A calling party initiates a communications attempt using a calling device such as one of calling devices . Calling devices shown in include a pager a cell phone wireline telephone and a personal computer . It will be understood that other types of calling devices may also be utilized in order to realize the benefits of the invention.

Pager communicates with other mobile devices using radio waves to transmit messages over a wireless data gateway. Pager may be an alphanumeric pager that delivers text messages to the call receiving device rather than simple numeric phone numbers or may be a two way pager.

Cell phone communicates via cell tower and mobile switching center which in turn communicates to other networks via a voice data network switch . Voice data network switch further enables wireline telephone and personal computer to communicate with communications devices over wired and or wireless networks. Voice data network switch may be implemented via an application programming interface that links disparate forms of communications e.g. PSTN and Voice over IP data.

Private Branch Exchange PBX wireline telephone refers to a traditional wired telephone utilizing Public Switched Telephone Network PSTN which carries analog voice data.

A called party who is the recipient of a communication attempt may receive the communication attempt on any one of call receiving devices . Call receiving devices may include wireless and or wireline devices and be implemented via voice and or data technologies.

Server executes the automated call acknowledgement service and may comprise any suitable high speed microprocessor capable of handling the volume of activities provided by the features and functions of the automated call acknowledgement service and its subscriber base. Server is accessible to the Internet and includes a security feature or firewall not shown in order to protect the integrity of the data stored therein.

The automated call acknowledgement service may be executed by a third party network provider or application service provider ASP and a portion of the automated call acknowledgement service may be resident in memory on a subscriber s call receiving device as described further herein.

Calling customer profile database stores phone numbers and other addresses for calling parties that are mapped for accessing and retrieving this information as described in .

Called customer profile database stores customer profile data for subscribers of the automated call acknowledgement service. Customer profile data includes personal information phone numbers other addresses etc. Called customer profile database also stores acknowledge messages defined by the subscriber the automated call acknowledgement service or a combination of both.

Wireless data gateways allows mobile digital devices to access the Internet and communicate with other wireless devices. Wireless data gateways route the data back and forth between mobile digital devices such as a laptop or pager .

Mobile switching centers MSC are circuit switching platforms that provide an interface for mobile devices to connect with voice data network switch and direct the network traffic coming in and leaving the MSC. MSCs serve as a network node in the wireless telecommunications network of system as well as a point of access to a Public Switched Telephone Network PSTN . A router at voice data network switch forwards the data packets received from mobile communications devices on to other networks and determines the optimal routes for these packets.

Voice services node enables both calling and call receiving devices to access the Internet via a text to speech and or voice recognition component. The party on the calling device e.g. telephone hears an acknowledgement message in the form of computer generated audio output while the call receiving party may generate an acknowledgement message utilizing a voice recognition component. In one embodiment voice services node may be implemented via a VoiceXML Gateway.

ISP represents an Internet Service Provider that provides access to the Internet for mobile digital devices such as laptop or a handheld device under a subscription agreement usually in the form of a monthly fee.

The automated call acknowledgement service can be implemented in a variety of communications environments. A caller may initiate a communications attempt using any means including wireless wireline PDA desktop and the communication attempt is routed to the call receiving device mobile switching center using standard communications channels. Mobile switching center is on the edge of the network between the network and the call receiving devices . Upon receiving an incoming communication attempt a screen display such as display as shown in is presented on the call receiving device . It will be understood that the terms called party and call receiving party are used interchangeably throughout this description.

The network system described in is provided for illustrative purposes. It will be appreciated that a variety of different networking topologies may be utilized in implementing the automated call acknowledgement and answering services.

To activate these options the called party utilizing a keypad stylus mouse or other input device highlights the selection and enters select . Otherwise the called party may go back to a previous screen by selecting back .

The automated call acknowledgement service allows a called party to send an acknowledgement message by voice or text. For example a message type I will call you back text refers to a selection in which the call receiving party wishes to send an acknowledgement message in text form to the calling party. A call receiving party who is familiar with the calling party may be aware that the individual calling has access to a PDA or similar device and so may decide that sending a text acknowledgement message is preferable over the voice option. Likewise a called party may select an acknowledgement message for transmission to the calling party in voice format. The menu screen of reflects a sampling of the type of options that may be provided to a calling party. Embodiments of the automated call acknowledgement service contemplate other similar menu options as well as those depicted in . Embodiments may include a menu screen including additional sub menu options that are presented in response to a selection of a message type. For example when a user selects I will call you back voice a sub menu is displayed on the call receiving device with a message select a time for call back followed by time incremented choices available for selection. The resulting acknowledgement message would reflect that the call receiving party has indicated an intent to call the calling party back in a specified number of minutes or other time frame.

As indicated above when an incoming communication attempt is detected on a call receiving device the party receiving the communication attempt has three options to answer the communication attempt ignore the communication attempt or send an acknowledgement message. describes the implementation of the automated call acknowledgement service when the call receiving party has selected the send message option. The call receiving party selects one of several options as described in . At step the automated call acknowledgement service receives a data request for an acknowledgement message from the call receiving device. The data request is automatically created by the automated call acknowledgement service and contains the phone number or text address of the calling party depending upon which mode the calling party used to place the call the phone number or of the call receiving party and the message type in accordance with the option selected by the call receiving party e.g. I will call you back and call me back . This information is readily available to the automated call acknowledgement service using existing communications technology. The data request also contains a voice text indicator provided by the call receiving party via options that lets the automated call acknowledgement service know how to transmit the acknowledgement message.

If the text voice indicator specifies text at step the automated call acknowledgement service looks at the calling party information in the data request to determine whether the communication attempt originated from a phone or computer device. If the communication attempt came from a phone at step the automated call acknowledgement service searches calling party customer profile database at step by mapping the calling party number in the data request to an associated text address stored in database . The text address is entered into the data request at step . The automated call acknowledgement service retrieves the actual text of the selected acknowledgement message from called customer profile database at step by mapping the message type selected to the associated acknowledgement message text stored in called customer profile database . Step is likewise performed if it is determined that the communication attempt originated from a text based calling device at step . This resulting acknowledgement message text is formatted using existing transmissions protocols and sent in text form to the calling device at step .

If on the other hand the text voice indicator specifies voice at step the automated call acknowledgement service creates a call request for a voice acknowledgement message at step . The call request may be a simple data packet and includes a field for a delay period that may be set by default or user customized. The delay is used to prevent premature placing of the call during a time when the calling party has not yet disconnected the call placed to call receiving device. This might occur for example when the calling party is leaving a voicemail message. The call request is automatically populated with information from the data request such as calling device phone number and call receiving device phone number at step . At step the automated call acknowledgement service determines whether the communication attempt originated from a phone or text device by looking at the information in the data request. If the communication attempt originated from a text device the automated call acknowledgement service searches the calling customer profile database at step in order to find an associated phone number for the text address. Once found the phone number is entered into the call request at step . At step the automated call acknowledgement service searches called customer profile database for the actual acknowledgement message text associated with the acknowledgement message type selected by the call receiving party and enters this acknowledgement message into the call request. The call request is then sent to voice XML gateway at step and the message is converted from text to speech at step . The automated call acknowledgement service then places a call to the calling party device at step and the voice acknowledgement message is presented to the calling party device.

It will be understood that some of the data and functionality of the automated call acknowledgement service may be stored internally on calling devices and call receiving devices with resident memory.

The automated call acknowledgement service provides a convenient way to acknowledge to a caller that the called party is aware of the communication attempt and to communicate information as to how or when the two parties may communicate at a future time without physically answering the communication attempt. The automated call acknowledgement service is optimally implemented in situations where the caller is not able to answer the communication attempt and has no other option but to let the communication attempt pass.

The automated call acknowledgement service may provide additional options to a called party who wishes to acknowledge an incoming caller without answering the communication attempt. For example the automated call acknowledgement service may enable the called party to send an acknowledgement message that is presented to the caller using one of a variety of personas that is selectable by the called party. Additionally or alternatively the automated call acknowledgement service may provide a scheduling and or reminder service to the called party. For example suppose an acknowledgement contains a message informing the calling party that the called party will call the calling party back in two hours. The reminder feature of the automated call acknowledgement service may access an application on the called party s device such as a messaging application or calendar application and enter a corresponding reminder.

As indicated above in response to an incoming communication attempt the called party has the option of answering the communication attempt or sending an acknowledgement message. Additional services may be made available to the called party should the called party wish to answer the communication attempt rather than send an acknowledgement message. These services may include selecting a mode of communication in which to conduct the call. Other services may be provided while the communication session is in progress e.g. switching mode of communication switching applications and call waiting options. These additional acknowledgement options and call answering related options are collectively referred to as automated call acknowledgement and answering services and are described further herein.

Turning now to processes for implementing the automated call acknowledgement and call answering services will now be described in exemplary embodiments. The process described in relates to the call acknowledgement features and the processes described in relate to the call answering related features.

Referring to the process begins at step whereby an incoming communication attempt is detected at step . The automated call acknowledgement and answering services present two options for the called party via one of call receiving devices at step namely an acknowledgement option and an option to answer the communication attempt. If the called party wishes to answer the communication attempt the process proceeds to . Otherwise the automated call acknowledgement and answering services receives a data request for an acknowledgement message at step . The request is implemented by selecting the SEND MESSAGE option on a user interface screen provided to the called party device a sample of which is shown in . The request is processed in a manner similar to that described above with respect to step of .

At step the automated call acknowledgement and answering services presents an acknowledgement screen to the called party device a sample of which is shown in . If the called party wishes to send the acknowledgement message in a voice format e.g. via selecting the VOICE option in acknowledgement screen a subwindow appears providing the called party with additional options. As shown in the subwindow the called party may choose PERSONA or REMINDER . At step it is determined whether the called party has selected this option. If so a subwindow is presented to the called party that includes various persona selections to choose from. The choices may include USE MY VOICE USE STANDARD VOICE USE CELEBRITY VOICE and USE AUDIO FILE to name a few. Some of these options may further include sub options e.g. by selecting USE CELBRITY VOICE the called party is presented with a list of different celebrity names to choose from .

At step the called party selects a persona from the subwindow and the process reverts back to whereby steps are performed. Alternatively if the called party decides not to select a persona at step the process reverts back to steps . Called customer profile database stores texts of acknowledgement messages defined by subscribers the automated call acknowledgement and answering services or both. The customer profile database also stores pre recorded acknowledgement messages supplied by e.g. celebrities who lend their voices to the services the subscriber in his her own voice or other audio file. Once a persona is selected the automated call acknowledgement and answering services retrieves the corresponding message from the called customer profile database and presents it to the calling party device. This option may further access the voice services node in performing text to speech or speech to text conversions of the message prior to transmission if applicable.

Once the acknowledgement message has been transmitted the process returns to whereby the called party is presented with an option to receive a reminder to follow up with the acknowledgement e.g. if the acknowledgement message specifies that the called party will call the calling party back at a future time . At step it is determined whether the called party wishes to be reminded of the acknowledgement message. Alternatively the reminder may be automatically scheduled for the called party without further actions on the part of the called party.

If a reminder is desired at step e.g. via selected option of the called party may select a method of reminder e.g. email calendar entry task folder entry etc. at step . If the called party selects a calendar reminder the automated call acknowledgement and answering services retrieves a calendar application executing the called party device. This process is depicted in . The calendar screen of depicts a calendar for the month of December along with a sub window of times. The entry of the reminder into the calendar including a search for free time on the calendar may be automatically performed by the automated call acknowledgement and answering services or may be selectable by the called party if desired at step . Upon entry of the reminder or alternatively if the called party does not wish to schedule a reminder at step the process ends at step . If a reminder is scheduled for the called party the automated call acknowledgement services provides the called party with a message e.g. within minutes of the scheduled call back time reminding the called party to call the party subject to the acknowledgement message in accordance with the call back time date.

Turning back now to step if the called party selects the answer option e.g. via ANSWER OPTIONS in the user interface screen of the process proceeds to whereby the automated call acknowledgement and answering services presents call answering related options in a subwindow at step . The options include ANSWER CALL SESSION MODE CLOSED CAPTIONING and sub option and CALL WAITING options. The answer call option refers to the normal or standard mode of answering a communication attempt. The session mode and closed captioning modes refer to modes of communication. These are described further herein.

If the called party wishes to answer the communication attempt in a standard way with no additional answering service at step the called party selects the ANSWER CALL option and the communication attempt is connected between the two parties in a standardized fashion at step . If this option is not selected the automated call acknowledgement and answering services determines if the called party wishes to communicate with the calling party via a particular mode of communication at step e.g. via selection of SESSION MODE option . If not the process proceeds to . Otherwise the automated call acknowledgement and answering services presents available modes of communication e.g. data mode audio mode at step and the called party selects the desired mode. Selecting the desired mode causes the automated call acknowledgement and answering services to invoke this feature at step and connect the call at step whereby the communications session is conducted by the called party via the selected mode of communication. This process may be implemented using the system and processes described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 184 789 entitled SYSTEMS AND METHODS FOR PROVIDING REAL TIME CONVERSATION USING DISPARATE COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES filed on Jun. 28 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 065 185 which is commonly assigned to the assignees of the instant application and is hereby incorporated by reference. In such a manner the called party may answer the communication attempt and converse with the caller in a mode that is different from the mode of the caller. For example if the incoming communication attempt is a voice call from the caller the recipient may choose to answer the communication attempt in data mode resulting in a conversation in which the caller conducts the conversation in voice mode and the called party conducts the conversation in data mode as further described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 184 789 entitled SYSTEMS AND METHODS FOR PROVIDING REAL TIME CONVERSATION USING DISPARATE COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES filed on Jun. 28 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 065 185.

As indicated above the automated call acknowledgement and answering services also provides the ability for a called party to switch communication modes during a communications session e.g. a call initiated as a voice call can be switched over to a data call. To this end the automated call acknowledgement and answering services may provide a user interface screen that appears during the communication a sample of which is shown in . The user interface screen of includes an option that prompts the called party to select a mode of communication that is different that the mode currently utilized i.e. mode shift . For example as shown in screen the communication is occurring in voice mode. Accordingly the option available to the called party in screen is option that is SWITCH TO TEXT MODE. At step it is determined whether the called party wishes to switch the mode of communication e.g. by selecting option . If not the communication proceeds in the current mode at step . Otherwise the automated call acknowledgement and answering services sends a signal to the network to invoke translation of the communication to the selected mode at step . The selected communication mode is then implemented at step . This translation may be implemented using the processes described in the aforementioned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 184 789.

As shown in the mode shifting process may be implemented for other services e.g. the standard call answering option of steps the session mode option of steps as well as the closed captioning and call waiting options of FIG. C which are described further herein .

Turning back to step of if the called party does not wish to implement the session mode option the process proceeds to whereby it is determined whether the called party has selected the CLOSED CAPTIONING option at step . If so the automated call acknowledgement and answering services sends a signal to the calling party informing the calling party that the called party will be communicating with the calling party via closed captioning at step . At step the automated call acknowledgement and answering services invokes the closed captioning application on the called party device which translates the incoming voice call into text format and presents the communication to the called party device. By this means a text record of both sides of the conversation may be created displayed on the device and saved to a file.

At step it is determined whether the called party wishes to save the communication e.g. by selecting RECORD TO FILE option from screen of . If so the automated call acknowledgement and answering services stores the communication in a file at step e.g. on the called party device or may transmit the file to another location specified by the called party if desired. If the called party does not wish to save the communication at step the process ends at step .

Turning back to step if the called party does not wish to utilize the closed captioning option it is determined whether the called party has selected the call waiting option at step . The call waiting option provides the called party with choices in the event there is a new incoming communication while an existing current communication is already in progress. These choices include keeping or maintaining the current communication and ignoring the new incoming communication ending the current communication and accepting the new incoming communication keeping the current communication and accepting the new incoming communication and ending the current communication and ignoring the new incoming communication. If the called party wishes to keep the current communication and ignore the new incoming communication the automated call acknowledgement and answering services takes no action the current communication continues at step and the process proceeds to step .

If the called party wishes to end the current communication and accept the new communication the current call is discontinued at step the incoming communication attempt is connected at step and the process proceeds to step . If the called party wishes to keep the current communication and accept the new incoming communication the current communication continues as normal at step and the called party selects an alternate mode of communication for the new incoming communication attempt at step . For example suppose that the called party device is a dual mode communications device. The called party may be speaking to the current caller via voice communications and then select text mode for communicating simultaneously with the new incoming caller. This may be implemented by accessing the screen and selecting the KEEP CALL ACCEPT NEW option of CALL WAITING . The dual mode functionality of the communications device would then initiate the communications session with the incoming communication attempt at step while maintaining the current session that is ongoing with the current caller. The process then proceeds to step

Alternatively if the called party wishes to end the current call and ignore the new incoming communication attempt the called party simply terminates the call at step and the process ends at step .

As indicated above the automated call acknowledgement and answering services provides the ability for the called party to switch between applications during a communications session. A sample user interface is provided to the called party and is illustrated in . The called party receives a text message WOULD YOU LIKE TO PLAY A GAME and includes response options YES and NO . Upon selecting the YES option the communication session switches to an interactive gaming application. For example upon selecting the YES option a data message is transmitted to the automated call acknowledgement and answering services e.g. via server to invoke the game. The automated call acknowledgement and answering services retrieves the selected application from a storage location e.g. called customer profile database and provides the called and call receiving devices with a user interface screen for implementing the selected game. Other applications may also be enabled for use by the application switching services e.g. communications session to word processing Web browsing messaging and other types of applications. For example while communicating with a called device via e.g. instant messaging the called device may initiate a local or web based application e.g. viewing streaming video from a web camera .

As described above exemplary embodiments of the present invention can be embodied in the form of computer implemented processes and apparatuses for practicing those processes. The present invention can also be embodied in the form of computer program code containing instructions embodied in tangible media such as floppy diskettes CD ROMs hard drives or any other computer readable storage medium wherein when the computer program code is loaded into and executed by a computer the computer becomes an apparatus for practicing the invention. The present invention can also be embodied in the form of computer program code for example whether stored in a storage medium loaded into and or executed by a computer or transmitted over some transmission medium such as over electrical wiring or cabling through fiber optics or via electromagnetic radiation wherein when the computer program code is loaded into and executed by a computer the computer becomes an apparatus for practicing the invention. When implemented on a general purpose microprocessor the computer program code segments configure the microprocessor to create specific logic circuits.

While exemplary embodiments of the invention have been described with reference to exemplary embodiments it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes may be made and equivalents may be substituted for elements thereof without departing from the scope of the invention. In addition many modifications may be made to adapt a particular situation or material to the teachings of the invention without departing from the essential scope thereof. Therefore it is intended that the invention not be limited to the particular embodiments disclosed for carrying out this invention but that the invention will include all embodiments falling within the scope of the claims.

