---

title: Multi-application trial stimulator
abstract: The disclosure relates to an electrical trial stimulator that stores multiple applications to selectively emulate the operation of different chronically implanted stimulators. Each application corresponds to a different chronically implanted stimulator. Upon selection of a particular application, the stimulator executes a set of instructions to emulate the operation of a chronically implanted stimulator that corresponds to the application. The multi-application stimulator permits a physician to select an application for stimulation therapy, and evaluate efficacy of a particular chronically implanted stimulator. In addition, the physician may select any of the other stimulation applications to emulate other stimulators. The different stimulation applications may correspond to different stimulators that deliver a similar therapy, e.g., stimulators designed to deliver spinal cord stimulation for alleviation of chronic pain. Alternatively, the applications may correspond to stimulators that deliver different types of therapy, e.g., stimulators that deliver spinal cord, deep brain, gastrointestinal, or pelvic floor stimulation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07680540&OS=07680540&RS=07680540
owner: Medtronic, Inc.
number: 07680540
owner_city: Minneapolis
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050729
---
Electrical stimulation is an effective therapy for a variety of conditions and diseases that adversely affect patient health. For example electrical stimulation has been effective in alleviating chronic pain movement disorders gastrointestinal disorders and pelvic floor disorders. Spinal cord stimulation systems have been found to provide relief for chronic pain. Deep brain stimulation can be effective in treatment of movement disorders such as Parkinson s disease as well as other neurological disorders such as epilepsy. Stimulation of the gastrointestinal tract can be effective in alleviating gastroparesis and obesity. Stimulation of the pelvic floor can be effective in alleviating urinary incontinence fecal incontinence pelvic pain and sexual dysfunction.

Typically electrical stimulation is delivered by an implantable pulse generator that is chronically implanted within the patient. One or more leads extending from the implantable pulse generator carry electrodes for delivery of stimulation energy to a target tissue or nerve site. Unfortunately some patients may not respond to stimulation therapy. For this reason a physician often prescribes a course of trial or screening stimulation to evaluate the likely efficacy of electrical stimulation therapy for the patient. In particular an external trial stimulator is used to evaluate the efficacy of stimulation before implanting a chronic stimulator. A chronic stimulator typically requires surgical implantation and may be implanted for several years.

An external trial stimulator is ordinarily electrically coupled to one or more implanted leads through a percutaneous extension. The trial stimulator may be carried by the patient e.g. at the waist. The physician penetrates through the skin and tunnels the leads to a target site. Upon connection of the leads to the external trial stimulator trial stimulation is activated to emulate the therapy delivered by a chronically implanted stimulator. Although the trial stimulator may only be used for a short time e.g. a period of hours days or weeks the patient and physician are able to determine if the stimulation therapy is effective in alleviating the symptoms.

If the therapy is successful the patient may undergo surgery to implant a chronic stimulator. If the trial therapy is unsuccessful the physician may alter the trial stimulation try another type of stimulation therapy or abandon stimulation therapy. In the case of an unsuccessful therapy the use of the external trial stimulator is beneficial in avoiding the need to implant and then explant a chronically implanted device. In this way the time labor patient risk and patient discomfort associated with surgical implantation and explantation can be avoided. On the other hand successful trial therapy provides heightened confidence in the efficacy of chronic implantation and may reveal desirable stimulation parameter settings to be programmed into the implantable stimulator.

The disclosure is directed to a trial electrical stimulator that stores a set of instructions associated with multiple applications to selectively emulate the operation of different chronically implanted stimulators. The trial stimulator may be a neurostimulator that operates in conjunction with electrodes carried by one or more implanted leads. Each application corresponds to a different chronically implanted stimulator and may be associated with a set of instructions. Upon selection of a particular application the trial stimulator emulates the operation of a chronically implanted stimulator that corresponds to the application.

The trial stimulator may reside externally to the patient and connect to one or more implanted leads via a percutaneous extension. The multi application trial stimulator permits a physician to select an application for stimulation therapy and thereby evaluate the efficacy of a particular type of chronically implanted stimulator. In addition the physician may readily select any of the other stimulation applications to emulate other implanted stimulators. In this manner the physician may switch between different stimulation applications as desired. A patient programmer or physician programmer may be used to control the multi application trial stimulator.

The different stimulation applications may correspond to different stimulators that deliver a similar therapy. For example the applications may correspond to two or more stimulators designed to deliver spinal cord stimulation for alleviation of chronic pain. Alternatively the applications may correspond to stimulators that deliver different types of therapy. For example the applications may correspond to stimulators that deliver spinal cord stimulation deep brain stimulation gastrointestinal stimulation or pelvic floor stimulation. In some embodiments the applications may correspond to different types of therapy as well as different stimulators designed to deliver each type of therapy. In addition the applications may be targeted to particular types of disorders.

In one embodiment the invention provides an electrical stimulation system comprising a trial stimulator and a programmer. The trial stimulator generates electrical stimulation pulses the trial stimulator having a memory storing multiple sets of instructions wherein each set of instructions corresponds to one of a plurality of different chronic stimulators. The programmer programs the trial stimulator to select one of the sets of instructions for operation of the trial stimulator. The trial stimulator applies the selected set of instructions to emulate operation of a corresponding chronic stimulator.

In another embodiment the invention provides an electrical stimulator comprising a stimulation pulse generator that generates electrical stimulation pulses a memory storing multiple sets of instructions wherein each set of instructions corresponds to one of a plurality of different chronic stimulators and a processor that selects one of the sets of instructions to control operation of the stimulation pulse generator wherein the processor applies the selected set of instructions to emulate operation of a corresponding chronic stimulator.

In an additional embodiment the invention provides a method comprising storing multiple sets of instructions in a memory in a trial electrical stimulator wherein each set of instructions corresponds to one of a plurality of different chronic stimulators and selecting one of the sets of instructions to control operation of a stimulation pulse generator within the trial electrical stimulator wherein the processor applies the selected set of instructions to emulate operation of a corresponding chronic stimulator.

In various embodiments the invention may provide one or more advantages. For example storing a plurality of stimulation applications within one trial stimulator may enable the use of a single trial stimulator to evaluate a variety of stimulation therapies. In comparison to the use of different trial stimulators for different stimulation applications the use of a single more versatile trial stimulator can simplify evaluation by the physician and reduce the cost of trial stimulation. In particular there is no need to use multiple trial stimulators dedicated to emulation of individual chronic stimulators. In addition the use of a single patient programmer to control delivery of therapy by a trial stimulator eliminates the need for the patent to learn how to operate different types of patient programmers. The use of a single universal patient programmer also may reduce patient confusion.

The details of one or more embodiments of the invention are set forth in the accompanying drawings and the description below. Other features objects and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the description and drawings and from the claims.

As shown in system includes a trial stimulator an external programmer and an implantable lead . External programmer communicates with trial stimulator by wired communication or wireless communication as indicated by reference numeral . Lead carries one or more stimulation electrodes and is tunneled into patient via a percutaneous port . Percutaneous port may be formed for example in the abdomen or lower back of patient . A pulse generator within trial stimulator is electrically coupled to electrodes carried by lead . The electrodes are deployed proximate the spinal cord of patient for delivery of spinal cord stimulation e.g. for alleviation of chronic pain. Trial stimulator typically will be external to patient . In some embodiments however trial stimulator may be configured for temporary implantation within patient .

In accordance with the invention trial stimulator stores multiple applications to selectively emulate the operation of different chronically implanted stimulators. Each application may include or be associated with a different set of instructions that when executed permit trial stimulator to emulate the operation of a particular chronically implanted stimulator. If different chronic stimulators are available for spinal cord stimulation for example trial stimulator may store applications that correspond to the respective chronic stimulators. In this manner by selection of a corresponding application trial stimulator emulates a selected chronic stimulator i.e. operates in a manner substantially similar to the selected chronic stimulator. Operation of different chronic stimulators may differ in terms of parameter settings ramp rates timing multi channel stimulation capabilities and the like. Trial stimulator permits emulation of the different chronic stimulators including operational variations among the stimulators.

Each application stored by trial stimulator corresponds to a different chronically implanted stimulator. An application generally refers to a set of machine readable instructions that direct operation of trial stimulator to substantially emulate the operation of a corresponding chronically implanted stimulator. The selected application may be a section of memory that contains the instructions or a pointer or other reference that identifies a location of the pertinent set of instructions. The machine readable instructions in an application may be accompanied by data which may define operands for the instructions. For example the data may include stimulation parameters such as current or voltage amplitude stimulation pulse rate stimulation pulse rate duration timing electrode combinations electrode polarities and the like. In some embodiments the instructions associated with an application may be substantially identical to the instructions carried within the corresponding chronically implanted stimulator.

To support multiple applications trial stimulator may include one or more memory modules that store instructions associated with multiple applications. Each memory module may store instructions to support a particular application. Alternatively instructions to support a given application may be distributed across multiple memory modules along with instructions for other applications. In this case a memory module may store portions of sets of instructions associated with multiple applications.

Upon selection of a particular application trial stimulator emulates the operation of a chronically implanted stimulator that corresponds to the application. Each memory module may be a discrete memory device such as volatile or non volatile memory chip. Alternatively a memory module may be a bank of memory or a set of contiguous or non contiguous memory addresses within memory. In general a memory module may refer to an independently addressable memory space that stores sets of instructions and data corresponding to one or more applications.

As discussed above the different stimulation applications may correspond to different stimulators that deliver a similar therapy. More particularly in the example of spinal cord stimulation the applications may correspond to different stimulators designed to deliver spinal cord stimulation for alleviation of chronic pain. Alternatively the applications may correspond to chronically implanted stimulators that deliver different types of therapy. For example the applications may correspond to stimulators that deliver spinal cord stimulation deep brain stimulation gastrointestinal stimulation or pelvic floor stimulation. In some embodiments the applications may correspond to different types of therapy as well as different stimulators designed to deliver each type of therapy. In addition the applications may be targeted to particular types of disorders.

Trial stimulator may select one of the applications from memory in response to a command received from external programmer . In this manner external programmer programs the trial stimulator to select a set of instructions for operation of the trial stimulator. A physician or patient may operate external programmer to select a desired application as well as particular programs or parameter values applied by trial stimulator . In some embodiments trial stimulator may itself include a user interface that permits a patient to select applications and specify programs or parameter values. The user interface in trial stimulator may be provided as an alternative or in addition to a user interface in external programmer . Upon selection of a particular application trial stimulator or external programmer may present a user interface that is customized to the selected application.

In some cases trial stimulator may be configured to apply a default application unless and until patient or physician enters a command to change the default application. Trial stimulator or external programmer may present a menu or other user interface medium for selection of applications to be applied by the trial stimulator. In response to a command specifying selection of a particular application trial stimulator may select a corresponding application from memory . In particular trial stimulator may load the instructions associated with an application either entirely or in successive segments into random access memory for execution by the trial stimulator. Loading of an application may involve any of a variety of standard memory access techniques.

In an exemplary embodiment trial stimulator stores instructions for four individual applications. Each memory module may contain the instructions for one stimulation application. Alternatively the instructions for the stimulation applications may be spread across multiple memory modules. Accordingly the number of applications need not correlate with the number of memory modules. When changing from one stimulation application to another stimulation delivered by trial stimulator may change substantially or only slightly depending on the similarities between the chronic stimulators being emulated. For example stimulation parameters types of connected leads electrode combinations and electrode polarities may change when using the trial stimulator for a different application. In general trial stimulator permits patient to experience such differences so that different chronic stimulators may be accurately emulated for purposes of efficacy evaluation.

Trial stimulator may have a housing constructed from a variety of materials such as titanium stainless steel or a polymeric material. Because trial stimulator is not implanted within patient the housing may be constructed of any type of durable material sufficient to secure and protect the inner components and not necessarily in keeping with the biocompatibility requirements usually associated with implanted stimulators. For example the housing of trial stimulator may be constructed of other materials such as polyurethane polycarbonate aluminum or another strong polymer or metal alloy. In any event the housing may be constructed for external use. The location of trial stimulator may be at the side of the lower abdomen or the side of the lower back. In alternative embodiments the housing of trial stimulator may be constructed for internal implanted use within a patient on a temporary basis. Accordingly the principles of the invention need not be limited only to external stimulators but also may be used with implanted stimulators.

In one embodiment the stimulator may be located near percutaneous port . Percutaneous port may be a surgically opened site in the skin to provide passage for lead to enter patient . For spinal cord gastrointestinal or pelvic floor stimulation as examples percutaneous port may be located near the lower abdomen or lower back of patient and may be kept open and protected through the use of a ring type seal structure. Alternatively the skin around percutaneous port may be allowed to close directly around electrical lead . In either case percutaneous port may essentially limit the period of time a patient may use a trial stimulator due to the risk of infection. Lead is flexible electrically insulated from body tissues and terminated with electrodes at the distal ends of the lead. The proximal end of lead is electrically coupled to pulse generator to conduct the stimulation pulses to a target stimulation site. In some embodiments more than one electrical lead may be used to deliver stimulation.

Trial stimulator may include telemetry electronics to communicate with external programmer . External programmer may be a small battery powered portable device that accompanies patient throughout a daily routine. In this case external programmer may be referred to as the patient programmer. This patient programmer may also be compatible with a chronic implantable stimulator that provides the same therapy as the chosen stimulation application. If the trial stimulator therapy is successful the patient may continue to use the same patient programmer. The use of the same patient programmer during trial stimulation and chronic stimulation can reduce patient learning time and increase patient convenience.

External programmer may have a simple user interface such as a button or keypad and a display or lights. External programmer may be a hand held device configured to permit activation of stimulation and adjustment of stimulation parameters. The programmer also may be capable of turning stimulation on or off. In some embodiments trial stimulator may be controlled through a series of buttons switches or small display located on trial stimulator . In this case programmers may not be needed to program the stimulator in some instances or they may be used in addition to the controls located on trial stimulator .

Alternatively external programmer may form part of a larger device including a more complete set of programming features including complete parameter modifications firmware upgrades data recovery or battery recharging in the event stimulator includes a rechargeable battery. This alternative programmer may be function as a physician programmer operated by a physician to program interrogate and maintain trial stimulator and alternatively chronically implantable stimulators. Additionally the physician programmer may be capable of initially choosing one of the stimulation applications for therapy. The physician programmer also may be able to limit compatible patient programmers by specifically indicating one patient programmer for altering stimulation parameters.

A physician programmer may enable the trial stimulator to be used with more than one patient. After trial therapy the physician programmer may upload data from the trial stimulator for evaluation of the therapy. This data may include stimulation parameters delivered stimulation therapy modifications and the like. This data may be stored within the physician programmer for recovery at a later time. In some cases if a trial is successful stimulation parameters used during the trial may be directly downloaded to a chronic stimulator for continuation of effective stimulation therapy. After all data is recovered from the trial stimulation the physician programmer may erase all data associated with a patient. Once cleared the trial stimulator may be ready for use by another patient.

If trial therapy is successful lead may be kept in place and connected to the implantable chronic stimulator. A lead used within patient may not be used in another patient and should be discarded if a trial does not indicate chronic implantation. If a percutaneous extension is attached to lead for trial stimulation the percutaneous extension may be removed so that the lead may be directly coupled to the chronically implanted stimulator e.g. by tunneling the proximal end of the lead to the site at which the chronic stimulator is implanted.

In some embodiments system may include multiple trial stimulators to stimulate a variety of regions on spinal cord . Stimulation delivered by the multiple stimulators may be coordinated in a synchronized manner or performed without communication between stimulators. Also the electrodes may be located in a variety of sites on the spinal cord dependent on the particular therapy or the condition of patient . In the case of multiple trial stimulators the chronic therapy may be conducted through the use of multiple implantable stimulators or just one implantable stimulator.

Multi application memory may be a non volatile electrically programmable read only memory such as EEPROM that stores instructions for multiple applications also designated A B C and D . Instructions for applications A B C and D may be stored in respective memory modules or distributed across multiple memory modules such that portions of the instructions for each application may reside in each of the memory modules.

Processor controls stimulation pulse generator and telemetry module via system bus . Stimulation pulse generator generates stimulation pulses for delivery to patient via lead . Processor controls stimulation pulse generator according to instructions associated with an application A D . The instructions for a given application A D may specify stimulation parameters such as amplitude pulse width pulse rate duration timing electrode combinations electrode polarities and the like.

RAM provides a temporary memory space for execution of instructions associated with respective applications A D . For example processor may load operational instructions from ROM for execution. ROM may store firmware instructions associated with an operating system which may be executed directly from ROM to provide a shell operating environment or boot executive for processor . In addition RAM may store instructions associated with a selected application from multi application memory .

Upon power up of trial stimulator processor executes the instructions from ROM . These instructions may also contain information relating to stimulation protocols telemetry protocols memory allocation guidelines and error handling. The contents of ROM may also contain general information such as a stimulator identification number and manufacture history. Upon power up processor also may load a default application from one of applications into RAM . The default application may be identified by a flag in a register or memory associated with multi application memory . Alternatively processor may present a menu to a patient or physician for selection of a desired application e.g. via user interface and or external programmer . In some embodiments trial stimulator may not include a user interface . Instead user interface functionality such as presentation of an application menu may be provided entirely by external programmer .

Multi application memory may include multiple memory modules for the storage of instructions for the plurality of stimulation applications A B C D. However applications A B C D may be stored within a contiguous mapping of memory space across the memory modules. As an illustration each memory module could have a memory capacity of 32 Kbytes such that four memory modules produce an overall memory space of 128 Kbytes within multi application memory . For example each memory module could be a 32 Kbyte EEPROM. In the example of multi application memory contains four individual memory modules to store the instructions for a total of four stimulation applications A B C D. However the number of memory modules and associated stimulation applications may vary according to individual needs and need not correlate with one another.

Multi application memory may be permanently contained within trial stimulator or removable. Removable memory may be a type of EEPROM or FLASH memory or multiple EEPROM or FLASH memories. For example a CompactFlash or SmartMedia flash memory card may contain one or more individual memory modules. In some embodiments a new flash memory card may be inserted into trial stimulator with application updates or new stimulation applications. Alternatively trial stimulator may include a programming port that permits the contents of memory to be rewritten. Examples of suitable programming ports for trial stimulator are infrared e.g. IrDa ports universal serial bus USB radio frequency RF ports and the like.

Multi application memory may store different applications for a common type of therapy. For example applications each may include instructions that correspond to different chronically implanted stimulators that address chronic pain by spinal cord stimulation. As an illustration applications A D could correspond to different neurostimulators manufactured by Medtronic Inc. of Minneapolis Minn. for spinal cord stimulation to alleviate chronic pain. For example application A could correspond to the Medtronic Mattrix stimulator application B could correspond to the Medtronic Itrel stimulator application C could correspond to the Medtronic Synergy stimulator and application D could correspond to the Medtronic RESTORE stimulator. In this manner with trial stimulator the physician may evaluate different types of chronic stimulators for a given type of stimulation or disorder. Likewise the multiple applications may include instructions that correspond to different chronically implanted stimulators of a common type but manufactured by different medical device manufacturers.

Alternatively multi application memory may store different applications for different types of therapy. For example applications each may include instructions that correspond to different chronically implanted stimulators for spinal cord stimulation deep brain stimulation gastrointestinal tract stimulation and pelvic floor stimulation. As an illustration applications A D could correspond to different stimulators manufactured by Medtronic Inc. of Minneapolis Minn. for such applications. For example application A could correspond to the Medtronic RESTORE stimulator for spinal cord stimulation application B could correspond to the Medtronic Activa stimulator for deep brain stimulation application C could correspond to the Medtronic Enterra stimulator for gastrointestinal stimulation and application D could correspond to the Medtronic Interstim stimulator for pelvic floor stimulation. In this manner with trial stimulator the physician may emulate different types of stimulators for a given patient without the need to use different trial stimulators.

In addition to storing the instructions for the stimulation applications memory may contain additional data. This additional data may include patient information selected parameters patient actions and data generated during stimulation. For example processor may generate stimulation trend data and operational data that assists the physician in customizing the therapy for patient . The data may be recorded within memory modules of memory or in separate memory. Memory may contain all information to operate trial stimulator for multiple stimulation applications and all data associated with the patient during the use of the pertinent stimulation applications. The data produced during use of a given application may be stored locally with the instructions for that application or elsewhere within memory . In other embodiments data produced by all applications may be stored together in a common area of memory .

Some data and instructions may be stored at multiple locations within trial stimulator . This redundancy may allow stimulation to continue unaffected if data corruption occurs. Once trial stimulator is no longer used for one patient all patient identifiable data may be erased before a different patient may use the trial stimulator. Further patient identifiable data may be erased before the physician programmer may be allowed to program the trial stimulator for a different patient. The erasure of patient data from trial stimulator may be desirable for both privacy and safety reasons.

More or less memory modules may be contained within trial stimulator . For example in some embodiments trial stimulator may only contain one large memory for storing all instructions and data associated with multiple applications. In this case the applications may be segregated in different memory address regions or otherwise mapped so that the applications can be readily retrieved and loaded for operation of trial stimulator . In other embodiments many more memory modules may be included for separating data and limiting data corruption if one module fails. Moreover as mentioned above one memory module may contain instructions for more than one application and one set of instructions for a given application may be split among more than one memory module.

In some embodiments multiple applications A B C D may be loaded into RAM as software applications that run in an operating environment established by the contents of ROM . In this case applications A B C D operate as separate processes within the operating environment. The processes are identified as being active or inactive or allocated processing cycles according to an active or inactive status. In this case each application A B C D runs on top of an operating system platform established by trial stimulator from the instructions contained within ROM .

Alternatively the instructions contained within ROM may establish an operating system shell that permits trial stimulator to boot into an operating environment created by one of applications A B C D. In this case applications A B C D are not merely software applications running on an operating system. Instead each application supports its own operating environment which is launched from a shell operating system provided by instructions within ROM . In this manner the contents of ROM operate as a boot loader executive that causes trial stimulator to boot into one of applications A B C D. This may be analogous to launching one of the Windows XP Window NT or Linux operating systems from a DOS shell in a standard computing system. In any event trial stimulator is able to selectively invoke one of the applications A B C D by loading the corresponding contents of memory into RAM .

When the code in ROM executes upon power up of trial stimulator it looks for a flag set in memory or elsewhere which identifies the default application A B C D into which the trial stimulator should boot. If no flag is set to identify a default application trial stimulator may communicate with external programmer e.g. by wireless telemetry to obtain a selected application. External programmer may present a user interface menu to a user such as a physician for selection of a desired application A B C or D. Upon receipt of a selection the code in ROM boots processor of trial stimulator into the selected application A B C D which then takes over operation of trial stimulator for delivery of therapy. In this case the application A B C D booted by trial stimulator may operate as the operating system for the trial stimulator.

External programmer programs trial stimulator to select one of the sets of instructions for operation of the trial stimulator. For example trial stimulator may set a corresponding flag in memory to identify the selected application communicated by programmer as the default application and then voluntarily reset the trial stimulator so that it reboots into the desired application on the resulting power up initialization. Alternatively trial stimulator may set the corresponding flag in response to the command from external programmer and then wait for a reset command from the external programmer . Hence external programmer may send both a default application selection command and a reset command. In either case the selected application is loaded upon reset and is loaded into RAM for operation. In this manner trial stimulator executes the application instructions and is able to emulate operation of a corresponding chronic stimulator.

Processor controls the flow of data between RAM ROM and multi application memory . Processor copies the data required for operation and control of stimulation pulse generator and places it within RAM for fast and easy access. Alternatively for instructions contained in ROM processor may execute the instructions directly from the ROM . Processor uses the information stored within RAM and multi application memory to control the stimulation generated by stimulation pulse generator . Based upon the stimulation instructions and parameters selected processor will determine when electrical pulses may be generated and delivered to patient . Processor may also generate and store data during stimulation based upon the progress of therapy.

Wireless telemetry in stimulator may be accomplished by radio frequency RF communication or proximal inductive interaction of trial stimulator with external programmer via telemetry module . Alternatively because trial stimulator will be ordinarily outside the body of the patient wireless telemetry may be accomplished by other communication techniques such as infrared communication. As a further alternative trial stimulator and programmer may communicate by wired communication. Processor controls telemetry module to exchange information with external programmer . Processor may transmit operational information and sensed information to programmer via telemetry module . Also in some embodiments trial stimulator may communicate with other devices such as stimulators or sensors via telemetry module .

To support wireless telemetry telemetry module includes appropriate radio frequency transmit receive amplifier filtering antenna and modem components. In some embodiments telemetry module may alternatively or additionally provide wired communications. Because trial stimulator is external to patient a cable connection may be available when wireless telemetry is not desired. This connection may utilize a universal serial bus USB or similar circuitry to transfer information to another device.

Power source delivers operating power to the components of trial stimulator . Power source may include a battery and a power generation circuitry to produce the operating power. In some embodiments the battery may be rechargeable to allow extended operation Recharging may be accomplished through proximal inductive interaction between an external charger and an inductive charging coil within trial stimulator . In other embodiments an external power supply may use a cable to connect to trial stimulator to charge the stimulator battery or provide direct power for stimulation.

As an example if no default application is indicated trial stimulator may receive a selection from programmer in which case trial stimulator places a flag in memory to specify the selection as the default application. Following the selection trial stimulator may receive a reset command from programmer . In response trial stimulator executes a power up reset operation and upon initialization loads the default application that was specified just before the reset operation. Hence selection of an application when no default is specified may involve selection by programmer followed by a reset operation.

Once an application is loaded processor may continue to communicate with an external programmer such as a patient programmer or physician programmer to receive any stimulation parameters or parameter changes that may be specified by a user for the application that is loaded in trial stimulator . Alternatively in some embodiments the parameters may be specified via a user interface provided in trial stimulator . Upon receipt of the stimulation parameters trial stimulator applies a therapy that corresponds to the set of instructions associated with the loaded application and in turn corresponds to a particular chronically implanted stimulator. In this manner trial stimulator emulates operation of the chronically implanted stimulator.

In the course of therapy processor may store therapy data such as parameter changes operational data and the like . In some embodiments the therapy data may be stored within a memory module or other memory space associated with the presently loaded application. If there is a parameter change by a user processor receives stimulation parameters and repeats application of therapy . Also processor may handle an application change in which the user wants to switch to a different application. In this case processor obtains an application selection from the user and loads the newly selected application into memory for delivery of a corresponding therapy and emulation of a corresponding chronically implanted stimulator. The change to a newly selected application may be invoked by designation of the application as the default application followed by a reset operation as in the case in which no default application is specified. Typically parameter changes may be performed using a patient programmer or physician programmer. However application changes are preferably performed only by a physician using the physician programmer. When the end of stimulation is reached either by expiration of a timer or active input from a user the trial stimulator may be powered off .

In some embodiments selection of an application and stimulation parameters may involve entry of a variety of information about the leads and stimulator that are to be emulated. For example the physician may then use external programmer to select the number and type of leads that will be used. Programmer may then be used to set each stimulation parameter used for the selected stimulation application. The stimulation parameters may include different settings for amplitude pulse width pulse rate electrode combination electrode polarity and the like. The degree to which a patient may later change parameters may be subject to limits in order to ensure patient safety and comfort. Some parameter values may be automatically selected by trial stimulator e.g. based on auto sensing of lead and electrode configurations.

Various embodiments of the described invention may include processors such as processor that are realized by microprocessors digital signal processors DSPs microcontrollers Application Specific Integrated Circuits ASIC Field Programmable Gate Arrays FPGA or other equivalent integrated or discrete logic circuitry. The processor may also utilize several different types of data storage media to store computer readable instructions for device operation. These memory and storage media types may include any form of computer readable media such as magnetic or optical tape or disks solid state volatile or non volatile memory including random access memory RAM such as static RAM SRAM or synchronous dynamic RAM SDRAM read only memory ROM electronically programmable memory EPROM or EEPROM or Flash memory.

The techniques described herein may be implemented in a stimulation device in hardware software firmware or any combination thereof If implemented in software the software may be executed in a programmable processor as described above. In that case the software that executes the techniques may be initially stored in a computer readable medium as described above and loaded and executed in the programmable processor. Thus this disclosure also contemplates a computer readable medium comprising machine readable instruction that upon execution carry out one or more of the techniques described herein.

