---

title: User interfaces for peripheral configuration
abstract: Systems and methods consistent with embodiments of the present invention provide a method for the configuration of peripheral devices. In some methods for configuring peripheral devices, configuration options available for a peripheral device are enumerated and listed as files associated with a virtual drive representing the peripheral device. In some embodiments the files may be given descriptive names related to the configuration options they represent. In some embodiments, icons in a user window may denote the virtual drive, and its associated files and folders. In some methods for configuring peripheral devices, when the icon for a file associated with the virtual drive is dragged onto the icon for the virtual drive, the configuration of the scanning device associated with the virtual drive is automatically changed to match the configuration associated with the file.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07822880&OS=07822880&RS=07822880
owner: Konica Minolta Systems Laboratory, Inc.
number: 07822880
owner_city: Foster City
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050310
---
The present invention relates to the field of graphical user interfaces and in particular to user interfaces for the configuration of computer peripherals.

Computer peripherals such as document scanners printers and multi function devices have been used for some time now to facilitate conversion of physical documents into electronic form and vice versa. For example a physical document may be scanned and stored in electronic form on a computer. The scanned document is represented at least initially as an image comprising of a sequence of pixels. The information contained in each pixel is dependent on the granularity of the scan which in turn depends on the resolution of the scanner. Scanner settings are typically controllable thus the granularity of a scan may be adjusted until a user is satisfied with the scanned image. In addition to image resolution users may also specify the format in which a scanned image is captured and stored. For example a user could specify that an image be scanned as a Joint Photographic Experts Group JPEG image a Tagged Image File Format TIFF image or several other image formats. Users must often also specify color settings document sizes document input trays and a host of other scan parameters before a document can be scanned. Thus programs that control peripheral devices generally provide a user interface to control settings on the device. Peripheral devices may also have a default setting so that they are immediately available for use after being turned on. However if a user wishes to change any of the parameters or device settings then interaction with multiple device control programs and user interfaces may be required. Users may be thwarted from configuring devices optimally because of the assortment of settings and options available with peripheral devices and on account of the multiplicity of control programs needed to effect settings on each device.

A simple intuitive and uniform interface to configure peripheral devices would allow users to more effectively utilize the diversity of features available on contemporary peripheral devices.

In accordance with the present invention systems and methods for configuring peripheral devices are presented.

In some methods for configuring peripheral devices the peripheral device is represented as a virtual drive on a computer. In some embodiments the different configurations available for a peripheral device are enumerated and listed as files and or folders associated with the virtual drive representing the peripheral device. In some embodiments the files and or folders may be given descriptive names related to the configuration parameters they represent. In some embodiments icons in a user window may denote the virtual drive and its associated files and folders. In some methods for configuring peripheral devices when the icon for a file associated with the virtual drive is dragged onto the icon for the virtual drive the configuration of the peripheral device associated with the virtual drive is automatically changed to match the configuration associated with the file. These and other embodiments are further explained below with respect to the following figures.

In accordance with the present invention systems and methods for configuring peripheral devices are presented.

In some methods for configuring peripheral devices the peripheral device is represented as a virtual drive on a computer. In some embodiments the different configurations available for a peripheral device are enumerated and listed as files and or folders associated with the virtual drive representing the peripheral device. In some embodiments the files and or folders may be given descriptive names related to the configuration parameters they represent. In some embodiments icons in a user window may denote the virtual drive and its associated files and folders. In some methods for configuring peripheral devices when the icon for a file associated with the virtual drive is dragged onto the icon for the virtual drive the configuration of the peripheral device associated with the virtual drive is automatically changed to match the configuration associated with the file. In some embodiments the drag and drop operation may also trigger the operation of the peripheral device in accordance with the user imparted configuration.

As shown in exemplary system includes a computing device and a server . Further computing device and server may communicate over a connection which may pass through network which in one case could be the Internet. Computing device may be a computer workstation desktop computer laptop computer or any other computing device capable of being used in a networked environment. Server may be a platform capable of connecting to computing device and other devices too not shown . Computing device and server may be capable of executing software not shown that allows the control and configuration of peripheral devices such as exemplary peripheral device . Peripheral device may be a scanner a printer a multi function device or any other device that is capable of being dynamically configured and or reconfigured.

Computing device also contains removable media drive . Removable media drive may include for example 3.5 inch floppy drives CD ROM drives DVD ROM drives CD RW or DVD RW drives USB flash drives and or any other removable media drives consistent with embodiments of the present invention. In some embodiments consistent with the present invention portions of the software application may reside on removable media and be read and executed by computing device using removable media drive .

Connection couples computing device server and peripheral device and may be implemented as a wired or wireless connection using conventional communication protocols and or data port interfaces. In general connection can be any communication channel that allows transmission of data between the devices. In one embodiment for example the devices may be provided with conventional data ports such as Ethernet ADB USB SCSI FIREWIRE AAUI and or BNC ports for transmission of data through the appropriate connection . In some embodiments connection may be a low bandwidth connection for example a Digital Subscriber Line DSL an Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line ADSL or a cable connection. The communication links could be wireless links or wired links or any combination consistent with embodiments of the present invention that allows communication between computing device server and scanning device .

Network could include a Local Area Network LAN a Wide Area Network WAN or the Internet. In some embodiments consistent with the present invention information sent over network may be encrypted to ensure the security of the data being transmitted.

Peripheral device is connected to network through connection . In some embodiments peripheral device may also be connected directly to computing device and or server . System may include multiple peripheral devices not shown according to embodiments of the invention. Peripheral device may be controlled by software including device driver software running on computing device or server . In some embodiments configuration parameters pertaining to peripheral device may be user configurable. For example where the peripheral device is a scanner the resolution image formats document sizes color encoding and other configuration parameters may be user configurable. A user may also be able to specify input trays and the use of automatic document feeders to allow batch processing of documents. If peripheral device is a printer paper sizes output trays color options and print resolution among other options may be user configurable. In general the nature and type of configuration options will depend on the function of the peripheral device and the features available on a specific device. In some embodiments information transferred to and or from the peripheral device may be stored on computing device and or server for additional processing.

A computer software application consistent with the present invention may be deployed on any of the exemplary computers as shown in . For example computing device could execute software that may be downloaded directly from server .

Further methods consistent with embodiments of the invention may conveniently be implemented using program modules hardware modules or a combination of program and hardware modules. Such modules when executed may perform the steps and features disclosed herein including those disclosed with reference to the exemplary flow charts shown in the figures. The operations stages and procedures described above and illustrated in the accompanying drawings are sufficiently disclosed to permit one of ordinary skill in the art to practice the invention. Moreover there are many computers and operating systems that may be used in practicing embodiments of the instant invention and therefore no detailed computer program could be provided that would be applicable to these many different systems. Each user of a particular computer will be aware of the language hardware and tools that are most useful for that user s needs and purposes.

The above noted features and aspects of the present invention may be implemented in various environments. Such environments and related applications may be specially constructed for performing the various processes and operations of the invention or they may include a general purpose computer or computing platform selectively activated or reconfigured by program code to provide the functionality. The processes disclosed herein are not inherently related to any particular computer or other apparatus and aspects of these processes may be implemented by any suitable combination of hardware software and or firmware. For example various general purpose machines may be used with programs written in accordance with teachings of the invention or it may be more convenient to construct a specialized apparatus or system to perform the required methods and techniques.

Embodiments of the present invention also relate to computer readable media that include program instructions or program code for performing various computer implemented operations based on the methods and processes of embodiments of the invention. The program instructions may be those specially designed and constructed for the purposes of the invention or they may be of the kind well known and available to those having skill in the computer software arts. Examples of program instructions include for example machine code such as produced by a compiler and files containing a high level code that can be executed by the computer using an interpreter.

Other embodiments of the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from consideration of the specification and practice of the embodiments of the invention disclosed herein. It is intended that the specification and examples be considered as exemplary only with a true scope and spirit of the invention being indicated by the following claims. As such the invention is limited only by the following claims.

