---

title: Computer trading of interests
abstract: The invention provides systems, methods, and programs for improved computer trading of financial and other interests, including improvements in the making, acceptance, and control of proposals for transactions in interests. Among improvements provided by the invention are the presentation of terms of proposed transactions to trading parties in terms selected or otherwise designated by the trading parties. For example, terms of proposed transactions may be displayed in present or future values, such as in straight or split amounts for forward swap agreements. Prices in currency exchanges may be expressed in terms of any of the involved currencies. Improvements further include improved means for changing terms of proposed transactions, and especially groups or sets of proposed transactions; restrictions on repeated acceptance of transaction proposals; trading by users on each other's behalf; and improved display of transaction information associated with fellow traders.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07774247&OS=07774247&RS=07774247
owner: Bloomberg L.P.
number: 07774247
owner_city: New York
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050323
---
The present application is a continuation of application Ser. No. 10 882 096 filed Jun. 30 2004 now pending the entirety of which is incorporated by reference herein.

This application claims the benefit of United States provisional patent application Ser. No. 60 484 168 COMPUTER TRADING OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS filed 30 Jun. 2003 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated in full by this reference.

A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material which is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent files or records but otherwise reserves all copyrights whatsoever.

This application contains material relating to the trading of financial and other interests. The trading of some interests is regulated as for example by the United States Government the various State governments and other governmental agencies within the United States and elsewhere. The disclosure herein is made solely in terms of logical and financial possibility and advantage without regard to possible statutory regulatory or other legal considerations. Nothing herein is intended as a statement or representation of any kind that any system method or process proposed or discussed herein does or does not comply with any legal requirement whatsoever in any jurisdiction nor should it be taken or construed as doing so.

The invention relates to trading of financial and other interests and in particular to systems methods and programs for improved computer trading of such interests.

Examples of systems for computer trading of interests are disclosed in U.S. patent applications Ser. No. 09 584 045 filed 30 May 2000 and entitled ELECTRONIC TRADING SYSTEM FOR ELECTRICITY FORWARDS Ser. No. 09 839 529 filed 20 Apr. 2001 and entitled PRICE CHANGE OF ORDERS FROM RESERVE IN AN ELECTRONIC TRADING SYSTEM and Ser. No. 10 395 839 filed 24 Mar. 2003 and entitled VARIABLE PRICING FOR AND CONDITIONAL AVAILABILITY OF PROPOSALS FOR TRADING OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS the entire disclosure of each of which is hereby incorporated herein by this reference.

The invention provides systems methods and programs for improved computer trading of financial and other interests. The invention is applicable to the trading of all types of interests including present future and contingent interests such as spot futures options swaps and forwards contracts in for example equity instruments such as stocks fixed income securities such as corporate government and municipal bonds mortgages loans commercial paper and other debt instruments energy and other commodities contracts including for example precious metals foreign exchange pollution credits and weather insurance.

The invention may be embodied in many types of computer systems for trading interests for example a computer system comprising one or more computers connected to a plurality of trading party stations by a network to provide an electronic market or exchange for interests.

The invention provides improvements in the making acceptance and control of proposals for transactions in interests and in the making of markets in interests.

Proposed transactions as contemplated herein can include both buy and sell orders such as bids and offers entered by initiating trading parties and execution or acceptance orders resulting from for example hits or lifts entered by aggressing trading parties for previously entered orders and proposed transactions. Proposed transactions may comprise any form of sale or exchange such as straight sale auction or swap. Proposed transactions may be binding or negotiable and may include requests for or indications of interest in trades such as inquiries directed to specified potential counterparties or sets of counterparties. In some embodiments proposed transactions are executable upon acceptance by other users.

An embodiment of the invention provides for the presentation of terms of proposed transactions to trading parties in terms selected or otherwise designated by the trading parties. For example a price term for a proposed trade associated with a future date may be expressed in terms of present future or other designated value s . For example in a system for trading of foreign currency forwards a trader considering a proposed forward transaction may elect to have terms of the transaction displayed in straight or current amounts in split or forward amounts or both prior to determining whether to accept the proposal or execute the trade or after the trade has been accepted and or executed.

In such an embodiment the invention provides for example systems methods and computer programming for presenting terms for proposed transactions in forwards contracts for interests traded over a network wherein a proposed transaction in a forward contract for an interest is displayed at a trading party station. The proposed transaction may be executable by a computer according to computer programming which provides for trading parties to aggress on proposals of other trading parties. The forward contract may be associated with among other terms a near date a far date and a notional amount of principal nominally to be paid at the far date of the contract. Displayed terms comprise a price displayed either as the notional amount or an amount indicating a present value of the notional amount at the maturity date or both according to a selection made by a user of the trading party station.

In such embodiments a user may elect to entertain e.g. by requesting or authorizing display at a display associated with the user only of transaction proposals stated in the desired straight or split amounts or by authorizing other trading parties to aggress on proposals entered by the user only when those trading parties agree to complete the transaction in such terms.

In another embodiment a trading party may elect to have terms for proposed trades of interests presented and or processed in various forms including for example in terms of any of the interests involved. For example in a system for trading foreign exchange interests a trading party may designate that it wishes to have terms for proposed transactions stated and or displayed in terms of any of the involved currencies such as United States dollars USD euros EUR Canadian dollars CAD or other currencies.

In such embodiments the invention provides for example systems methods and computer programming for presenting terms for proposed transactions in currencies traded over a network wherein a computer system provides for display at a trading party station terms for a plurality of proposed transactions between trading parties in at least two currencies. The proposed transaction may be executable by a computer according to computer programming which provides for trading parties to aggress on proposals of other trading parties. Displayed terms comprise prices stated in either of the currencies in accordance with a selection made by a trading party.

The invention provides improved means for changing terms of proposed transactions and especially groups or sets of proposed transactions as for example for entry to a market or to keep proposed transactions up to date in a changing market. For example the invention provides for incrementing terms of proposed transactions such as price or quantity terms by amounts previously designated by the trading party who proposed them. For example the system can display a special interactive functional element such as a selectable item or item for use by a user of a trading party station. Selection of the item using an input device such as a mouse or other pointer causes a command to be issued to the trading system computer the command causing the system to change all of the price quantity or other terms associated with pluralities of the user s and or the trading party s proposed transactions. For example selection of an arrow item displayed on an interactive interface screen can cause price or quantity terms of all of a trading party s displayed proposed trades to be changed incrementally upward or downward by an amount previously designated by the trading party or the system.

In such embodiments the invention provides for example systems methods and computer programming for processing terms for proposed transactions in interests traded over a network wherein at least one computer receives proposals for transactions over a network from trading party stations. Terms for a plurality of transactions proposed by a trading party are displayed at a trading party station. The proposed transactions comprise a plurality of proposals for transactions in at least one interest on at least one side of a market and are executable by the at least one computer. The displayed terms comprise at least one item associated with each side of the market the item being selectable at a trading party station. Upon selection of the item terms are incremented for each of a plurality of transactions proposed by the user on the side of the market associated with the selected item. Terms may be incremented upward or downward in amounts which may be designated set by the computer the trading party or both.

The invention also provides tools for the protection of trading parties orders and or for preventing the manipulation of the trading party and or the relevant market. The invention provides for example for automatically or at the instruction of a trading party restricting the availability of a trading party s orders to repeated acceptance e.g. repeated hitting or lifting of the trading party s bids and or offers by other trading parties particularly where the trading party has more than one proposed transaction pending in a market. For example where a trading party enters or has pending multiple orders in the same or different interests such as different tenors of foreign exchange forwards or where the trading party enters or has pending multiple reserve orders in a single interest the trading party may designate one or more counterparties and in some embodiments a time period during which the counterparty s are to be restricted from accepting any further trades proposed by the trading party after accepting a previous trade. This feature is useful for example in preventing sniping techniques used by some traders in repeatedly hitting or lifting offers of other traders and in protecting traders who inadvertently leave orders pending in a rapidly changing market.

In such embodiments the invention provides for example systems methods and computer programming for processing terms for proposed transactions in interests traded over a network wherein at least one computer receives over a network proposals for transactions from trading party stations. The at least one computer executes transactions in interests according to computer programming which provides for a first trading party to aggress on proposals of other trading parties and restricts the first trading party from aggressing within a set period of time on more than a set number of proposals for transactions in one or more interests proposed by a same other trading party. The time period and number of proposals may be designated or set by the computer system by a trading party or both. Individual trading parties may be targeted for restriction or restrictions may apply to all trading parties in accordance with designations of the user and or the computer system. Restrictions may apply to repeated acceptance of proposals in the same or multiple interests. For example the restrictions may apply to aggressing on multiple proposals for transactions in a same interest where the proposals include transactions in interests having a quantity term all or part of which is a reserve quantity associated with a proposal having a visible quantity and the reserve quantity forming part of an executed transaction for all or part of the visible quantity. Restrictions may also apply for example to acceptances of forward contracts in foreign exchange where the interests comprise a plurality of tenors associated with a single currency pair.

The invention also provides for trading by one trading party on behalf of or in the name of a second trading party. For example a first user which can be for example an administrative or trading user of a trading party station according to the invention may enter transaction commands such as proposed trades or attempts to hit or lift proposed transactions which are associated with a second user of the same or another trading party station for example by means of an identification number corresponding to the second user provided to the trading system for association with terms of transactions proposed by the first user so that at least a first level of trade reporting the second user is solely identified as the user entering the transaction command. In second or deeper levels of reporting the first user may also be identified for example to assist in auditing and accounting.

In such embodiments the invention provides for example systems methods and computer programming for processing information related to transactions in interests between trading parties over a network at least one of the trading parties comprising a plurality of associated users wherein at least one computer identifies at one reporting level a user associated with a trading party as responsible for a communication related to a transaction in an interest the transaction executable by at least one computer according to programming which provides for trading parties to aggress on proposals of other trading parties and the at least one computer identifies at another reporting level another user associated with the same trading party as at least partially responsible for the communication. Communications may include for example terms for proposed transactions commands for aggressing on transactions proposed by other trading parties and or other information relating to transactions in interests.

Reporting levels may include for example varying levels of confidentiality in trade reporting or disclosure. For example a user may be identified as responsible for a communication in a display provided to parties to a completed transaction or in a display provided openly to all trading parties whether or not they were involved in a transaction showing all completed transactions in a given market or during a given time period. In such embodiments another user may be identified as at least partially responsible for the communication at another level of reporting for example in a more or less confidential display or printed report provided for clearance or accounting purposes.

In such embodiments an administrative or other user associated with a trading party may be authorized or required to authorize one user to act on behalf of another user as for example to submit to the at least one computer communications related to transactions on behalf of another user associated with the trading party.

The invention further provides features for improved monitoring of markets. For example in trading systems in which books of orders or other pluralities of transaction proposals are displayed to a trading party an order comprising a changed term may be displayed in a highlighted manner such as in a distinct color or flashing text for a period of time after the term has been changed. For example in a system in which books of proposed transactions are displayed in a first or constant color such as white or amber a new order or an order in which a price or quantity term is changed may be displayed in a second color such as red and or in an intermittent or flashing display for a designated period of time such as 1 30 seconds following the changing of the term which may include entry of a new order. After the designated highlighting period the order terms may be displayed in the manner of other pending orders. The period of time in which new or changed orders are shown in highlighted form may be designated by the viewing trading party by the trading system or both.

In some embodiments of the invention orders displayed in market or other views may be displayed or otherwise disclosed in distinct fashion when the orders are originated by other traders associated with or otherwise designated by the same trading party. For example individual traders or other users associated with an investment bank or other institutional investor may be provided with market displays in which orders originating from traders associated with their own trading party are displayed in a first manner for example in a first color and trades originating from other trading parties in a second manner for example in a second color. Such disclosure techniques are useful for example for assisting traders in controlling or limiting intra office trading.

In such embodiments the invention provides for example systems methods and computer programming for processing information related to transactions in interests the interests traded between trading parties over a network at least one of the trading parties having a plurality of users therewith. The at least one computer displays at least one trading party station terms of proposed transactions in interests the proposed transactions being executable by the at least one computer according to programming which provides for trading parties to aggress on proposals of other trading parties. The displayed terms comprise terms for transactions proposed by users associated with a plurality of trading parties terms for the proposals being displayed in various manners in accordance with the identities of the users who proposed the proposed transactions and the identity of users associated with the trading party stations at which the proposals are displayed. For example the terms of proposals may be displayed in a first manner when the user who proposed the transaction and the user associated with the trading party station at which the proposal is displayed are not associated with a common trading party and in a second manner when the user who proposed the transaction and the user associated with the trading party station at which the proposal is displayed are associated with a common trading party. In some embodiments the terms of a proposal are displayed in a third manner when the user who proposed the transaction and the user associated with the trading party station at which the proposal is displayed are the same and or in a fourth manner for a set period of time after the terms are changed.

The various manners of displaying information may be differentiated or defined for example by varying combinations of parameters used in presenting the displayed terms the parameters including for example various colors font styles flashing or intermittent display and special characters or graphical images.

Additional aspects of the present invention will be apparent in view of the description which follows.

System according to an embodiment of the invention includes a plurality of trading party stations linked to a host computer by a communications and or computer network . Host computer performs various tasks and functions of the system including entitlement credit and trading functions. Host computer may be connected in a LAN not shown to operate with databases and or other computers as described for example in the incorporated U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 584 045 mentioned above. Trading party stations may comprise one or more user computers connected for example in a LAN as used for example by a trading party comprising a brokerage or other trading firm employing multiple traders and administrative users.

The network architecture of the system depicted in as configured to trade interests in general and FX in particular is merely exemplary. While this specification describes in an embodiment an architecture comprising a host computer linked to a plurality of trading party stations other system and network architectures may be employed and the invention has application to various types of networks and network architectures in which trading party stations may be connected. For example more than one host computer may be provided and host computer s may be connected in a LAN. Trading party stations may be linked to one or more local or regional computers or servers the local or regional computers or servers linked to one or more host or central computers or to still other local or regional computers which are linked to one or more host or central computers . Also a trading party station may be linked both to local and or regional computers and to a host or central computer or computers . Local and or regional computers to which trading party stations may be linked may perform some of the functions otherwise performed by a host computer in the embodiment depicted in . For example a local or regional computer linked to a number of trading party stations may perform functions specific to those trading party stations while a host or central computer performs functions applicable to one or all trading party stations.

Although the plurality of trading party stations are shown in as having respective direct connections to network there may alternatively be more or fewer connections between trading party stations and network . For example pluralities of trading party stations may be connected to network singly or in groups connected by LANs or WANs and or by private Electronic Communication Networks ECNs or public networks such as the Internet. Trading party stations may represent a single station of a trading party or a plurality of trading party stations of the trading party.

Trading party stations and host computer preferably operate in a client server architecture with the trading party stations providing respective users with access to host computer . Depending upon context a trading party may be in an individual an individual within a firm or a firm. A firm may be a bank a brokerage or trading firm another institutional investor etc. The term user is meant broadly and encompasses a person who is operating a computer communicatively linked to the system particularly a trading party station on behalf of a trading party e.g. on behalf of him or herself or on behalf of a firm.

In a preferred embodiment of the invention a plurality of trading party stations may be connected in a LAN of a firm such as a commercial or investment bank. Within such a firm a trading party station may be employed for use by a trading party administrator or administrative user for example to set credit limits for each of the other trading party stations with which the firm wishes to consider trading. Such a trading party station may be referred to as a trading party administrative station. Trading party stations that may trade with each other may be referred to as counterparty stations.

Trading party stations may comprise any suitable computer or computer system including for example desktops laptops personal digital assistants PDAs local servers or other computers or data processors preferably at least one display such as a computer monitor or other output device and data input device s such as for example a keyboard and a mouse touch pad or screen or other selection or pointing device.

Network may comprise a closed network including e.g. a router network and or an open network such as the Internet. Gateway directors gateways firewalls etc. not shown link the host computer to the network .

Host computer may include one or more CPUs and include and or have access to volatile memory and non volatile memory which can be shared by various functions of host computer . Memories and can store databases and software for processing credit entitlement trading and other functionality and host computer may manage data storage and retrieval with respect to memories and and other memories which host computer can access e.g. directly and or on a network such as a LAN or other network.

In an embodiment of the invention all processing for the system relevant to the invention disclosed herein is performed by the host computer and trading party stations include programming such as client software that interacts with the host computer to allow users to receive view and otherwise process data from and input and transmit data to the host computer . Each copy of the client software and or each trading party station may be provided with unique information to uniquely identify each copy of the client software and consequently each trading party station . Host computer may be implemented in any suitable single or multi processor commercially available or specially built computer e.g. those available through Data General Division of EMC Corp. In one embodiment where the host computer includes multiple processors credit entitlement and other data is stored in space of volatile memory shared by all processors. Trading entitlement credit and other functionality performed by host computer may be controlled by a single operating system.

In some embodiments non volatile memory contains one or more records which may be in the form of one or more databases for each unique trading party authorized to trade using system . Where a trading party comprises a firm having access to a plurality of trading party stations record s are stored in memory preferably for each trading party station and each user of each trading party station in the firm. Each record may contain profile information including unique customer information corresponding to each user of each trading party station associated with the trading party and to the users preferences and entitlements and unique firm information identifying the firm of which the trading party is a part and firm credit and entitlement information. Preferably a unique customer number is associated with each individual user authorized to use a trading party station and a unique firm number is associated with each firm.

Also stored in non volatile memory for example in the same or another database or set of databases are records for proposed accepted and or executed transactions entered by trading parties. Depending upon the type of trading system supported transaction records stored in the trade database s include for example an identifier of the trading party who entered the proposed transaction e.g. the initiator including preferably both customer and firm i.e. user and trading party numbers an identifier specifying each interest to be traded price quantity and other terms such as any relevant dates such as tenor or forward dates. A status and or trade history is preferably associated with each transaction record. In some embodiments additional information such as commission rate information and unique transaction identifiers is included.

Volatile working memory can comprise the memory space where the host computer processes data for trading entitlement credit and other functions. At certain times such as at startup the host computer loads the records from the databases in non volatile memory into volatile working memory . Also the host computer reloads records into or updates records in volatile working memory whenever those records are updated.

Host computer may implement in software or be linked to a separate computer acting as an interface server which interprets data and command inputs from trading party stations and controls display of screens on trading party displays . Host computer may also implement in software one or more task servers that process credit entitlement trading and other tasks or functions and store and process data related to the credit and trading tasks.

Functions performed by host computer preferably via server functions in software include posting of orders proposals monitoring and handling trading activities e.g. communications relating to aggressing on and otherwise executing proposed transactions retrieval of detailed order and trade information requests to download trade and order blotters and control of information to a backend system that handles the settlement of the executed trades. As pointed out above the various functions performed by host computer may be performed by other computers in alternate embodiments of system .

In presently preferred embodiments user input output activity is performed through the use of interactive interface screens displayed on displays of trading party stations using data provided by the host computer . Input processing is preferably conducted by point and click and or keyboard keystroke methods using items and graphical input fields. For example a user can proceed with tasks associated with displayed items by either placing his cursor over the item corresponding to the task and activating an instructional address link by activating the select switch or button on his mouse or other pointer to select the item or he can enter a corresponding number of a menu item at the command line by using keystrokes from the keyboard to select a corresponding command. For example a user may enter commands by entering a keystroke combination corresponding to an identifier such as a number associated with a listing in a menu. Data may be input by placing the cursor over a desired input field which may be identified by associated text displayed with the input field and activating a pointer switch to select the field and typing data in from the keyboard. Thus input functions are typically accomplished in embodiments such as the one described by positioning a cursor within pointing to a desired image area and activating a control switch on a mouse clicking to select an item associated with the image area or analogous functioning of other pointing devices.

Each clickable or selectable item on a trading party or user station monitor has an instruction address or other identifier associated with it. Upon selection of an item an instruction or event is sent to an event handler server which like all servers described herein may be a software process running simultaneously with many other server processes on host computer . The handler server sends the identifier associated with the selectable item to the appropriate trade server via a message queue shared memory according for example to an interprocess communication IPC scheme. Upon receipt of the message the trade server checks the user and firm e.g. trading party permissions and status and determines what class of item has been selected. Upon determining the item class the trade server processes the request identified by the click accordingly updates any database as appropriate and sends the result back to the event handler which forwards appropriate screen information to the trading party station associated with the clicked display screen and releases the event handler to process the next incoming screen event.

A screen such as the one depicted in is accessed for example by entering an appropriate term at the command line of any screen displayed by the BLOOMBERG PROFESSIONAL trading and information system at an authorized trading party station upon which the POWERMATCH FX system server is invoked and causes the screen to be displayed. The screen depicted in shows a number of proposed transactions for trades of US dollars and euros in various tenors and comprises a number of items including the terms of the various proposed transactions adapted for selection and for interactive input of commands related to the entry acceptance monitoring and management of proposed transactions in foreign exchange currency forwards and for setting of entitlement credit and other administrative and accounting preferences.

At the screen depicted in provides an identifier EURTN immediately above two output fields Bid 1.145 and Ask 1.130 . Collectively these inform the user of the trading party station at which the screen is displayed that the most recent bid and offer transactions executed by the POWERMATCH FX host computer in the tomorrow next tenor were executed at prices corresponding to 1.145 and 1.130 basis points from the midpoint of the spot USD EUR price expressed in basis points. The spot price is stated in terms of the difference in interest rates set by banks for lending of the corresponding currencies. For example the interest rates used in designating prices for USD EUR transactions can be the US prime or LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate or other rates for lending of dollars and euros for the designated periods.

Tenors traded on the POWERMATCH FX system include overnight ON tomorrow next TN spot next SN one week 1W two week 2W three week 3W one month 1M and so on. A trading party wishing to make or monitor foreign exchange transactions can select from any of several currency pairs drawn from US dollars euros Canadian dollars yen Swiss francs and several other currencies.

At and a user of a trading party station is offered options of accessing drop down menus and system commands associated with Markets Options and Suspend Orders. Selection of Markets item using point and click methods results in presentation of a drop down menu providing the user with options of selecting from any of several currency pairs for trading. Selection of Options item results in presentation of a drop down menu providing the user with options of selecting from any of several administrative functions such as setting preferences to be used by the system in presenting trading options to the selecting user. Several of these functions are described herein. Selection of Suspend Orders item results in immediate suspension of any and all pending transaction proposals entered by or on behalf of the user.

Current time as determined by host computer and as used by host computer in processing proposed transactions and in executing trades is displayed at .

At current spot bid and offer prices for the corresponding currency pair are shown. Current spot prices may be derived from any suitable source including for example most recently completed trades within the system and or any sources of suitable foreign exchange data external to the trading system. Prices are expressed in terms of interest rate differentials for the selected currency pair stated in basis points. In the example depicted in the prices correspond to spot prices for Euros and USD.

At the identity of the trading party associated with the user of the trading party station is identified. As previously discussed the user may be an in individual trader associated with a trading party station and or the firm with whom the individual user is associated.

At in a book of current bids and offers for the selected currency pair in various forward tenors is displayed. Orders are expressed by placement by host computer of data in an appropriate column as indicated in rows corresponding to the relevant tenor. For example at a bid for the purchase of 50 million euros on the overnight market is displayed. The stated price is 1.010 basis points from the midpoint of the indicated spot rate. At a bid for the purchase of 50M at a price of 5.470 basis points in a one week tenor is displayed with an offer of 50M at 5.320.

In the POWERMATCH FX system trades are entered in the various tenors for forward swaps. Each executed trade entered comprises a near leg consisting of an immediate spot transaction in the amounts indicated in the opposite sense at the current spot price and a far leg in the sense indicated at the end of the stated forward period i.e. tenor . In the one week example just described the near leg would constitute a sale of 50M at the current spot price followed at the end of the one week period by a purchase of 50M at 5.470 basis points below the spot EUR USD spot price current at that time.

At in a column of active tenors is displayed. Each displayed tenor comprises an active selectable item selection of which causes the display to expand to show any existing depth in the market for the selected tenor. Displayed prices in field always include the market best offer ranked by price regardless of size. If additional orders exist and are displayed they are ranked by price again regardless of size. If two or more proposals include identical prices they are listed first in order of time and then in order of quantity. As will be appreciated by those familiar with the relevant arts many suitable ranking schemes may be used for example price quantity time depending upon user and system operator preferences and in some cases applicable legal or regulator requirements.

Each proposed trade displayed in field comprises an active selectable item. In the example shown in selection of any term of one of the proposals displayed in field by a user of a trading party station results in presentation of a pop up screen displaying all relevant order details and offering the selecting trading party an option of accepting the proposal and executing the trade. As will be appreciated by those skilled in the relevant arts other selectable items usable for obtaining further information about a proposed transaction and or for initiating acceptance of any of the proposals may be provided in association with the terms and other information shown in .

In the POWERMATCH FX system all proposals are binding and trading is anonymous. As will be appreciated by those familiar with the relevant arts many other suitable trading schemes me be used. For example non binding requests for proposals and indicators of interest may be used and the identity of traders may be disclosed to one another. In some cases the binding or non binding nature of proposals and the disclosure of trading party identities may be regulated or otherwise subject to legal requirements.

Field of provides for display of all of a user s own pending proposed transactions and for entry of proposed transactions. In the user for whom the display is presented has no pending proposed transactions. To enter a proposal the user places his cursor over a relevant portion of field and selects the desired buy sell and tenor combination. For example systems according to the invention provide for the automated simultaneous entry of orders into both sides e.g. a two way buy and sell order of an electronic market. A user wishing to enter both sides of a market for the EUR USD two week tenor places his her cursor over selectable slash mark item and selects it. Selection of item results in the sending of a new order request from the user s trading party station to host computer and sending of appropriate signals for presentation of an interactive interface such as pop up box as shown in which is adapted for entry by the trading party user and acceptance by the trading system host computer of terms for both a buy and a sell order for euros and dollars in the two week tenor.

Pop up box of provides input fields and for ask and bid prices respectively and fields for entry of ask and bid order quantities. For example a trading party wishing to enter both a bid and an offer for a two week forward swap each in the amount of 1M enters appropriate amounts in fields and prices stated in terms of basis points relative to the spot price at the end of the forward term at . In the example shown the trading party has entered data corresponding to a proposed forward sale of 1M at 10.94 basis points below the spot price and a sale of the same amount at a price 10.64 basis points below spot. Selection of Close item would result in cancellation of the proposals before they are entered into the order book. Selection of Place item results in entry of both proposals into the order book. In some embodiments the user or trading party entering the proposed transaction is provided with a pop up confirmation screen to review and ensure that details of the two way order are correct and preferably to modify them if they are not. In the example depicted in selection of Place item results creation and storage by host computer of suitable trade records as discussed above and presentation of the proposal in the display shown in without further confirmation by the trading party entering the order.

At in field of the two way order entered by the trader using the pop up screen shown in is displayed in the trader s own book and at field in the system market book displayed in field . Asterisks or other notations in market view notify the viewing trading party that the notated order is his her own. Other trading parties and in some embodiments other users associated the entering user s own trading party may accept one or both of the proposed trades by suitable placement of cursors and selection of the trade data as described above.

In some embodiments of the invention the entry of proposed trades for interests is facilitated by the automatic presentation by the trading system to a trading party of default terms for proposed trades on either or both sides of a market. For example upon entry by a user of a single suitable command a user of a trading party station provides an interactive interface display comprising overrideable defaults for one or more terms of the proposed trade s . Default terms can include for example an identification of the interest s buy and or sell price s quantity ies for all or nothing AON and or incremental trades time period s such as forward execution dates tenors or loan maturities associated with the proposal s and spread terms for use in static or dynamic calculation of price terms relative to one or more indices. In some embodiments trading parties can designate further controls for generation of default terms such as for example maximum and or minimum buy and sell prices maximum minimum and preferred quantity ies and indices for calculation of spread prices. In some embodiments one or more of the default terms are overrideable by the trading party to whom they are provided.

In preferred embodiments default terms provided for trades as modified if overrideable become terms of firm trade proposals upon confirmation by the trading party to whom they were provided and entry of a suitable command to make the terms available to other trading parties.

A trading party wishing to set defaults for entering orders according to the invention may access an interactive screen for the setting of default order parameters. For example by selecting Options item in the trading party or in some embodiments an administrative user associated with a trading party is offered options for creating or editing firm or individual user term settings. Selection of the corresponding item results in presentation of a screen such as that shown in . In some embodiments for example those implemented as features of the POWERMATCH FX system the trading party is also offered the option of selecting or is required to select a particular interest with which to associate the default settings. In the example shown in the trading party has entered selections to set default trading preferences for user Jane Q. Trader for the EUR USD spot next tenor for forward swaps trading.

At field in the trading party is provided with fields for input of default price increments maximum and minimum prices price spreads for two way order entry and price movement increments for use by host computer in automatically stepping prices for hidden order quantities sold from reserve. The price increment may be used for example for automatic setting of default prices based on a basis point spread from the relevant spot price. Maximum and minimum prices may be used for example to cap default or user designated prices in order to prevent accidental mispricing or unauthorized order entry. The two way price spread may be used by host computer to provide default price spreads stated in basis points for two way trades in the corresponding tenor as for example relative to the spot price.

At field in the trading party is provided with fields for input of further defaults including a size increment for automatically generating new orders from hidden quantities sold from reserve maximum and minimum trade sizes for use for example in controlling an individual user s ability to commit the trading party to financial obligations and a default order size for one way or two way order entry. At the trading party is apprised of system limits on the setting of default parameters.

In some embodiments fields and are themselves populated with defaults provided by the system and preferably overridable by the trading party. In any case in the example shown the trading party enters desired parameter values in the indicated fields within the limits set by the system as shown at . Entry of designated values by entry of 1 or 1 on a proprietary BLOOMBERG PROFESSIONAL keyboard at the command line causes host computer to create or modify suitable records associated with the trading party and or the individual user and to store the designated default values to be stored by host computer in memory and used in processing of trade proposals.

An example of provision of default terms for a transaction proposal is shown in . In a trading party station user has requested an interface for entry of a spot sale of euros for USD by placing his her cursor in the offer field corresponding to the EURSN tenor in field resulting in presentation of pop up order entry interface screen portion . Using defaults entered by the trading party in an interactive interface such as that shown in a host computer has accessed the appropriate data record s in memory and caused trading party station to present screen portion pop up with the default terms shown a price of 3.85 basis points quantity 1M with straight pricing to be offered on an all or nothing basis with no reserve quantities or scaleback price increments as described in the incorporated reference application Ser. No. 09 839 529 or price pegging as described in the incorporated reference application Ser. No. 10 395 839. The trading party entering the proposed transaction is able to modify any of the terms of the proposal within limits defined by the user s own designations or limits set by the system as described.

Upon selection of Post item an order record is prepared by host computer included in the host computer s order book and further processed as discussed herein and in the incorporated references. In some embodiments the trading party entering the proposal is provided an opportunity to review and either confirm or modify the terms of the order including any terms set by default by presentation of a suitable user interface screen as previously mentioned.

The order is then displayed in market or book view field and the trading party s own order view field as herein described and as indicated at in .

Using default terms as herein described it is possible according to the invention for a user to create and post a proposed transaction with the entry of two or even one computer command.

The invention provides for the presentation of terms of proposed transactions to trading parties in terms selected or otherwise designated by the trading parties. For example a price term for a proposed trade associated with a future date may be expressed in terms of present future or other designated value s . For example in a system for trading of foreign currency forwards a trading party considering a proposed forward transaction may elect to have terms of the transaction displayed in straight or current amounts in split or forward amounts or both prior to determining whether to accept the proposal or execute the trade and or after the trade has been accepted and or executed.

For example a trading party wishing to consider or to aggress on a proposed transaction in the POWERMATCH FX system may click on the desired proposal to review terms of the proposal and to accept it. For example a trading party wishing to accept i.e. hit the three month swap bid for 50M at 35.250 shown at in may select any of the displayed items of the proposal causing the terms and other details of the proposed transaction to be displayed in a pop up acceptance confirmation screen as shown in

Confirmation screen of confirms all details of bid . In the price indicator item at is shown as straight. This means that the 50base amount of the trade shown at is the 50M notional amount. Also shown are the start or near and end or far i.e. execution or maturity dates respectively of the swap contract Jul. 01 2003 and Oct. 01 2003 respectively at and the near and far interest rates at . YES and NO trade acceptance and trade rejection indicator items are provided for acceptance or rejection of the transaction by the viewing trading party.

As previously mentioned a forward swap agreement may be viewed as a contract for two separate foreign exchange transactions an immediate spot transaction and a reverse spot transaction at the closing date of the forward term or the maturity date of the contract in the case depicted in on 1 July and 1 Oct. 2003 respectively . Thus for the proposed transaction shown in the trading party to whom the display shown in the figure is presented is considering an immediate spot purchase of 50M at an interest rate differential of 1.14175 percent and a purchase of 50M at an interest rate differential of 1.138335 percent at the 1 Oct. 2003 end date of the transaction. A user wishing to view the total projected value of the far leg of the swap in the split amount or the present value of the notional amount in view of the expected rate of interest over the life of the swap contract may select Straight item .

Selection of the price indicator Straight item from the screen depicted in results in determination of the split amount and presentation of the changed screen shown in where Split is shown as the price indicator item at . The split amount of 50.27M is shown at .

While the split amount is shown on the display screen the viewing trading party may cause the straight amount to be displayed by selecting the price indicator Split item . In the case illustrated in selection of item would result in presentation of the changed screen with respect to the screen of shown in .

While the split amount is shown on the display screen the viewing Trading party may cause the straight amount to be displayed by selecting split item . In the case illustrated in selection of item would result in presentation of the screen shown in

In some embodiments a user is provided with functionality allowing the user to exercise even greater control over preferences and or requirements in futures trading. For example by accessing a User Term Setting screen such as that shown in a user is provided with the option of setting defaults for forward swaps proposals to be entered proposed by the user. Pop up field of provides a user with the option of specifying that terms for forward swaps be proposed by the user and subsequently processed by the trading system in straight amounts or in split amounts as a default by entering a 1 or a 2 in the corresponding field or that the user has no preference by entering a O . By entering a 1 or a 2 in the appropriate fields of field a user specifies that terms shown for example in pop up box of are to be entered in either straight or split amounts in accordance with the user s choice.

The preferences set in field may be set for all interests traded or for each combination of interests traded by the system or any combinations or subsets thereof. For example in the foreign exchange system described in the figures a separate set of preferences may be set for each combination of currency pairs and forward tenors. In the example shown in preferences are set for forward swaps in US and Canadian dollars in the 3 month tenor.

In such embodiments the designations added at field may be defaults only overridable at the request of the user entering the proposal. For example a user who has entered default preferences using field my be presented upon entering terms for a proposed transaction with a screen including a pop up order entry field such as field of . The user s preference ANY corresponding to NONE in field for display of price terms in split or straight amounts is echoed at field . A pop up menu of choices available to the user is presented at . By selecting a suitable menu item or entering an appropriate value in field the user may change the user s preferences for the proposal shown in field without affecting the user s default preferences.

Optionally the selection made at field is not overridable by any aggressor who may wish to act on the user s proposal and the choices made by the proposing user may be used for any subsequent processing of any executed trade in addition to being used in preparing displayed term proposals.

In some embodiments a user is provided with the option of designating other aspects of transaction proposals. For example in the foreign exchange system described in the Figures a user is provided in with functionality allowing the user to designate at field an interest rate index to be used for example in computing split amounts for display with proposed transactions and in some embodiments other subsequent processing. In the example shown in a user is presented with options for preferences in trading US and Canadian dollar swaps in a six month forward term. At field the user has designated that the default Canadian dollar six month interest rate which might for example be designated as the currently published LIBOR rate is to be used in computing split amounts in that tenor for the US dollar Canadian dollar currency pair. At the user is provided an option of entering identifiers to be used in reporting trades in the selected tenor as for example in public or private market reports.

As another example a trading party may elect to have terms for proposed trades of interests presented in various forms including for example in terms of either or any of the interests involved. For example in a system for trading foreign exchange interests such as POWERMATCH FX a trading party may designate that it wishes to have terms for proposed transactions stated and or displayed in terms of any of the involved currencies such as United States dollars USD euros EUR Canadian dollars CAD or other currencies.

In the POWERMATCH FX system a trading party may elect to view trades in terms of a desired currency by entering an appropriate term at the command line or by selecting Options item in a screen such as that shown in selecting the Switch Currency item from the resulting pull down menu and entering the desired currency pair in the resulting menu as shown in . For example in the screen depicted in clicking item EUR USD or entering the command 4 or 4 at a Bloomberg proprietary keyboard would cause host computer to enter or modify records of preferences for the trading party making the selection and cause all market view blotter and other screens presented at the party s trading party station to show euro dollar trades expressed in euros instead of USD as shown in . Making the same selection again would cause the system to display euro dollar trade terms in USD instead of euros. At a warning is displayed to the trading party indicating that all of the trading party s orders and market monitors are suspended during the running of administrative processes.

Optionally a selection made using an interface such as that shown in is a selection of an overridable default so that preferences for specific transactions or for transactions in specified interests or groups thereof may be set on an individual basis. For example terms for a proposed transaction in euros and US dollars are shown in field of . The proposed transaction is a euro dollar swap in the 2 week forward tenor for a notional amount stated as 50M euros. By entering a suitable identifier e.g. USD in field the user may specify that the proposal be stated and subsequently processed with all price terms stated in US dollars.

The invention further provides improved means for changing terms of proposed transactions and especially groups of proposed transactions as for example for entry to a market or to keep proposed transactions up to date in a changing market. For example the invention provides for incrementing terms of each of a user s or trading party s proposed transactions on one or both sides of a market such as price or quantity terms for buy and or sell proposals by amounts previously designated by the user or trading party who proposed them. For example the system can display a special interactive functional element such as a selectable item for use by a user of a trading party station. Selection of the item using an input device such as a mouse or other pointer causes a command to be issued to the trading system computer the command causing the system to change all of the price quantity or other terms associated with pluralities of the trading party s proposed transactions. For example selection of an arrow item displayed on an interactive interface screen can cause price or quantity terms of all of a trading party s displayed proposed trades on one or both sides of a market to be changed incrementally upward or downward by an amount previously designated by the trading party or the system.

For example in the screen shown in a user of a trading party station may increment the price terms of his own orders by using arrow items . Selection of one of arrow items increments price terms for the corresponding individual orders as described in incorporated application Ser. No. 09 584 045. Selection of one of arrow items causes host computer to access and modify data records of corresponding transaction proposals as appropriate to increment or decrement price terms for each of the trading party s proposed trades on the entire corresponding side of the market and to process subsequent hit or lift orders proposal acceptances accordingly. For example selection of the arrow pointing to the left in item causes the price terms associated with both of the orders at to be incremented upward by the amount specified by the user in the Price Increment field at in while selection of the arrow pointing to the right causes the same prices to be incremented downward i.e. decremented by the same amount. In some embodiments of the invention selectable items corresponding to arrows are provided selection of such items causes the computer system to increment quantity terms e.g. the notional amount associated with a forward swap contract instead of or in addition to the price terms as shown.

The invention also provides tools for the protection of trading parties orders and or for preventing the manipulation of the trading party and or the relevant market. The invention provides for example for restricting the availability of a trading party s orders to repeated acceptance e.g. repeated hitting or lifting of the trading party s bids and or offers by other parties particularly where the trading party has more than one proposed transaction pending in a market. For example where a trading party enters or has pending multiple orders in the same or different interests such as different tenors of foreign exchange forwards or where the trading party enters or has pending orders comprising reserve quantities in a single interest the trading party may designate one or more counterparties and in some embodiments set a time period during which the counterparty s are to be restricted from accepting any further trades proposed by the trading party after accepting a previous trade or may for example elect to prevent any trading parties from accepting multiple proposals within a given period of time. This feature is useful for example in preventing sniping techniques used by some traders in repeatedly hitting or lifting offers of other traders and in protecting traders who inadvertently leave orders pending in a rapidly changing market.

For example a trader wishing to prevent repeated rapid acceptance of its orders by other trading parties may access a screen such as that shown in for example by entering an appropriate term at the command line in order to update the trading party s preferences. By entering an appropriate flag e.g. A for aggressor W for world or N for none at field the trading party may designate A that the most recent aggressor or any specifically designated trading party will be prevented from executing another of the trading party s orders for a designated period of time or W that no other trading party will be able to execute one of the trading party s orders within the designated time period since the last acceptance of one of the trading party s orders. In the former case whatever party last executed one of the trading party s orders will be prevented from trading with the trading party again during the designated time period. In the latter case the trading system will not permit trading with any other party at a frequency greater than that of the designated time period. This anti sniping feature may be disabled by the user by leaving field blank. In the currently contemplated embodiment of the POWERMATCH FX system the system will designate a time period of 15 seconds which may not be modified by trading parties. It has been determined on the basis of experience that 15 seconds is long enough for example to prevent manipulation of portions of the market or the taking of unfair advantage of individual trading parties in many cases. In other embodiments a trading party may set a time period during which trading will be restricted or the frequency with which its orders may be accepted may identify trading parties to whom such restrictions will apply and or specify individual interests or groups of interests to which such restrictions will apply.

In embodiments of the invention implementing such anti sniping features each command entered by a trading party to aggress on another party s transaction proposal is checked by the computer system. If the acceptance command has been preceded by another such command entered by a designated party which may be any party within the set period of time the system will not execute the command by allowing the trader to accept the proposed transaction. The would be aggressor may be notified of the refusal by the system to accept or act on the command or the command may be simply ignored so that no notification is given the proposed transaction is not affected.

Anti sniping features may be applied to specific interests e.g. 3 week forward tenors for USD Canadian dollar swaps for groups of interests all USD Canadian dollar swaps or for all interests traded by a user a trading party or a group of trading parties.

In other embodiments the invention provides for example the automatic withdrawal or suspension of a trading party s pending proposals at a given time during a day or trading session such as for example at the end of the trading party s trading day. For example a trading party may designate a time of day at which the trading party s pending orders are automatically suspended or withdrawn from the trading system and the trading party is for example logged off. The trading party may be offered the option of reinstating or re entering the proposals with or without further confirmation by the trading party at the beginning of a subsequent trading session or at another time designated by the trading party. End of day and other automatic suspension functions may be set on a firm or individual trader basis.

In the POWERMATCH FX system an end of day suspension feature may be set by a firm administrator on a user by user basis through use of an interface screen such as that depicted in . A firm administrator accesses a screen such as that depicted in by entering a command such as TSFP at the POWERMATCH FX command line and entering an individual user identification code. For example the screen of depicts a screen associated with firm 269318 and individual user or trader 883624. The administrator may enter the user s name contact information and other data including trading and cancellation permissions by entering appropriate data. At the administrative user may enter a time at which all of the individual user s trading functionality including pending orders will automatically be suspended. Upon entry of the data host computer makes or modifies a suitable data record so that at the stated time on each succeeding trading day the trader s functions will be suspended. Functions will resume at the beginning of the next trading day. In some embodiments terms for any suspended orders are saved in memory so that the trades may be reinstated by the trading party after the beginning of a new trading session.

When an end of trading day feature is enabled for a trading party at the end of the trading day the trading party s functionality is suspended and the trading party may be sent a notification such as that shown in indicating that the trading party s orders are being suspended.

The invention also provides for trading by one user or trading party on behalf of or in the name of a second user or trading party. For example a first user which can be for example an administrative or trading user of a trading party station according to the invention may enter communications related to proposed transactions attributable to or otherwise associated with a second user of the same or another trading party. Such communications may include terms for new or changed transaction proposals transaction commands such as attempts to hit or lift proposed transactions or any other communications associated with proposed transactions. For example a user may submit communications on behalf of another user by providing an identification number corresponding to the second user to the trading system so that at least a first level of trade reporting the second user is solely identified as the user entering the transaction command or other communication. In second or deeper levels of reporting the first user may also be identified for example to assist in auditing and accounting.

In the POWERMATCH FX system an individual user associated with a trading party e.g. an individual trader or an administrative who has sufficient authority may enter another individual users unique identification number and a password associated with the unique user identifier to enter proposed transactions. Thereafter any trades entered by the first user will be associated with both the first and second user s identities. At an initial level of reporting as for example that shown in a trading party order monitor such as that shown in a second user s identity e.g. Trader A is the only one disclosed in connection with the proposed transaction. By accessing more detailed information relating to a particular order however as for example by selection of one of the orders shown in the trading party order monitor of so that a screen such as that shown in is presented showing at that the order was placed by a first user e.g. Trader B on behalf of the second user. Varying levels of reporting details of may include for example levels of confidentiality in reporting the varying levels of confidentiality associated with authorizations to access reports displayed on user interface screens in print etc.

The invention further provides features for improved monitoring of markets. For example in trading systems in which books of orders or other pluralities of transaction proposals are displayed to a trading party an order comprising a changed term may be displayed in a highlighted manner such as in a distinct color or flashing text for a period of time after which the term has been changed. For example in a system in which books of proposed transactions are displayed in a first or constant color such as white or amber a new order or an order in which a price or quantity term is changed may be displayed in a second color such as red and or in an intermittent or flashing display for a set or designated period of time such as 1 30 seconds following the entry of the order or the changing of the term. After the set highlighting period the order terms may be displayed in the manner of other pending orders. The period of time in which new or changed orders are shown in highlighted form and the manner of highlighting such as the choice of colors or style of flashing or other highlighting may be set by the viewing trading party by an individual user associated with a trading party by the trading system or by any combination thereof. It has been found by experience that periods of between 1 and 30 seconds are sufficient for most trading systems and user requirements in the current trading environment. Where flashing or intermittent displays are used frequencies of for example 0.5 2 hertz may be used advantageously.

As an example a color map for the POWERMATCH FX system is shown in . Map is accessed by for example selecting an item color map on the options pull down menu accessed via item of as previously discussed. In the color map it is seen that pending orders of more than the designated period s standing are shown in amber. Orders that have changed within the designated time period e.g 1 30 seconds are shown in white. Orders specifying all or none terms are shown in steady blue. Orders comprising reserve quantities are shown in red and orders comprising reserve quantities with scale back price features as disclosed in the incorporated reference as shown in amber on blue. An order which is pegged to an index is shown in yellow. In some embodiments a trading party may elect to see orders of the type described in such highlighted fashion only when they are the trading party s own orders. In other embodiments all trades are displayed to all trading parties in accordance with some or all of the highlighting rules.

The invention also provides improved risk management features. For example in a trading system in which credit may be established between a trading party and potential counterparties for trading of interests a trading party may designate one or more other trading parties with whom the trading party wishes to share or pool credit. For example a trading party corresponding to one office or branch of an investment bank or other institutional investor may designate another office of the same entity for sharing of credit. Shared credit limits may be used for example by the trading system for prescreening orders displayed for or otherwise made available to the credit sharing parties in market displays and or in enforcing limits on credit between the credit sharing parties and designated counterparties upon attempted execution of proposed transactions. Shared credit limits may used in conjunction with multiple counterparty credit limits associated with various time periods.

In the POWERMATCH FX system a trading party designates other trading parties it wishes to share credit with by accessing a screen as described above and shown in and entering 4 or 4 on a Bloomberg proprietary keyboard at the command line as indicated at line . This results in presentation of a screen such as that shown in . The interface screen of provides input fields for entry of trading party identifiers of trading parties to be included in the shared credit group. Upon mutual entry of identifiers in shared credit groups host computer updates suitable credit records and during subsequent trade processing the trading parties so identified are enabled to share common credit benefits including the ability to add to or draw against or replenish credit limits. For purposes of host computer in processing credit data all members of the group are considered part of the same credit entity. Thus a group credit limit will be affected by trading by any member of the credit group i.e. credit will be drawn down from a single combined credit account. All users of all group member trading parties having suitable administrative permissions will have the ability to change credit extended by the group to other trading parties. In preferred embodiments members of shared credit groups will still be enabled to trade with each other.

Shared credit limits may also be used for example in providing credit filtered market views of bids and offers for the selected currency pair that user of the trading party station is enabled to make e.g. the screen depicted in . For example credit information may be used by host computer to provide a limited credit filtered view a color coded credit filtered view or a view unfiltered by credit. Where the market view is not credit filtered or color coded to show trades with and without sufficient credit but with insufficient credit orders selectable credit information may be used in a credit checking procedure during an attempted trade e.g. a trading party or user station may hit or lift a visible bid or offer and thereafter host computer determines if there is sufficient credit for the proposed trade.

Credit limits may also be used to block trades for which insufficient available credit exists. For example upon attempted acceptance of a proposed trade credit is checked for one or both parties and if insufficient credit is available the trade is disallowed. If partial trading is enabled a partial trade for an amount up to the credit limit may be allowed. In such an embodiment for example execution or acceptance of a proposed trade is inhibited or the price size or quantity of the proposed trade is capped if a price term associated with the proposed trade is greater than an available portion corresponding to a credit limit associated with the trader the potential counterparty and a time period associated with the proposed trade.

In trading systems comprising multiple multi time period credit limits between counterparties shared credit accounts can be treated as aggregate credit limits to be applied to all time periods.

In some embodiments of the invention orders displayed in market or other views may be displayed or otherwise disclosed in distinct fashion when the orders are originated by various classes of users and or trading parties. For example individual traders associated with an investment bank or other institutional investor may be provided with market displays in which orders originating from traders associated with their own trading party are displayed in a first manner for example in a first color and trades originating from other trading parties in a second manner for example in a second color. Such disclosure techniques are useful for example for assisting traders in controlling or limiting intra office trading.

In the POWERMATCH FX system a user or trading party may designate other users or trading parties to whom it wishes to disclose its orders by accessing a TSFP screen as described above and shown in and entering a command string 3 or 3 at a Bloomberg proprietary keyboard at the command line as indicated at line . This results in presentation of a screen such as that shown in . The interface screen of provides input fields for entry of identifiers corresponding to users and or trading parties to be included in an order disclosure group. Upon entry of identifiers in disclosure groups host computer updates suitable trading party profiles records and during subsequent display processing information related to transactions entered by members of the disclosure group is identified to each other by for example display of an identifying item such as a designated character such as for example cross in market book view field of the screen depicted in . In this manner trading party members of the disclosure group are made aware that orders in the market view have been entered by other members of the disclosure group.

In such embodiments terms of proposed transactions may be displayed in a first manner when the user who proposed the transaction and the user associated with the trading party station at which the proposal are displayed are not associated with a common trading party in a second manner when the user who proposed the transaction and the user associated with the trading party station at which the proposal are displayed are associated with a common trading party in a third manner when the user who proposed the transaction and the user associated with the trading party station at which the proposal are displayed are the same and or in a fourth manner for asset period of tine after the terms are changed. The various manners may be defined using various combinations of parameters in presenting the displayed terms the parameters including for example color font style intermittent display e.g. flashing or blinking text and identifying items such as crosses asterisks exclamation points etc.

The invention provides other tools for risk and order management. For example in a trading system in which credit may be established between a trading party and potential counterparties for trading of interests trading party stations for example trading party stations associated with individual traders associated with the trading party or trading stations associated with trading party administrators may display warnings when remaining portions of credit limits associated with one or more designated counterparties or types of interests drop below designated levels. For example warnings may be displayed at such trading parties stations when during the course of trading activity available portions of credit limits associated one or more forward time periods in a foreign exchange forwards trading system are less than or equal to 20 15 10 and or 5 of their designated maximum levels.

For example in the POWERMATCH FX system completion of a transaction causes host computer to update an available portion of a corresponding credit limit and to check the amount of available credit against the maximum credit amount. When completion of a transaction reduces an available portion of the credit limit to within 20 15 10 and or 5 of the designated maximum levels an alert is displayed on the trading party s display reading that CREDIT ALERT applicable percentage REMAINING AVAILABLE PORTION AMOUNT REMAINING IN CREDIT LIMIT IDENTIFIER . For example when available credit drops below 20 in a 100 million dollar credit limit associated with a 3 month EUR USD forward tenor the corresponding trading party s display can display a message in green text reading CREDIT ALERT 20 20 MILLION REMAINING IN EUR USD LIMIT. Different warnings can be displayed in different colors. For example when a minimum level has been reached such as 5 of the maximum limit the warning can be displayed in red. Optionally flashing warnings may be used.

The invention also provides improvements in user entitlements in order to provide useful and flexible trading systems. For example a user associated with a trading party may be authorized as for example by an administrative user of a trading party system or by a user associated with the trading system host computer s to only view proposed and accepted transactions e.g. market books of displayed orders and not to enter or accept any transaction proposals. The user may be entitled for example to view a market book display but not to enter any commands which would financially commit a trading party to any obligations.

In the POWERMATCH FX system a trading party administrator may authorize a user of a trading party station to view market display and trading activity but not to trade by accessing an interface screen such as that depicted in selecting input field and entering a N to indicate that the user is not authorized to trade. Upon entry of such data an identifier associated with the affected user is sent to host computer which creates or modifies a suitable user profile data record with a flag which will prevent the identified user from being presented with order input or acceptance screens such as screen portions of FIG. of or of and or otherwise blocking attempted trading activity by the user. Setting flag to Y enables the identified user to trade as described herein.

While the invention has been described and illustrated in connection with preferred embodiments many variations and modifications as will be evident to those skilled in this art may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention and the invention is thus not to be limited to the precise details of methodology or construction set forth above as such variations and modifications are intended to be included within the scope of the invention. Except to the extent necessary or inherent in the processes themselves no particular order to steps or stages of methods or processes described in this disclosure including the Figures is implied. In many cases the order of process steps may be varied without changing the purpose effect or import of the methods described.

The invention provides methods computer systems including network computer systems and computer program products for implementing the inventive methods and processes described herein. Such computer program products comprise computer usable media having computer readable codes embodied therein that cause a computer to effect methods and processes incorporating the invention as described herein.

