---

title: Providing direct access to managed content
abstract: A method for providing direct access to managed content is disclosed. The method comprises receiving a request to perform an operation with respect to content associated with a set of managed content and obtaining information required to respond to the request. The method further comprises providing in response to the request a content locator usable to perform the requested operation through direct communication with a content system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08082334&OS=08082334&RS=08082334
owner: EMC Corporation
number: 08082334
owner_city: Hopkinton
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050915
---
Content management systems provide the capability of managing content including typically the ability to search a body of stored content for and retrieve particular content of interest. Additional functionality provided by a content management system may include without limitation tracking revisions versions review approvals distribution life cycle and retention policy information file name file type file creator application used to create owner and any other data and or metadata associated with stored content. In a typical content management system a request from a user to retrieve content such as a particular file version or other stored object results in the content management system obtaining the requested content from a content storage location e.g. a content server and providing the requested content to the user. Because the content management system has limited throughput this middleman role limits the performance of data delivery to and from the content server or other storage location. It would be beneficial to be able to utilize the advantages of a content management system without suffering the performance limitations the content management system can impose.

The invention can be implemented in numerous ways including as a process an apparatus a system a composition of matter a computer readable medium such as a computer readable storage medium or a computer network wherein program instructions are sent over optical or electronic communication links. In this specification these implementations or any other form that the invention may take may be referred to as techniques. A component such as a processor or a memory described as being configured to perform a task includes both a general component that is temporarily configured to perform the task at a given time or a specific component that is manufactured to perform the task. In general the order of the steps of disclosed processes may be altered within the scope of the invention.

A detailed description of one or more embodiments of the invention is provided below along with accompanying figures that illustrate the principles of the invention. The invention is described in connection with such embodiments but the invention is not limited to any embodiment. The scope of the invention is limited only by the claims and the invention encompasses numerous alternatives modifications and equivalents. Numerous specific details are set forth in the following description in order to provide a thorough understanding of the invention. These details are provided for the purpose of example and the invention may be practiced according to the claims without some or all of these specific details. For the purpose of clarity technical material that is known in the technical fields related to the invention has not been described in detail so that the invention is not unnecessarily obscured.

Providing direct access to managed content is disclosed. A remote system sends to a content management system a request associated with particular content such as a request to retrieve and or store write particular content. Information required to respond to the request is obtained from a content system. A content locator based at least in part on the information obtained from the content system is provided to the remote system. The content locator enables the remote system to retrieve the requested content directly from the content system or directly write to the content system as applicable without the content first passing through the content management system.

In some embodiments remote system spawns client to receive the content locator and obtain the content from the content system using the content locator. Client also handles errors picks up data transfers from where they left off after an interruption and retrieves content from a different e.g. backup secondary etc. content system if the original system is no longer available to transfer content. In addition client takes care of handshaking between the content management system and remote system as well as the content system and the remote system . Client manages the location that data is transferred to and from including the relevant folder locations the file and or object names how to display the folders and any differences required due to operating system conventions e.g. different naming protocols etc. . In some embodiments client handles a digital signature or other type of security that allows verification of the interaction between remote system and the content management system and between the between remote system and the content system. In various embodiments client handles compression or decompression and or encryption or decryption of the transferred content as appropriate. In some embodiments client reverts to the transfer of content through the content management system in the event that it is not possible for file structure access or any other reason to transfer content directly to or from the content system.

Content system interface is connected to a content server or other content system through communication interface . In some embodiments content system interface communicates with the content server using communication interface and communication interface is omitted. In various embodiments content management system is implemented using multiple computer systems one computer system or any other appropriate hardware and software systems.

In some embodiments metadata database contains metadata information about the content in content store . Examples of metadata include when and by whom documents were created modified edited reviewed and approved keywords related to documents version data routing and collaboration data date time the content was created modified etc. and data associating two or more stored objects with each other e.g. to create and manage a virtual document or object. In various embodiments keywords in metadata database are entered by the creator editor modifier or approver of the document or by an automatic process or engine that scans the document to extract or identify relevant keywords such as by using natural language or other linguistic technologies to identify key concepts based on the words comprising the document.

In some embodiments content server maintains a file system or other hierarchical organization or view of content in content store and accelerated content server has no file system of its own and instead uses the file system of content server to read write content from to content store . In some embodiments accelerated content server comprises a web server.

In some embodiments content server has information regarding files documents or objects that have been transferred out of content store i.e. objects that have been checked out for editing or other use by a user enabling management of requests for content. In some embodiments a content management system associated with the content server keeps track of which objects have been checked out. In some such embodiments a subsequent request to the content management system to retrieve an object that has been checked out and has not yet been checked back in is denied e.g. by sending a reply indicating the content is not currently available is checked out to a user identified in the reply etc.

Although the foregoing embodiments have been described in some detail for purposes of clarity of understanding the invention is not limited to the details provided. There are many alternative ways of implementing the invention. The disclosed embodiments are illustrative and not restrictive.

