---

title: Method and system for configurable options in enhanced network-based auctions
abstract: A system and method are provided for including a configurable order option in a listing on a network-based auction service. The system and method include specifying the configurable order using an auction application separate from the network-based auction service and communicating the configurable order option specified using the auction application to the network-based auction service as part of the listing. A seller may specify configurable order options during the creation of a listing that may be communicated to the network-based auction service along with the listing information. Configurable order options provide at least two possible choices for a bidder/buyer thereby allowing customization of the listing to the degree permitted by the seller. Configurable order options may include information such as, for example, the shipping method, payment method, an optional accessory purchase for a product in the listing, a warranty for a product in the listing, a color selection, and a model selection. The winning bidder/buyer's selection for a configurable order option is communicated back to the auction application which may process the selection and send the appropriate order information to a back-end business information management system or the auction application may send the selection directly to the back-end business information management system for processing as part of the order.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07788160&OS=07788160&RS=07788160
owner: SAP AG
number: 07788160
owner_city: Walldorf
owner_country: DE
publication_date: 20050103
---
This application claims priority to provisional application No. 60 562 838 filed on Apr. 16 2004 to provisional application No. 60 565 198 filed on Apr. 19 2004 and to provisional application No. 60 629 667 filed on Nov. 19 2004 all of which are incorporated by reference herein.

A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material that is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

The present invention relates to a method and system for implementing enhanced network based auctions and postings for sale. In one embodiment of the present invention the enhanced auctions and postings for sale are implemented over the Internet.

Businesses have traditionally been limited in their opportunity to dispose of their old inventory and used assets. Oftentimes businesses have scrapped these items generating no revenue return or have relied on brokers to dispose of them in a manner generating revenue for the business. In turn these brokers often use auctions as one means of disposing these assets or inventory while attempting to maximize the revenues that can be generated. These broker auctions may be limited to specific customers for particular types of items or the auctions may be open to all potential bidders. In the first case a broker may want to limit the auction where the potential pool of actual customers is limited or where allowing an open auction may in some manner hinder the auction process. In the latter case where the auction is open to all potential bidders it is often beneficial to maximize the number of people participating in the auction in order to extract the greatest price for the asset being auctioned. The problem in this latter case has been in attracting a large enough auction audience to facilitate a maximization of the return on the disposing of the asset.

The advent of the Internet along with the accompanying revolution in computer and network technology has created new auction paradigms including several forms of network based auctions. The Internet provides the ability to aggregate large numbers of bidders in all types of auctions such as for example ascending bid auctions reverse auctions and Dutch auctions. Priceline.com is an example of a traditional reverse auction process made available over the Internet. In another example eBay provides a traditional ascending bid auction service over the Internet. An eBay type ascending bid auction is ideally suited for the broker auction process discussed above. Since its founding in 1995 eBay has become the world s largest online marketplace providing a powerful platform for the sale of goods and services among a passionate community of individuals and businesses. Everyday millions of items across thousands of categories are available on eBay for sale by auction and for a fixed price enabling trade on a local national and international basis with customized Internet Web sites in markets around the world.

Businesses have typically kept their information including information regarding the assets and inventory they wish to sell or auction off in database systems that are part of their corporate information systems. For example SAP A.G. of Germany provides data management tools such as their SAP R 3 and mySAP Customer Relationship Management CRM system that can manage this type of information. Conventional systems do not provide the automatic linking between these business information management systems and online Web auction services such as eBay and therefore manual involvement with the Web auction service is required for each auction or sales posting conducted. Providing a system linking business information management systems with a Web auction service and automating the auction submission tracking and post auction processing will considerably improve the ability of businesses to sell or auction off assets such as current or old inventory in a manner allowing greater price maximization and thereby increasing business revenue.

According to one embodiment of the present invention a method and system for integrating a business information management system with a Web auction service is provided through an auction application. The auction application allows a seller to generate listings e.g. auctions and postings for sale allows for the execution of listings on a Web auction service processes winning bidder buyers and monitors existing listings leveraging the power of a seller s business information management system. The auction application serves as the bridge between on the one hand the seller and the seller s business information management system and on the other hand the Web auction service and the winning bidders buyers.

A system and method are provided for including a configurable order option in a listing on a network based auction service. The system and method include specifying the configurable order using an auction application separate from the network based auction service and communicating the configurable order option specified using the auction application to the network based auction service as part of the listing. A seller may specify configurable order options during the creation of a listing that may be communicated to the network based auction service along with the listing information. A computer readable medium is provided that includes instructions adapted to be executed on a processor to execute a method for incorporating configurable order options in an enhanced network based listing as discussed below.

In one embodiment of the present invention the auction application allows a seller to specify configurable order options during the creation of a listing. The configurable order options may become part of the listing and may be communicated to the Web auction service along with the listing information. Configurable order options provide at least two possible choices for a bidder buyer if they successful complete the listing i.e. win the auction or complete a purchase for the posting for sale thereby allowing customization of the listing to the degree permitted by the seller. Configurable order options may include information such as the shipping method selected. For example a winning bidder buyer may be provided an option to select between standard ground transportation priority delivery and or overnight mail. Other examples of possible configurable order options may include payment method e.g. credit or debit card wire transfer check cash on delivery etc. an optional accessory purchase for a product in the listing e.g. an optional battery purchase for a battery operated toy in a listing a warranty for a product in the listing a color selection e.g. a selection of a cherry colored or lime colored desktop computer and a model selection e.g. selecting between similar models A and B for a product . These examples are illustrative and are not meant to be an exhaustive list of the potential configurable order options that may be provided for a listing. The winning bidder buyer s selection for a configurable order option is communicated back to the auction application which may process the selection and send the appropriate order information to the back end business information management system or the auction may send the selection directly to the back end business information management system for processing as part of the order.

According to an embodiment of the present invention an application for the enhanced network based auction services auction application links an existing business information management system with a network based auction service hereinafter also referred to as a Web auction service . In this embodiment the auction application is a component based multi tier application developed according to the Java 2 platform enterprise edition standard J32EE and running on top of the SAP Web Application Server SAP Web AS . The auction application is linked to a business information management system such as for example SAP R 3 using business information management system plug ins to tie the auction application to the business information management system backend functions. The auction application is also linked to a Web auction service using communication protocols such as for example HTTP secure HTTP and SOAP protocols.

In the embodiment depicted in the user interface layer uses HTML to implement the user interfaces . In particular for the seller user interface and administrator user interface a protocol such as the SAP secure HTML for Java may be used to implement HTML with Web controls using comprehensive tags. In addition Struts an open source tool may be used to segregate the business data and logic from the user interfaces while implementing complex user interfaces using for example Java servlets JavaBeans and Enterprise JavaBeans .

The backend layer BLS is the part of the auction application that handles the communication with the business information management system . In the embodiment depicted in the business information management system is an SAP R 3 application release 4.0 or higher. The backend layer uses the SAP Java Connector JCo component in this embodiment to provide the communication between the J32EE auction application environment and the business information management system .

The services layer includes functional components for process management of the enhanced network based auction process as depicted in . In particular the services layer handles the interface with a database used by the auction application to store for example product and listing information. The services layer may use Java Data Objects JDO for information sent to or retrieved from the database in this example an SAP DB database. In this embodiment OpenSQL is used as the query language for interaction with the database . In addition the services layer may provide specialized functional service components such as the Web auction service communicator referred to in as the Communicator discussed later. Web auction service communicator may be a communicator adapted to be used with one or more network based auction services and or may include different pluggable components for different network based auction services.

Other functional service components may include a scheduler for the scheduling of tasks by the auction application . For example a task may be an object with an executable block of program code enclosed with timing information inside a job. The scheduler may run as a service in J2EE handling the execution and management of jobs and task by the auction application . Some scheduled tasks may involve interfacing with the Web auction service . For example a listing creation task may be used to create a listing in the Web auction service at a scheduled time. In another example a winner poll task may be used to synchronize information about listings that have been won or postings for sale that have successfully been responded to. A bid synchronization task may synchronize information about bids for a listing maintained by the auction application with the bid information maintained by the Web auction service . A category synchronization task may be used to synchronize the descriptive and search categories used by the Web auction service with categories used by the auction application . A feedback task may synchronize feedback information for a listing or seller provided by Web auction service bidders with the auction application . The above example tasks specifically refer to the transfer and synchronization of information between the Web auction service and the auction application . Other tasks may be internal to the auction application or may involve synchronization with the business information management system . For example a product catalog synchronization task may update product details for a listing in the auction application and eventually the Web auction service with the product details in the business information management system .

Another functional service component may include an internal recovery manager to manage failures in network based communications and transactions between the auction application and the Web auction service . A persistence manager is another example of a functional service component that can be used to ensure data persistence between the data used in the auction application and data in the database . Specifically in the persistence manager may handle data persistence between the business objects used by the auction application and the Java data objects . The Java data objects map to the database through OpenSQL as provided for in the SAP Web AS.

An embodiment of auction application provides a method and system to recover information and or recover from a system failure. For example the auction application may enable a user e.g. seller and or administrator to recall steps in a listing initiation process. Conventionally when a user attempts to publish a listing in Web auction service various steps may be performed sometimes in multiple systems. These steps may validate the listing with the Web auction service and the Web auction service may send information to a backend system such as the business information management system . Conventionally a Web auction service may prevent a user from going back a step perhaps allowing only forward movement through screen prompts. Limiting the direction of the progress through screen prompts may be due to the involvement of multiple systems in the process.

Therefore in case of a failure of some sort for example a screen freeze a keyboard lockup system crash network communication error network or power outage etc. it may be useful to provide a system that returns a user to the most recent step on which the user was working. One embodiment of the present invention may record steps in the auction listing process and thereby provide a method for returning to the previous screen or prompt or to any previous screen or prompt.

This embodiment of the present invention may be useful in any multi phase application that provides a series of screens or prompts to a user in which the system limits the ability of the user to return to a previous screen and or prompt. In this embodiment a process may return to an initial screen prompt and then functionally input a recording of entries and or responses until the previous screen prompt before the lockup system failure etc. or to a previous point determined by a user.

Conventional systems may not allow the release of a reservation of a quantity of a product in a listing after a predetermined period of time passes the entry may have a certain life span . Therefore it may be useful to recover a transaction to prevent the system from duplicating reservations for product quantities.

For example a user may create a listing and begin to publish the listing before an electricity failure. The auction application may have reserved the quantity of the product in the listing in the business information management system but not published the listing to the Web auction service . In this situation a user may re attempt publishing the listing and thereby avoid creating a new reservation for the quantity of the product in the listing. In an embodiment of the present invention may enable a user to resume the listing publishing process at a step saved in the database.

In a system that operates in conjunction with two or more non compatible systems a user may be prevented from returning to an initial prompt or screen. In this situation an alternative embodiment of the present invention may enable the user to return to an intermediate state and or a beginning of a last good state. The intermediate state or last good state may represent for example a beginning or end of any of the following functions creation reservation publication create customer create order check payment release delivery block and or deliver product.

According to one embodiment of the present invention the auction application may incorporate milestones in particular transactions processes at which point the transaction state information is saved and at which point a transaction can be recovered. Alternatively the user may define milestones in the system to facilitate the return to an intermediate step. For example the user may configure transaction milestones relating to the creation of a customer publication or any other appropriate milestone. If the auction application or another system utilizing this exemplary method fails to respond and or locks up at the same point in the process the user may know that the error is caused by the screen and or the system accessed by the screen when the lock up reoccurred.

According to one embodiment of the present invention a failure recovery manager models each of the processes as a series of steps with each execution of a process treated as a process instance. For example a process to publish a listing may include four steps 1 save listing 2 create quotation reservation 3 publish to Web auction service and 4 save listing again. Each time a publish listing process is executed according to this embodiment it is assigned a unique identifier e.g. listing identifier and treated as a single instance of the process having a state holder used by the failure recovery manager to track the execution of the process. The failure recover manager tracks how far a process instance has successfully executed and maintains and updates state information before and after the execution of each step in the process. If the execution of a process instance fails at any intermediate step the execution of the process instance terminates but the failure recovery manager may use the state holder information to resume the process instance from the last successfully completed step.

The Web auction service communicator provides the interface between the Web auction service and the auction application . The Web auction service communicator translates auction application actions to Web auction service API calls. For example an auction application action to create or publish a listing may be translated into a Web auction service API call such as AddItem. Using eBay as an example the AddItem call sends a request to the eBay platform to post a listing and includes arguments such as for example a definition of the item being sold payment methods the seller is willing to accept and global regions the seller will and will not ship the item to. The Web auction service communicator translates the create listing auction application activity into the AddItem Web auction service API call. The API call may be placed in an XML packet using the SAP Java XML binding toolkit which allows the mapping of Java objects to XML documents. The XML packet may include specific information including packet header data. For example the XML packet may include an Identifier including the seller user ID and password for the Web auction service an API call identifier for the Web auction service API call and call parameters such as the API call arguments. The XML packet may be transmitted between the auction application and the Web auction service by means of an HTTP request. Information received from the Web auction service may be received as an HTTP request and its content may be mapped to Java objects also by using the SAP Java XML binding toolkit .

One aspect of the auction application is the business object layer also referred to as the business logic layer in . The business object layer may communicate with the user interface layer using JavaBeans to transfer data. Data is transferred in either direction by generating and transferring the appropriate JavaBeans . At the business object layer processing and interaction of data between the users and user interface layer the business information management system the Web auction service and the service layer with its component services including data from the database occurs. The business object layer may be implemented using a commercial architecture such as for example the SAP Internet Sales Architecture ISA framework as part of the SAP Web Application Server. In one embodiment of the present invention the ISA framework is used throughout the auction application including in the communication between the winning bidders buyers and the business information management system through the use of plug ins to allow the ISA framework to link to for example the SAP R 3 backend .

The SAP Internet Sales Application ISA framework for the SAP R 3 system is used according to one embodiment of the present invention. In an alternative embodiment other frameworks may be used for example to integrate an SAP CRM backend with the auction application instead of an SAP R 3 backend.

The business objects in the business object layer are functional components providing a number of services according to the embodiment depicted in . For example the listing manager may include codes for a number of functions such as create listing create listing template copy listing modify listing view listing details publish listing publish listing by schedule activate listing cancel listing close listing and search listings. The create listing function allows a seller to create a new listing for an auction or a posting for sale. A listing may be created in a number a ways including by selection from a product catalog database query database report manual entry using a listing template and in loading an external file. The listing manager allows the seller to provide listing specific information and may validate that the requirements of the Web auction service for the listing are met. For example a Web auction service may require that particular information is included when a listing is created. The create listing function may then validate that the seller included the information and otherwise prompts the seller for this information. The create listing template function allows a seller to create a template for use with future listings. The information provided by the seller for the template is automatically used when the seller selects the template during the create listing function discussed above. The seller may then modify template information or add information omitted from the template to complete the new listing. A listing template facilitates the generation of multiple listings particularly when similar listings are going to be scheduled at multiple times. The copy listing function allows a seller to copy the information from an existing or stored prior listing into a new listing the seller creates a new listing from an existing or old listing. The seller finds the existing or old listing to be copied selects the copy listing function and then edits the listing information to generate a new listing. The modify listing function allows a seller to modify the attributes of an existing listing to the extent allowed by the Web auction service . For example a Web auction service may allow a listing to be modified until it becomes active at which time the listing is locked and no further changes to its attributes can be made during the execution of the listing. A Web auction service may also allow changes to particular listing attributes during the execution of the listing. For example a seller may be allowed to change the reserve price during the execution of an auction. The Web auction service requirements need to be accounted for by the modify listing function to avoid conflicts between the auction application and the Web auction service . The view listing details function allows a seller to view the details of a listing and may include information about an active listing that is being executed. For example the view listing details function may retrieve bidding information for an active auction listing that is being executed i.e. the auction is in progress . The view listing details function may be divided into two functions one for viewing the listing details and a second for viewing details regarding the execution of the listing on the Web auction service . For example the view listing details function may provide information regarding the listing itself while a view bid history function may provide listing execution information from the Web auction service . The publish listing function allows a seller to submit a created listing for publication by a Web auction service . The publish listing by schedule function allows a seller to schedule the publication of a listing already created or based on a listing template. For example a listing template may be used to schedule a similar listing to be published every week day month etc. The activate listing function allows a seller to activate a listing before the submitted start time of the listing provided that the Web auction service allows the manual activation of a listing. Under some circumstances the manual activation of a listing may be necessary if a Web auction service does not require a start date for a listing and one is not provided. The close listing function allows a seller to close a listing before the submitted end date and time of the listing provided that the Web auction service allows changing the conclusion date of the listing. The cancel listing function allows a seller to cancel a listing before it becomes active with a Web auction service . It is unlikely that a Web auction service will allow the canceling of an active listing but if this is allowed the cancel listing function may allow the canceling of an active listing as well. The search listings function may allow a seller different ways to search through listings. For example the searching may occur only for seller created listings stored by the auction application in its own database or in the business management information system . The search listings function may also allow a seller to search through listing on the Web auction service . The search listings function may also incorporate different ways to conduct the search to include for example searching by product start date end date listing status description category etc. Other examples of listing manager component functions may include a bidder buyer feedback function to display to the seller bidder buyer feedback provided to Web auction service regarding the listing and seller and a listing finalization function to trigger post auction sale processing including the retrieval of winning bidder buyer information and creating an order in the business information management system .

In another example of a business object layer object the bid manager may include code for viewing the bid history or sale history of a listing. Though previously described as part of the view listing details function of the listing manager this function may additionally or alternatively be included in the bid manager . As previously stated the view bid history function may allow a seller to view all the bids with associated information e.g. date and time for a listing and may allow the viewing of a bid history for listings that are active or closed. The winner manager may include code to allow a winning bidder buyer to communicate with a seller in order to handle and process payments and to direct shipping of the listing product s . The winner manager may include functions used to trigger post auction sale processing including the retrieval of winning bidder buyer information and creating an order in the business information management system in the same manner as the potential list finalization function discussed within the listing manager .

The backend layer BLS objects are also functional components providing additional services for the auction application according to one embodiment of the present invention. The BLS layer handles communications with the backend system the business information management system with which the auction application integrates. In the diagrams depicted in and the backend system is the SAP R 3 system. In other embodiments other business information management systems can be used as the backend to the auction application . For example SAP CRM may serve as an alternative backend. One example of a BLS object is the order manager which may include code for a number of functions such as creating an order in the backend system viewing the order in the backend system and searching the backend system orders. The winner manager as discussed above may trigger the execution of the order manager . The create order function allows the auction application to create an order in the backend system for a winning bidder buyer of a listing as part of the checkout process. The order is created using listing execution information e.g. winning bidder buyer and associated information price quantity etc. obtained from the Web auction service . The order in the backend may be associated with the listing through adding at least one order identifier to the listing information in the auction application and by adding a listing identifier to the order in the backend . The order may include shipping details and payment information for the winning bidder buyer . The view order function allows a seller to retrieve information through the user interface layer about the order and its status from the backend system . The search orders function allows a seller through the user interface layer to search for information about multiple orders in the backend system . The search orders function may allow a seller to use different parameters to conduct the search in order to sort aggregate and or limit orders in the results.

The product catalog API object is another backend layer BLS functional component allowing retrieval and searching of data in the product catalog of the business information management system as well as quantity reservation of products included in a listing. A view product catalog function allows a seller to view products available in a product catalog maintained by the backend business information management system . As previously discussed a seller can use this product catalog to select products for inclusion in a listing. The view product catalog function may incorporate filtering to filter out products based on particular attributes. This filtering may be performed by the backend system or by the view product catalog function in the Java runtime environment in order to display only listing actionable products to a seller . The auction application in this embodiment operates in a J2EE runtime environment and interacts with the product catalog of the backend system through a Java based API called PCATAPI which is the means of interaction between the product catalog API object and the product catalog according to this embodiment. The search product catalog function also uses PCATAPI which allows SAP TREX based searching of the product catalog. The search product catalog function may allow a seller a variety of possible search parameters for finding a desired product. The quantity reservation function may be triggered during the listing creation process or at a later time in order to prevent the quantity of the product included in the listing from being otherwise disposed. For example when a listing is first generated and a quantity x of a product is included in the listing the quantity reservation function may be executed to reserve x quantity in the product catalog so that it remains available for the winning bidder buyer . Alternatively the quantity reservation function may be executed after the listing is created such as for example when a listing is published or activated on a Web auction service or when a winning bidder buyer is determined.

The service layer objects are also functional components providing services for the auction application according to one embodiment of the present invention. The service layer objects are system level components that do not directly communicate with the user interface layer and the backend system . The persistence manager is a service layer object that ensures data persistency and object relational persistency for the auction application . The persistence manager also handles any data redundancy requirements during database changes or queries to ensure the integrity of the data. The scheduler is another example of a service layer object that handles the scheduling of background jobs and tasks as previously discussed. The scheduler primarily handles the scheduling of jobs i.e. communicating tasks with the Web auction service . The XML data binder is a service layer object responsible for the mapping in both directions of Java objects and XML documents necessary for the communication between the auction application and the Web auction service according to this embodiment of the present invention. The Web auction service communicator is an example of a service layer object that handles the communication between the auction application and the Web auction service .

The Web auction service communicator may communicate with the Web auction service by using HTTP and secure HTTP communication by means of post and get requests. Communication with the Web auction service needs to conform to the Web auction service API and the Web auction service communicator is designed to generate requests using the Web auction service API calls. The Web auction service communicator may place the Web auction service API calls inside an XML packet i.e. an XML document which is sent in the HTTP request. According to one embodiment the XML packet includes user attributes such as a seller ID and a seller password to authenticate the seller to the Web auction service license attributes providing a developer license key where necessary call identifier for the Web auction service API call i.e. the API function call name call parameters corresponding to the API call parameters and error attributes for returning errors from the Web auction service to the auction application . Using eBay as an example the following table includes samples of Web auction service API function calls a brief description of their purpose and an auction application component that may initiate the API call 

The Web auction service communicator is specific or unique to a particular Web auction service allowing the remainder of the auction application to be general and relate to any Web auction service according to one embodiment of the present invention. According to this embodiment the communicator code is modular and can be replaced and or augmented allowing the auction application to work with a plurality of Web auction services as long as the appropriate communicator is present. For example the Web auction service communicator may be stored in a plug in or servlet used by the auction application that can easily substituted with the appropriate plug in or servlet for another Web auction service if and when needed.

Different embodiments of the present invention can be implemented using different architectures products and services other than in the example embodiments described herein. The present invention is not intended to be limited to the products environments and standards described herein and may be implemented in different ways in other embodiments of the present invention.

According to the example embodiment of the present invention the auction application is developed using the J2EE based SAP Web application server. The current release of SAP Web AS only includes by default functionality for digital signatures and not the encryption necessary to implement Secure Sockets Layer SSL protocol. For example by default SAP Web AS may allow the auction application to as part of securing communication use public key technology to send and receive encrypted message digests in order to validate the other party to the communication what is commonly known as using digital signatures. However the complete version of the SAP Java Cryptographic Toolkit may have to be loaded when deploying the auction application in some circumstances according to this embodiment. The SAP Java cryptographic toolkit provides support for certificates symmetric cryptographic algorithms and message authentication code MAC values e.g. using MD5 necessary for Secure Sockets Layer SSL protocol based secure communication over the Internet in particular the HTTP request based communication between the auction application and the Web auction service . If necessary loading the complete cryptographic toolkit may be described in the technical documentation provided by SAP and may in addition be available from SAP technical support personnel. This additional step may only be relevant regarding the example embodiment discussed above which is based on an early version of SAP Web AS. In other embodiments of the present invention this issue may be irrelevant.

In the example embodiment of the present invention the auction application is not specific to any one Web auction service . Instead the auction application may be used with many possible Web auction services . Using the auction application with a specific Web auction service may entail the use of an appropriate Web auction service communicator specific to the Web auction application . The specific details of the communication and interaction between the auction application components objects and the Web auction service may be hard coded into this specific Web auction service communicator . According to this embodiment the Web auction service specific interfacing is done through the Web auction service communicator .

The first step in the enhanced network based auction process is the product identification preparation step according to this embodiment of the present invention. During this step two actions in particular may occur 1 identifying the product s to be auctioned or posted for sale and 2 gathering information about the product s . The identification of products by a seller e.g. a business can occur in a number a ways using a business information management system according to one embodiment of the present invention. For example a seller may manually compile a list by directly entering the information into the auction application. In another example a seller may manually retrieve data from a database or legacy software application such as for example a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. According to this example the product information is extracted from the legacy software e.g. Microsoft Excel by exporting the selected data into a file and loading the file into the auction application . In another example a seller may execute a report or query on the backend business information management system returning a listing of products from which the seller may make a selection. The report or query may be generated using whatever selection parameters are available to limit the results and assist the seller in identifying the desired product s in an expeditious manner. The fields or columns available in the business information management system database tables may determine these selection parameters. For example if a field or table allows storing information on inventory location then inventory location is a potential parameter that may be used in generating the report or in forming the query from which an identification of the product s to be auctioned or posted for sale can be made. The selection parameters may also be determined using calculated values derived from stored information in the tables of a business information management system . For example if a field or table stores information regarding when a product was received or otherwise became part of the inventory a calculation using the current information can be made to determine the number of days the product has been carried as inventory. Therefore for example the number of days a product has been a part of the inventory may be a selection parameter used in generating the report or in forming the query from which an identification of the product s to be auctioned or posted for sale can be made.

In the example embodiment shown in the SAP R 3 system is the business information management system from whose databases a report or query can be executed and used in the product identification process. Another example of a business information management system including a database system from which a report or query can be executed is the SAP CRM system. For example the product may exist in the mySAP Customer Relation Management mySAP CRM system as a product master or may exist in the SAP R 3 system in the Material Management MM module. In other embodiments of the present invention idle assets may exist in the Asset Management AM module of the SAP R 3 system and equipment may exist in the Plant Maintenance PM module of the SAP R 3 system. In conjunction with SAP R 3 other tools can be used in generating the reports and queries from which product identification can be made including SAP Business Information Warehouse BW reports SAP ABAP reports and queries SAP R 3 modules such as the Sales Information System SIS and third party reporting and query systems. Regardless of the tools used the product identification and preparation process can take advantage of product information already maintained by the seller s business information management system .

In addition to identifying the product s to be auctioned or posted for sale the first step in the enhanced network based auction process may further involve the gathering of information about the product s the staging of the product s . According to one embodiment of the present invention information regarding the product s is gathered in a staging area which serves as the virtual repository of the product information. The staging area may be a memory based area from which a seller may organize listings or it may be part of a database in the auction application where additional product information may be stored. The additional product information may also be provided as either part of the product identification process discussed above or separately using the same means 1 manual entry 2 loading from an external file and or 3 from information available in the business information management system such as for example from a product catalog. The product information may in one example include a product ID quantity description plant storage location and shipping point in order to fully identify the specific product so that it can be reserved discussed later . Less information may be used where only a quantity of a product at a location needs to be reserved but not the specific product or where a product location is not used.

The listing processing itself is the second step in the enhanced network based auction process according to one embodiment of the present invention. From a sales perspective all the products and materials products identified for auctioning or posting for sale are conceptually or electronically gathered in the staging area as previously discussed e.g. in an auction application database . These products can now be grouped into listings that will be published on and executed by the Web auction service . Each grouping may be termed a listing and each listing may be for an auction or a direct offer for sale a posting for sale .

The listing information is taken from the product information gathered in the staging area as previously discussed and may be augmented with additional listing specific information provided by the seller . For example a quantity of the product to the offered an auction start price an auction reserve price and a sale price for a posting for sale are all examples of listing specific information that may be provided by the seller . Alternatively this information may be generated or automatically determined based on prior sales history and other information available in to the business information management system . The seller may create one or more listings and he she determines which products are included in each listing. Products may be listed individually or as a group and therefore multiple different products may be included in a single listing if the seller chooses. In addition to the product information the seller may need to provide information required by the Web auction service in order to place i.e. publish the listing. The Web auction service may require or allow the specification of additional information that may not be necessary but may facilitate finding bidders buyers for the listing and the seller may also include this information. For example category information for the listing may not be necessary but may help a bidder buyer find the listing on the Web auction service and therefore would be advantageous for the seller to include in the listing.

The created listings may be stored in a database in or linked to the auction application . The products in the listing may also be linked to a product catalog or other descriptive information in one or more databases of the business information management system . The seller may then transfer the listings once created to the Web auction service . The auction application communicates with the Web auction service e.g. transferring listings by sending Web auction service API calls through the Web auction service communicator as previously described The publication of a listing may occur immediately or may be scheduled for a particular time by the seller . For example a seller may specify as a default that all listings are immediately published to the Web auction service upon successfully creating the listing. The seller may rely on this default or may by exception schedule a listing for a future publication date on the Web auction service . Additionally a seller may specify parameters regarding the re posting of a listing should the listing unsuccessfully conclude.

In addition to creating a listing as discussed above a seller may also save the listing in its entirety or partially as a listing template which can be used in the future to create new listings. A seller can then decide whether to create a new listing from scratch use a current or prior listing or use an existing listing template. If the seller uses a listing template all the information in the listing template is used to populate the listing fields with the seller still capable of editing the information therein before publishing the listing. A listing may also be created by copying an existing or old listing. For example a seller may search through existing i.e. currently in progress or waiting to be scheduled listings and or old listings i.e. listings that have already closed and select a listing to copy. The information from the copied listing is then used to populate the listing fields for the new listing with the seller still capable of editing the information therein before publishing the new listing. Copying a listing is similar to creating a listing from a template except that an already specified listing rather than a template is used.

Once a listing is created it can be scheduled for publication or sent to the Web auction service for immediate publication. Before this occurs the business information management system is queried to validate if the product s are available. If the products are not available the seller is presented with an error message in the seller interface . Otherwise the product s are reserved by for example generating a reservation for the product s in the business information management system also referred to as generating a quotation for the product s . The reservation is not complete but is used as a placeholder along with the listing information in order to prevent the product s from being otherwise disposed. The plant and location information for the product s gathered in the staging area may be used to implement the reservation or quotation for the product s where the product location matters. The product s may be reserved at any time during the listing process but most likely will be reserved when the listing is first created or when the listing is published to the Web auction service. Alternatively product s may be reserved when a listing is activated on the Web auction service provided the Web auction service allows inactive listings or when the information for the product s is first brought into the staging area. Alternatively products may never be reserved. The Web auction service handles the execution of the listing and the taking and validating of bids and offers according to the example embodiment though alternatively a portion of this process may be handled by the auction application .

Post listing processing is the third step in the enhanced network based auction process and occurs after the listing processing as a result of the conclusion of an auction or posting for sale i.e. a listing . Information may be pulled i.e. retrieved from the Web auction service by the auction application as one method of retrieving winner or other listing information. A Web auction service may also push i.e. send on its own accord listing information to the auction application . A listing may be concluded automatically through the completion of the listing processing or manually through the early termination of the listing by the seller . A seller may manually terminate an auction for example when he she determines there is insufficient interest for the product s or when he she receives a desirable offer and no longer wants to wait for a later planned conclusion to the auction or posting for sale. A seller may manually terminate a listing for a number of reasons with the manual termination generally representing a departure from the planned closing conditions.

The automatic conclusion for a posting for sale may occur by a particular date and time i.e. an offer end date or when the product s are purchased. On the other hand the automatic conclusion of an auction generally occurs at particular date and time advertised by the Web auction service for the auction. However an auction may be closed under other circumstances. For example an auction may conclude when a particular price target is met. A posting for sale generally concludes when an order is placed for the specified price or when a conclusion date is reached. In one embodiment of the present invention the conclusion of the auction or posting for sale is only successful if a target price i.e. reserve price is met where specified. For example if product A is being auctioned with a reserve price of 10.00 a successful closing to the auction only occurs if a valid bid of 10.00 or more is made on the Web auction service by the closing date. As previously discussed an auction or posting for sale may include multiple quantities of a product or set of products. Under these circumstances the auction or posting for sale may be only partially successful when it closes if only a portion of the offered quantity is sold. The Web auction service generally receives and validates the bids and offers and determines successful auction winners or buyers of a posting for sale. In alternative embodiments of the present invention the seller may determine successful auction winners or successful purchases using information provided by the Web auction service . The closing of a listing whether manually terminated or closed or automatically closed may also need to conform to the requirements of the Web auction service and may limit the closing options available to the seller .

According to the example embodiment of the present invention a successful conclusion of a listing e.g. an auction or posting for sale results in the initiation of the checkout process the winning bidder buyer finalization process the post listing processing . The checkout process is used to verify the winning bidder buyer information and to generate the necessary order s in the business information management system serving as the backend to the auction application . During the checkout process the winning bidder buyer i.e. the customer verifies the purchase of the item on the Web auction service and the customer may also verify and update delivery and payment information.

The checkout process may be conducted through the Web auction service or directly between the winning bidder buyer and the auction application the seller . In one embodiment of the present invention the checkout process is conducted through the Web auction service . This embodiment may be used when for example the seller wants to leverage the Web auction service infrastructure or when the seller wants to remain anonymous. For example if a seller has limited network based e.g. Internet based presence and capability to handle the transaction the seller may want to leverage the infrastructure provided by the Web auction service . In another example if the seller is a brand name manufacturer disposing of excess inventory the seller may not want bidders buyers to know that its name brand products can be purchased on the Web auction service at a potentially discounted price. Notification is the first step in the Web auction service based checkout process. A winning bidder may receive an email notification from the Web auction service informing him her that he she has won the auction listing. For a posting for sale the buyer may be immediately informed that he she has successfully executed a purchase when the buyer is online. In either case the Web auction service may calculate the total checkout amount for the winning bidder buyer based on the information provided by the seller e.g. shipping costs and using the winning bid purchase price provided by the winning bidder buyer . The seller may also be notified of the winning bidder buyer by the Web auction service .

The payment method selected by the winning bidder buyer must conform to acceptable forms of payment identified by the seller and this form of payment dictates the following steps in the checkout process . is a diagram illustrating how forms of payment may be specified in a listing and how selection of one form of payment links a winning bidder buyer to an appropriate payment site according to one embodiment of the present invention. The payment details may be included in the listing on the Web auction service . The form of payment may be linked to an appropriate payment page for the Web auction service or other third party payment provider. For example selecting PayPal as the third party payment provider brings the winning bidder buyer to the PayPal Web site from which a payment can be made and the checkout process continued. Once the winning bidder buyer makes the appropriate payment on the PayPal Web site PayPal sends an Instant Payment Notification IPN message to the seller to the auction application in the form of an HTTP post message confirming that the winning bidder buyer has made a payment as part of the checkout process . PayPal is only one example of a third party payment provider and may itself be limited to offering services in only a few countries. Other third party payment providers may also be used. For example in Germany where PayPal is not available an Iloxx powered Treuhandservice may be used for payment transfers. The winning bidder buyer makes the necessary payment to Iloxx which confirms the payment and notifies the seller . The Web auction service may also provide its own payment system that may be used by the winning bidder buyer to make payment as part of the checkout process . Under these circumstances the Web auction service on receipt of payment from the winning bidder buyer may confirm the payment and send an appropriate notification to the seller . The winning bidder buyer may also make payment arrangements directly with the seller when the seller offers this option. In this scenario the winning bidder buyer makes arrangements for the payment and the seller processes the payment on receipt from the winning bidder buyer . In all the cases discussed above the payment step is generally the second step following notification in the checkout process .

Regardless of the form of financial service provider handling the payment for the winner e.g. a third party payment provider or the Web auction service itself the payment confirmation may be retrieved i.e. pulled by the auction application from the financial service provider through a communication API with the financial service provider and or the confirmation may be sent i.e. pushed from the financial service provider to the auction application . Once the confirmation is received the auction application may make a calculation to determine that the payment made the actual payment equals the expected payment from the listing. If there is a mismatch because of either an underpayment or an overpayment the checkout process is incomplete and a resolution procedure may need to be executed. This resolution procedure may involve a manual resolution to the overpayment underpayment.

In another embodiment of the present invention the checkout process is conducted between the winning bidder buyer and the seller through the auction application . This embodiment may be used when a seller wants to leverage its own network based e.g. Internet based sales architecture and or when the seller wants to drive traffic to his her own network based e.g. Web site to potentially generate additional sales. The notification step differs slightly in that in addition to the notification by the Web auction service the seller may send a notification message e.g. an email to the winning bidder buyer referencing the checkout process for the listing. The seller provided notification may expedite the checkout process by including a URL with a secure ID for a checkout Web page or other network based site that is particular to the listing and the winning bidder buyer . For example if the winning bidder buyer is not already a customer of the seller and is not registered with the seller a random secure ID may be used as part of the URL linking the winning bidder buyer with either a registration Web page if the winning bidder buyer information is to be stored for future use or to a checkout Web page where the winning bidder buyer information will be used for a one time transaction . The fields of the checkout Web page may be pre populated with information from the listing and the Web auction service . If the winning bidder buyer is already a registered customer of the seller a login page may be presented separately or a login required as part of a checkout Web page where fields are pre populated as discussed above.

The payment step is handled by the auction application i.e. the seller site according to this embodiment of the present invention. The auction application may allow for direct payments or may use third party payment providers such as PayPal and the Treuhandservice by Iloxx as discussed above. The auction application may be configured to directly accept credit card payments requiring credit card processing to be provided in the auction application or through the backend business information management system either of which may need to communicate with an external clearinghouse to process the transactions. The auction application may also allow cash or cash equivalent payments to be made in any technically feasible form. For example the winning bidder buyer may authorize a wire or electronic cash transaction by providing his her bank account and bank routing information to the seller along with any necessary transaction authorization allowing the auction application to generate an electronic transfer for the winning bidder s buyer s credit. In another example the auction application may prompt e.g. online or by sending a bill or invoice either electronically and or by hardcopy the winning bidder buyer to submit a check or money order in response to a winning bidder s buyer s request to make a cash payment.

In one embodiment of the present invention the auction application may be configured to add the winning bidder buyer as a new customer i.e. business partner in the business information management system . For example the winning bidder buyer and his her associated information are added to the appropriate customer and other associated tables of the backend business information management system creating a new customer master record. In particular a unique customer business partner identifier is assigned to the new customer and it is linked i.e. mapped to a Web auction service identifier for the customer e.g. in a lookup table or using associated key fields in a table in the business information management system . According to this embodiment the auction application compares the winning bidder buyer information with existing customer information in the business information management system . For example the business information management system is searched using the Web auction service identifier for the winning bidder buyer . If the customer entry already exists customer specific information may be retrieved and presented during the checkout process . For example a winning bidder buyer may be presented with shipping address payment information etc. based on the information stored in the business information management system . The winning bidder buyer may then continue with this default information or may edit the appropriate entries and submit the necessary information. If the customer entry does not already exist customer information may be added to the business information management system as part of the checkout process . The mapping of a customer identifier to the Web auction service customer identifier in the business information management system allows rapid searching for existing customers and prevents duplicating entries for the same customer.

In an alternative embodiment of the present invention the checkout process is executed without saving the customer information in the business information management system without creating a new customer entry or new customer master record. The customer information is still necessary as part of the checkout process however the customer information is not stored in a manner allowing it to be reused in further checkout processes. In this situation one time customer data may be stored in the information for the order but is not used to generate specific customer information separate from the order.

Regardless of whether a new customer entry is created in the business information management system i.e. a new customer master record is created an order needs to be created for each winning bidder buyer of a listing. The order is created primarily using the original listing information with additional information provide by the Web auction service e.g. winning bid or purchase price . A reservation may already have been created when the listing was first generated or published as part of a quotation of the quantity in the listing and in this case additional details may need to be added for the reservation. The pricing information for the order may include an overall price or may be broken down by product in multi product listings. In addition tax and shipping fees along with other fees may also need to be calculated and included in the order. This additional information may be provided by the Web auction service calculated by the auction application or may need to be generated or manually entered for the order. Shipping costs are normally included in the listing by including a flat fee for shipping regardless of shipping destination within the region the seller will ship to the use of a Web auction service shipping calculator to estimate shipping costs or by not specifying the cost in the listing but specifying the shipping cost based on a selected delivery method during the checkout process i.e. allowing the winning bidder buyer to select one of several shipping options during the checkout process . In any case the order may need to allow for automatic and or manual determination of shipping costs to handle the various possibilities. Tax costs may need to allow for the inclusion of U.S. sales taxes along with foreign value added taxes VAT such as the German Mehrwertsteuer VAT . The auction application and or the business information management system may include the integration of external tax packages such as those of Vertex Inc. and Taxware to support these tax calculations. The total costs of the order are presented to the winning bidder buyer as previously discussed prior to the payment step in the checkout process . A delivery block i.e. blocking the delivery of the product s may be placed on the order until proper payment is received.

The delivery step generally occurs after payment is made the payment step regardless of whether checkout occurs on the Web auction service or through the auction application i.e. the seller site according to the example embodiment. The product s are generally reserved when the listing is either first created published or activated on the Web auction service . The reservation of the product s may include the specification of the product s by location through the use of location specific fields such as plant storage location and or shipping point in a warehousing or plant specific module of the business information management system . For example the Warehouse Management WM module of the SAP R 3 system may be used. After any delivery blocks are removed when payments are received the product s are shipped according to the shipping method and to the shipping address as verified during the checkout process . A winning bidder buyer may be able through the winning bidder buyer interface to check on the status of the order to include the shipping status if carrier tracking is provided by the business information management system . For example SAP Express Carrier configuration in the SAP Internet Sales Architecture running on R 3 can provide detailed tracking of an order by handling units. In an alternative embodiment delivery may be made before payment is received such as during payment processing or when selling on credit i.e. an internal seller credit to a winning bidder buyer.

Other steps in the checkout process may include updating general accounting and financial information for the seller based on a delivered and paid order. Additionally the payment of fees to other external service providers may be necessary and may also need to be calculated and paid. For example the Web auction service will typically charge a fee for the listing which the seller will need to pay if not already paid in advance. Additionally the use of an external clearing house for a credit card order PayPal and the Iloxx run Treuhandservice may also need to be paid for by the seller as appropriate. The billing of these fees may or may not be automated and may occur outside the immediate checkout process between the winning bidder buyer and the seller . Alternatively the payment of these fees may be required in conjunction with the checkout process . For example the Web auction service fee may need to be paid as part of the checkout process .

A Web auction service may allow a winning bidder buyer to leave feedback regarding a seller and for a seller to leave feedback regarding the winning bidder buyer on the Web auction service . The auction application as part of its scheduled processes may retrieve feedback left by winning bidders buyers regarding the seller . This information may then become available to the seller as part of the monitoring and analyzing process discussed below. In addition the seller may generate and leave feedback with the Web auction service regarding the winning bidder buyer . This feedback may also be stored by the auction application either in a database or in the business information management system along with the customer information so that it is available for future use. The seller feedback available on the Web auction service may be used by other bidders buyers when deciding whether to bid on or to make a purchase from a seller s listings. In a similar manner bidder buyer feedback available on the Web auction service may be used by other sellers in determining what forms of payment to accept and whether to accept the bids offers of a bidder buyer .

The fourth step in the enhanced network based auction process is the monitoring and analyzing of listings according to one embodiment of the present invention. The monitoring and analyzing of listings may occur in parallel throughout the entire process and is not sequentially dependent on any of the other steps in the process as outlined. As the name implies the monitoring and analyzing step allows a seller to both monitor listings and perform analysis on the listings through the seller interface of the auction application . The seller interface may allow the seller the ability to monitor listings according to a number of parameters. For example the seller may view all his her listings only published listings closed listings etc. is a diagram illustrating a seller interface display allowing a seller to monitor his her listings according to one embodiment of the present invention. The monitoring screen allows the seller to view particular types of listings in this case failed to publish listings. The seller may also conduct a search and may specify the field by which the listings are sorted or displayed. In this case the listings are those that have failed to publish and are organized by listing name . A listing title and scheduled publication date are also included along with the listing status in this case Errors for the listings that have failed to publish. Clicking on the error field i.e. the status field allows the seller to display details about the listing that have caused the particular status. Regarding the selected listing shown the error causing the failure to publish the listing is the inability to reserve the product selected for the listing. As previously stated reserving the product or creating a quotation may occur to ensure that the product isn t otherwise disposed of as this case shown in indicates. Additional listing information may also be available through the monitoring display. For example other listing details highest bidder information and bidder information may also be available from information in the auction application database or downloaded retrieved from the Web auction service through a scheduled process as previously discussed.

As shown in a seller may be able to conduct a search of his her listings limiting the information displayed and facilitating the monitoring process. is a diagram illustrating a seller interface display allowing a seller to search his her listings as part of the monitoring process according to one embodiment of the present invention. The display screen shows a basic search returning a group of listings organized and sorted by listing name . The basic search field allows a seller to view open listings active listings finalized listings and closed listings according the example depicted in but does not have to be limited in this manner. The listings are also sorted by name as they were in . In addition a search term Laptop1 is used to limit the returned listings to those containing a Laptop1 product. In addition to the listing description and status the start date and end date for the listings are also displayed. Selecting a listing by clicking on the name may result in the display of the product details for the listing according the example depicted in . A seller may also be provided the option to conduct an advanced search if the basic search is not sufficient. is a diagram illustrating the advanced search designation screen of the seller interface according to one embodiment of the present invention. The advanced search screen allows the seller to specify more detailed search parameters including a listing name and a product name for which wild cards may be used in the name specification. A start date range and an end date range for the listing search may also be specified as well as selecting listings by those for which a reserve price and those with an automatic bid increment are included. is only one example and different and or more detailed advanced searching options may be presented to the seller .

In addition to searching listings and viewing their status current listing information may also be viewed by the seller as part of the monitoring process . is a diagram illustrating the viewing of bidding information for an auction listing according to one embodiment of the present invention. For a selected listing in the search screen bidding information can be viewed by selecting a Bids Placed tab according to example depicted in . The bids specify the bidder but are organized by the latest bid placed according to the time of the bid and include the bid amount . Other listing information may also be displayed including for example a start price a specified reserve price and a bid increment if one is specified. is an example of the Web auction service data that can be periodically retrieved by scheduled process copied to the auction application and made available to the seller as part of the monitoring and analyzing process .

In addition to the monitoring functions described above the seller interface may also provide analysis such as tracking statistics based on a listing history of the seller. A seller may be provided an interface to generate reports based on seller specified listing parameters with the reports generated using data from the seller s listing history. These reports can determine for example overall profitability of listings listing success rates product demand demand to price analyses and location based demand analyses. According to one embodiment of the present invention the analytical reporting available through the seller interface of the auction application may be provided using the SAP BW reporting tool. Examples of analytical statistics that may be collected tracked and made available to a seller may include the top n successfully unsuccessfully closed listings based on either revenue generated and or time period. According to this example analytical information regarding the amount of revenue generated or revenue that could have been earned but failed to earn due to unsuccessful listings over a certain period of time may be provided. The presentation or selection of this information may be further refined according to a seller s business unit department division or other such grouping categories. In addition to listing revenues and listings over time other examples of analytical information may include information for relistings reposted listings the most listed categories and or products the most failed listings by category and or product the number of relistings by category and or product the return on investment per listing etc. The above examples make apparent that a wide variety of analytical information and statistics may be tracked and made available to a seller according to this embodiment of the present invention.

Alternative embodiments of the present invention may provide additional or alternative features to those described above. In an alternative embodiment the seller interface may include a personalized homepage that may have a different login for each user and or role. When a user for instance seller logs in information may be provided showing tasks and listing status for the seller. The personalized homepage may be viewed and or accessed from the SAP R 3 or CRM seller side or elsewhere and may provide information by default such as for example current listings listings scheduled to be published and recently closed listings. Prior listings may also be republished using the personalized homepage.

The personalized homepage may allow for customized name searches and may be used with a system such as an SAP ERP Enterprise Resource Planning system or SAP R 3 . The personalized homepage may provide the user with highlights of the listing information and may grab information in particular user requested information from a backend system such as the business information management system .

For example if a holiday is approaching a seller may schedule now in advance to publish to the Web auction service on the holiday. When the seller logs in a list of what will be published and what has been published may be displayed as well as any problems with either of the published listings or the yet to be published listings. This information may be displayed in a predefined field or alternatively may be time dependent information. For time dependent information specific criteria may be defined and set up. A user may create a login script or scenario including as many fields as may be included in a query which may run each time the user logs in. The user may also name particular searches and save a set of searches accessible from the personalized homepage. A user may edit the personalized homepage to show only what they wish to view for example a list of auction items sold.

One example method for performing the personalization process may include making an advanced query with different fields. The different fields may include product name status of listing publication status including closed and checked out and published in a certain date range. The backend system e.g. SAP R 3 or other ERP system may receive the queries though hyperlinks which a seller may click on in the personalized homepage causing a query to execute on the backend system with the query results being displayed to the user. These queries may be saved to the system as part of the hyperlink or otherwise and may be executed when the user logs in. Clicking a hyperlink may result in the display of specific information relating to the listings satisfying the query. Queries may be named to allow the user to execute any number of queries. The queries results may include more detailed information on the products in the listing as well.

The personalized homepage may be set up using the business information management system for instance an SAP R 3 system or SAP ERP system or other backed system. The quantity of a product and the number of products that the seller wants to place in the listing may identified in the business information management system e.g. marking a field which may then be used in a query in the personalized homepage of the auction application . For example a business warehouse system for instance the BW system from SAP search may provide such saved information in response to a personalized homepage query. According to this embodiment queries may be predefined or customized by the seller or user in the personalized homepage.

An alert system may also be included using the queries in order to alert the seller as to which products are ready for listing. The resulting query may display the product and other selected listings on a screen before a new listing is generated. The information may be stored in the backend system e.g. an ERP system SAP R 3 or SAP BW .

When a user logs into a system a query may be executed based on a predefined query which may have been created by the user with respect to an application status. For example the query may communicate with a database in the backend of an ERP system.

The query may use links or hyperlinks to communicate with a database for information. This query system may provide a flexible system for a user setting up a homepage.

A seller may also define a listing theme providing a distinct look and feel to the listing of a seller during the listing creation and publishing in the listing processing step in the enhanced network based auction model. This may help promote brand identity or seller identity by ensuring a consistent look and feel for seller listings on the Web auction service . Listing themes may consist of standard HTML with links to images and embedded styles included for the customization in the presentation of a seller s listings. Using embedded links in the HTML requires that the linked images and styles also be available to the Web auction service so that the listing theme can be displayed properly with all its components available. Listing themes may only be implemented where a Web auction service allows seller specified theme information to be displayed.

A listing theme is generally first created in a display language such as HTML using a specific editor e.g. an HTML editor or a text editor. This function may be available through the seller interface or the seller may import a document e.g. an HTML document created outside the auction application . A listing theme may be created in the auction application according to one embodiment of the present invention or alternatively may be directly sent to the Web auction service where the Web auction service provides support for such themes. Placeholder sections inside the HTML document indicate areas where substitute text for the listing will be included listing information will be copied into the placeholder area. Listing themes are composed conceptually as an entire body of HTML within which various sections of relevant listing information such as listing description shipping information or payment details reside. Certain sections of the listing information such as listing description may vary constantly depending on the product while others such as shipping information return policies and payment information may be relatively static. Conceptually themes can consist of various static and dynamic page sections that in aggregate compose the actual listing theme. Currently these sections may include the header sales policy shipping policy additional information as shown below.

A listing theme layout generally conforms to the following visual representation according to this embodiment. Listing themes may be stored either as a full HTML document or as an HTML document fragment. A full HTML document would be demarcated with the requisite HTML start and end tags as well as the attending head and body tags. An HTML document fragment would need only the start and end tags of the whole of the fragment to match. The document fragment start and end tags should preferably also be designated block level tags such as table div or p. An optional embedded style section can also be inserted to the beginning of the document fragment if the seller intends to employ styles for customizing the display. The examples below display both an HTML document and document fragment 

Although the Web auction service may accept both full HTML documents and document fragments the preferred method is to use document fragments according to this embodiment. Inserting themes as document fragments into a Web auction service listing page normally results in valid HTML. When entire HTML documents are inserted the result may be a non valid HTML page because there would be more than one start and end html tags. Depending on how sensitive the bidder buyer browser is to HTML errors the effect may lead to an unintentional or undesirable display.

Special tags may be used within listing themes to demarcate placeholders within the HTML which the auction application or Web auction service will substitute with corresponding field values pertinent to the listing. The format of the placeholder will standardize on syntax derived from the current JSP specification and or the HTMLb tag service. The placeholder uses a general XML namespace tag name format. For example the placeholder for the listing product title may be written as follows 

In this example SAP is the XML namespace and product title denotes the tagname. Both monikers taken together as the tag represent a placeholder that the auction application or Web auction service will remove and replace with the stored value corresponding to the product title. Other placeholders for the remaining fields will work in a similar manner. The actual listing theme may be composed using a document fragment consisting of an HTML table the contents of which constitute the theme that will be displayed as part of the listing on the Web auction service . Providing a further example valid HTML code for a listing theme can appear as the following 

This fragment can be inserted into the Web auction service listing page when the listing is published. The fragment may contain links to images and other resources outside of the Web auction service . If this is the case these linked images and other resources must be made externally available to the Web auction service in order for the listing theme to display correctly. It may be the responsibility of the seller to ensure this occurs as the auction application may not be able to determine these components if the listing themes are not generated in the auction application . Note that the starting and ending HTML comments are optional but desirable for formatting and development purposes. The following is an example of a user defined tag and template implementation of a listing theme 

In one example the SAP database DB is a software application that works with the J2EE based SAP Web application server used in the example embodiment depicted if and . SAP DB may serve as the persistence database for the auction application according to one embodiment of the present invention. In other words data entries are made to the SAP DB database in order to ensure the persistence of the data received from and transferred to either the Web auction service and the backend business information management system .

