---

title: Expression vector encoding a triterpene hydroxylase polypeptide
abstract: Soyasapogenol B is biosynthesized via two steps of hydroxylation reaction of its precursor β-amyrin. However, the gene of the hydroxylase concerned in this reaction has not been revealed. Therefore, it was impossible to apply a genetic engineering technique on the hydroxylase. The present inventors reveals that a sequence which corresponds to a soybean-derived cytochrome P-450 gene CYP93E1 encodes an enzyme protein that carries out hydroxylation of the 24-position of an oleanane type triterpene, and also provides a method for applying said gene making use of a genetic engineering technique.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07575892&OS=07575892&RS=07575892
owner: Meiji Seika Kaisha, Ltd.
number: 07575892
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050225
---
This invention relates to a cell transformed by a genetic engineering technique with an enzyme gene which is concerned in the biosynthesis of plant derived soyasapogenol B and a method for producing soyasapogenol B making use of the cell.

Soyasapogenol B 12 oleanene 3 22 24 triol is a triterpene having an oleanane skeleton which has been isolated from a soybean seed and determined for its structure 24 pp. 121 129 197630 pp. 2294 2297 1982 Non patent References 1 and 2 and its glycoside soyasaponin is broadly distributed in leguminous plants.

Regarding the soyasapogenol B its anti complement activity and platelet agglutination inhibitory action JP A 61 37749 Patent Reference 1 antitumor activity JP A 10 234396 Patent Reference 2 and hepatoprotective activity 7 85 88 1997 Non patent Reference 3 and the like have so far been reported and its usefulness as a pharmaceutical preparation or a material thereof is expected.

Regarding the production method of soyasapogenol B a method is known in which sugar chains of saponin contained in soybean seeds are hydrolyzed and then soyasapogenol B is purified but since the ratio of saponin contained in soybean seeds is about 0.2 which is very small Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 104 162 168 1984 Non patent Reference 4 more efficient production method is in demand.

It is considered that amyrin as a biosynthesis precursor of soyasapogenol B is biosynthesized by the ring closure of 2 3 oxidosqualene which is formed via the mevalonate pathway and soyasapogenol B is biosynthesized thereafter via two steps of hydroxylation reactions.

Sophoradiol 12 oleanene 3 22 diol structurally close to soyasapogenol B is a substance which has been reported a component of 78 1090 1094 1958 Non patent Reference 5 and it is possible to produce soyasapogenol B by hydroxylation of the 24 position of sophoradiol.

Actually a method for producing soyasapogenol B by hydroxylation of the 24 position of sophoradiol making use of a hydroxylase derived from a cultured cell has been disclosed WO 02 086142 Patent Reference 3 .

The amyrin is a biosynthetic precursor of soyasapogenol B. It is biosynthesized by the ring closure of 2 3 oxidosqualene which is formed via the mevalonate pathway and soyasapogenol B is biosynthesized thereafter via two steps of hydroxylation reaction. However the gene of the hydroxylase concerned in this reaction has not been revealed. Therefore it was impossible to apply a genetic engineering technique on the hydroxylase.

Based on an assumption that the gene of a cytochrome P 450 type enzyme concerned in the biosynthesis of soyasapogenol B from amyrin is contained in an EST Expression Sequence Tags clone of soybean producing soyasaponin at a high production rate or in a clone whose function is unidentified the present inventors have carried out analysis of functions of these soybean clones using a lanosterol deficient yeast mutant strain. Among the analyzed clones the hydroxylation activity of the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene which cannot be detected originally was detected in a yeast strain in which the polynucleotide represented by SEQ ID NO 8 was transcribed and translated. Polynucleotide sequence of the hydroxylation activity detected enzyme is SEQ ID NO 8 and deduced polypeptide sequence is SEQ ID NO 9. As a sequence bearing resemblance to the SEQ ID NO 8 a cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 GenBank Accession Number AF135485 SEQ ID NO 10 deduced polypeptide sequence is SEQ ID NO 11 is known. The polynucleotide represented by SEQ ID NO 8 and the polynucleotide represented by SEQ ID NO 10 are different from each other in terms of 3 positions of the 121st position the 171st position and the 1081st position hereinafter the sequence represented by SEQ ID NO 8 is also called cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 in some cases . In addition the polypeptide represented by SEQ ID NO 9 and the polypeptide represented by SEQ ID NO 11 are different from each other in terms of the 41st position and 61st position amino acids. The present inventors have revealed that the polynucleotide represented by SEQ ID NO 8 is coding for an enzyme protein which carries out hydroxylation of the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene. Based on this knowledge the inventors have conducted intensive efforts and accomplished the invention.

1. An expression vector having a polynucleotide which hybridizes with a complementary chain of the polynucleotide represented by SEQ ID NO 8 under a stringent condition and also encodes a polypeptide that has the activity of hydroxylating the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene.

2. The expression vector described in the aforementioned 1 wherein the polynucleotide is the polynucleotide represented by SEQ ID NO 8.

3. A transformant in which a host is transformed with the expression vector described in the aforementioned 1 or 2.

6. An expression vector having a polynucleotide which hybridizes with a complementary chain of the polynucleotide represented by SEQ ID NO 8 under a stringent condition and also encodes a polypeptide that has the activity of hydroxylating the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene and having a amyrin synthase gene.

7. The expression vector described in the aforementioned 6 wherein the polynucleotide is the polynucleotide represented by SEQ ID NO 8.

8. A transformant in which a host is transformed with the expression vector described in the aforementioned 6 or 7.

12. A method for producing a polypeptide that has the activity of hydroxylating the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene which comprises a step of culturing the transformant described in any one of the aforementioned 3 to 5 and thereby producing the polypeptide described in the aforementioned 1.

13. A method for producing a polypeptide that has the activity of hydroxylating the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene and a amyrin synthase by culturing the transformant described in any one of the aforementioned 8 to 10 which comprises

14. A method for producing an oleanane type triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated which comprises a step of allowing the transformant described in any one of the aforementioned 3 to 5 to act upon an oleanane type triterpene.

15. A method for producing an oleanane type triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated effected by culturing the transformant described in any one of the aforementioned 8 to 10.

16. A method for producing an oleanane type triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated effected by culturing the yeast mutant strain described in the aforementioned 11.

By the invention it was able to reveal nucleotide sequence of the gene of an oleanane type triterpene 24 position hydroxylase and an amino acid sequence thereof. Also the use of said gene by means of genetic engineering techniques renders possible large scale production of the enzyme protein as a gene product.

In addition it became possible to effect hydroxylation of the 24 position of a triterpene by the use of the produced enzyme protein or a transformant containing said enzyme protein. Also it became possible to produce a triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated by the direct culturing using a transformant transformed with said gene and a amyrin synthase gene.

As the oleanane type triterpene of the invention amyrin sophoradiol soyasapogenols A and B and the like are known but the oleanane type triterpene of the invention is not limited to the above case.

As the oleanane type triterpene in which the 24 position will be hydroxylated amyrin and sophoradiol can be exemplified but this is not limited to the above case with the proviso that it is a compound in which the 24 position will be hydroxylated by the method of the invention. As the triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated soyasapogenols A and B can be exemplified but not limited to soyasapogenols A and B with the proviso that they are oxidation products by the invention.

According to the invention an oleanane type triterpene in which the 24 position will be hydroxylated can be produced making use of the transcription and translation products of polynucleotide of the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 and equivalent forms thereof. In this connection the equivalent forms mean those sequences which have the same function and hybridize under a stringent condition with a complementary chain of the sequence described in the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1.

Regarding the hybridize under a stringent condition hybridization of a nucleotide can be verified by the use of a method e.g. colony hybridization plaque hybridization Southern blot hybridization or the like in which the hybridization is carried out using as the probe a part or entire portion or a complementary chain thereof of a DNA having the nucleotide sequence represented by cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1. Illustratively a case in which hybridization is carried out at 55 C. in the presence of 0.5 mol l of sodium chloride and then 2 SSC solution composition of 1 SSC solution consists of 150 mM NaCl 15 mM sodium citrate pH 7.0 is used can be exemplified.

The hybridization can be carried out in accordance with the method described in Molecular Cloning A Laboratory Manual edited by T. Maniatis et al Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 1989 or the like. As a DNA which can be hybridized a DNA that shows a homology of at least 80 or more preferably 90 or more more preferably 95 or more with the nucleotide sequence represented by the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 when calculated using BLAST National Center for Biotechnology Information can be illustratively exemplified. In this connection the homology according to the invention means the numerical value when parameters of BLAST are set to Wordsize 3 Matrix BLOSOM 62 Gap Costs Existence 11 Extension 1.

In addition the polynucleotide which hybridizes with a complementary chain of the polynucleotide of the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 under a stringent condition and also encodes a polypeptide that has the activity of hydroxylating the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene illustratively includes a polynucleotide in which one or two or more nucleotides in the polynucleotide sequence of the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 are deleted substituted inserted or added and which encodes a polypeptide that has the activity of hydroxylating the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene. The number of nucleotides to be substituted in the polynucleotide sequence of the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 is not particularly limited with the proviso that it is a number which satisfies the aforementioned homology and encodes a polypeptide that has the activity of hydroxylating the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene.

Mutation on the polynucleotide of cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 includes an artificial mutation in addition to mutations which are generated in the natural world. An example of the means for causing an artificial mutation is a method for obtaining a polynucleotide in which at least one of the deletion substitution insertion and addition is effected on one or two or more nucleotides by means of a genetic engineering technique by introducing a random mutation or site directed mutation using the polynucleotide of cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1. By using the mutant polynucleotide obtained in this manner it becomes possible to obtain a polypeptide having different optimum temperature heat stability optimum pH pH stability substrate specificity and the like properties of the activity of this enzyme.

In addition a polynucleotide which hybridizes with a complementary chain of the polynucleotide of the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 under a stringent condition and also encodes a polypeptide that has the activity of hydroxylating the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene can also be obtained by a method in which a hybridization e.g. colony hybridization plaque hybridization Southern blot hybridization or the like is applied to other microorganisms plants or animals capable of producing an oleanane type triterpene wherein the 24 position is hydroxylated preferably a plant more preferably a leguminous plant most preferably a soybean which can produce an oleanane type triterpene using as the probe a part or entire portion or a complementary chain thereof of a nucleotide having the nucleotide sequence of the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 or by a method in which PCR is carried out using as the probe a part or entire portion or a complementary chain thereof of a nucleotide having the nucleotide sequence of the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 or the like.

In addition the aforementioned polynucleotide can also be obtained by chemical synthesis based on the information of the nucleotide sequence. This method can be carried out by referring to the descriptions in Gene vol. 60 1 pp. 115 127 1987 .

In addition the invention relates to a transformant prepared by transforming a host with a vector which can perform autonomous replication preferably an expression vector for harboring and or expressing polynucleotide of the cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 and equivalents thereof. Said vector may further contain a amyrin synthase gene in addition to the polynucleotide of cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 and equivalents thereof.

As examples of the host a microorganism a plant an animal and the like can be cited though not particularly limited. As the microorganism a yeast and the like can be exemplified and a yeast is preferably used. As the animal a silkworm can be exemplified. As the plant a soybean can be exemplified. It is possible to provide a plant having increased content of an oleanane type triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated by transferring the vector of the invention into the plant.

As an example of the yeast to be transformed there is a lanosterol synthase deficient yeast GIL 77 Kushiro T. et al. 256 238 244 1998 . It becomes possible to culture produce a triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated by integrating a cDNA corresponding to the aforementioned cytochrome P 450 gene CYP93E1 and a pea derived amyrin synthase gene into a yeast expression vector pESC ERA mfd. by Stratagene transforming the lanosterol synthase deficient yeast GIL 77 therewith and effecting co expression of the two genes.

As the expression vector those which can perform autonomous replication in the host cell or can be integrated into chromosome and have a promoter at a position where the polynucleotide of the invention can be transcribed are used.

As the expression vector when the host cell is a microorganism for example pBluescript mfd. by STRATAGENE pUC18 mfd. by Takara Bio pUC118 mfd. by Takara Bio pUC19 mfd. by Takara Bio pUC119 mfd. by Takara Bio and the like can be exemplified.

Regarding the promoter it may be any promoter which can effect the expression in a fungus and the like host cells. For example a trp promoter P a lac promoter P and the like promoters derived from a phage and the like and a Taka amylase gene promoter a TEF 1 gene promoter and the like promoters derived from an strain and the like can be cited.

Regarding the method for transferring a recombinant vector any method for transferring a polynucleotide into the aforementioned host cells can be used and for example a method which uses calcium ion 69 2110 1972 and the like can be cited.

As the expression vector when a yeast strain is the host cell for example pAUR101 mfd. by Takara Bio pAUR112 mfd. by Takara Bio pI RED1 mfd. by TOYOBO and the like can be exemplified.

For example a glycolytic pathway enzyme gene promoter a Gal promoter and the like promoters can be cited.

Regarding the method for transferring a recombinant vector any method for transferring a polynucleotide into a yeast strain can be used and for example the electroporation 194 182 1990 the spheroplast method 84 1929 1978 the lithium acetate method . 153 163 1983 and the like can be cited.

Regarding the medium and culture conditions of host cells it is possible to optionally select them in accordance with the conventionally known methods. When a microorganism is used as the host cell the medium to be used for culturing the obtained transformant may be either a natural medium or a synthetic medium with the proviso that it is a medium which contains a carbon source a nitrogen source inorganic salts and the like that can be assimilated by said microorganism and can carry out culturing of the transformant efficiently.

As the carbon source potato dextrose glucose sucrose soluble starch glycerol dextrin molasses organic acids and the like can be used. As the nitrogen source ammonium sulfate ammonium carbonate ammonium phosphate ammonium acetate and the like inorganic salts or ammonium salts of organic acids other nitrogen compounds peptone yeast extract corn steep liquor casein hydrolysates and meat extract can be used. As the inorganic salts potassium primary phosphate potassium secondary phosphate magnesium phosphate magnesium sulfate sodium chloride ferrous sulfate manganese sulfate copper sulfate calcium carbonate and the like can be used.

When the host cell is a silkworm the polypeptide of the invention can be expressed for example by a conventionally known method which uses a baculovirus expression system 62 1 20 2003 . Also when a plant transformed with the polypeptide of the invention using a plant cell as the host is obtained for example a direct gene transfer which uses a Ti plasmid or a binary plasmid system of an Ri plasmid of or polyethylene glycol or the electroporation is effective 267329 50 2004 .

In addition when a transformant transferred with an expression vector having an inducible promoter is cultured an inducer may be added to the medium as occasion demands. For example isopropyl D thiogalactopyranoside or the like can be added to the medium when the lac promoter is used or indoleacrylic acid or the like when the trp promoter is used.

In this connection regarding the method for expressing the polypeptide of the invention other than its direct expression it can be carried out in accordance with the method described in Molecular Cloning Second Edition or the like.

An oleanane type triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated can be produced using the transformant described in the aforementioned 3 to 5. The transformant is cultured in the medium adding the oleanane type triterpene as a substrate. Thus obtained 24 position hydroxylated compound is extracted with ethyl acetate ether or the like organic solvent and purified using silica gel or ODS.

In addition an oleanane type triterpene in which the 24 position is hydroxylated can also be produced by preparing a cell free extract from the culture medium of the transformant. In that case the collected cells are suspended in a suspending liquid the resulting cells are disrupted using a homogenizer a sonic disintegrator or a French press or the like and then centrifuged to obtain a cell free extract. In order to prevent inactivation of the polypeptide an antioxidant an enzyme stabilizer a polyphenol adsorbing agent a metal ligand and the like can be added to the buffer liquid. It is effective to purify the polypeptide for further increase the specific activity and centrifugation by a centrifuge salting out with ammonium sulfate or the like gel filtration ion exchange chromatography affinity chromatography electrophoresis and the like techniques can be used alone or in combination.

The oleanane type triterpene to be used as the substrate and a coenzyme are added to the thus obtained polypeptide containing buffer and incubated at from 15 to 40 C. preferably at from 20 to 37 C. As the coenzyme NADH or NADPH can be used and an NADPH reconstruction system which uses glucose 6 phosphate and glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase can also be used jointly. In addition it is possible also to carry out the hydroxylation reaction by adding an NADPH P 450 reductase other than the NADPH P 450 reductase produced by the transformant cells.

When the transformants described in the aforementioned 8 to 10 are used an oleanane type triterpene is produced making use of the 2 3 oxidosqualene produced by the transformant cells themselves so that the 24 position hydroxylated oleanane type triterpene can be produced without adding the oleanane type triterpene from the outside moiety. The thus obtained 24 position hydroxylated compound is extracted with ethyl acetate ether or the like organic solvent and then purified using silica gel or ODS.

Seven species of soybean derived EST and cytochrome P 450 clones whose functions are unidentified but complete length nucleotide sequences have been reported GenBank Accession Numbers AF 135485 Y 10491 Y 10982 Y 10983 Y 10493 and AF 022459 and TIGR Accession Number TC 100921 were selected. Among them CYP93E1 GenBank Accession Numbers AF 135485 showed the activity and the polynucleotide of SEQ ID NO 8 which showed high homology therewith is described in the following. A cDNA which corresponds to the CYP93E1 SEQ ID NO 8 was amplified by the RT PCR method from mRNA prepared from soybean sprouts and integrated into a yeast expression vector pESC ERA mfd. by Stratagene and a lanosterol synthase deficient yeast GIL 77 Kushiro T. et al. 256 238 244 1998 was transformed therewith to carry out function analysis. Cell free extracts of the yeast transformants were allowed to react with amyrin and the products were acetylated and analyzed by GCMS. As a result 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was detected.

In the same manner cell free extracts of the yeast transformants were allowed to react with sophoradiol and the products were acetylated and analyzed by GCMS. As a result triacetylsoyasapogenol B was detected.

 Amyrin was added to the culture medium of yeast transformants and allowed to undergo the reaction and then the cells were collected. Fat soluble fractions were extracted and acetylated and then analyzed by GCMS. As a result 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was detected.

The aforementioned cDNA of SEQ ID NO 8 and pea derived amyrin synthase gene were integrated into a yeast expression vector pESC ERA mfd. by Stratagene and the lanosterol synthase deficient yeast GIL 77 was transformed therewith thereby effecting co expression of the two genes. This transformed yeast named GIL77 pESC PSY CYP93E1 has been deposited on Feb. 6 2004 as FERM P 19675 transferred to FERM BP 10201 on Jan. 6 2005 in international Patent Organism Depositary National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology postal code 305 8566 Central 6 1 1 1 Higashi Tsukuba Ibaraki Japan .

The transformed yeast was cultured and the cells were collected. Fat soluble fraction was extracted and acetylated and then analyzed by GCMS. As a result 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was detected.

In the same manner the aforementioned cDNA of SEQ ID NO 8 and an derived mixed triterpene synthase gene were integrated into the yeast expression vector pESC ERA mfd. by Stratagene and the lanosterol synthase deficient yeast GIL 77 was transformed therewith thereby effecting co expression of the two genes.

The transformed yeast was cultured and the cells were collected. Fat soluble fraction was extracted and acetylated and then analyzed by GCMS. As a result 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was detected. Other diacetoxytriterpenes were not detectable.

Based on the above results the hydroxylation activity on the 24 position of sophoradiol and amyrin which is not detected originally was confirmed so that it was able to reveal that the SEQ ID NO 8 is a gene coding for an enzyme which hydroxylates the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene. On the other hand this activity was not detected in the other 6 P 450 genes examined in the same manner.

The following describes the invention further in detail based on examples but the invention is not limited to these examples.

Total RNA was extracted by the phenol chloroform method from soybean early ripening green soybean Atariya Noen young leaves after 14 days of soaking in water. By using this as the template cDNA was prepared using a reverse transcriptase Superscript II mfd. by GIBCO BRL and the primer shown in SEQ ID NO 1.

Using the cDNA prepared in the aforementioned 1 as the template and the oligo DNA fragments which correspond to the N terminus and C terminus of the polypeptide shown in SEQ ID NOs 2 and 3 as the primers PCR 30 cycles Ex Taq DNA polymerase manufactured by Takara Shuzo was carried out at an annealing temperature of 65 C. to obtain a complete length clone of CYP93E1 SEQ ID NO 8 .

The complete length clone obtained in the above 2 was treated with SpeI and ClaI and integrated into the SpeI ClaI site of a yeast expression vector pESC URA mfd. by Stratagene This was named pESC CYP93E. pESC CYP93E was transferred into a yeast strain INVSC 2 mfd. by Invitrogen using Frozen EZ Yeast Transformation II mfd. by Zymo Research .

The transformed yeast was inoculated into 20 ml of SC U medium Methods in yeast Genetics A Laboratory Course Manual Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press 1990 containing 2 raffinose instead of glucose and cultured at 30 C. and at 220 rpm for 18 hours. Hemin 13 g ml in final concentration and galactose 2 in final concentration were added thereto to carry out the culturing for 20 hours under the same conditions. The cells were collected by centrifugation transferred into a 2 ml capacity screw vial and again suspended by adding 100 l of an extraction buffer prepared by adding 10 sucrose 1 mM EDTA and 14 mM 2 mercaptoethanol to 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer of pH 7.5 . Glass beads having a diameter of from 0.4 to 0.6 mm mfd. by Iuchi Seieido were washed with dilute hydrochloric acid and added thereto. By cooling to 4 C. disruption of the cells were carried out using MINI BEADBREADER mfd. by BIOSPEC . This was further mixed with 400 l of the extraction buffer and thoroughly stirred and then centrifuged at 3500 g for 5 minutes while cooling to 4 C. to recover about 400 l of the supernatant as a crude enzyme liquid. To this were added 100 l of a concentrated reaction buffer prepared by adding 10 mM of NADPH 75 mM of glucose 6 phosphate G6P and 2.5 U ml of glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase G6PDH to the extraction buffer and 5 l of 10 mM amyrin methanol solution. This was allowed to undergo the reaction at 30 C. for 6 hours. After adding 10 l of 12 N hydrochloric acid this was concentrated by carrying out extraction of the fat soluble components twice using 500 l of ethyl acetate. Acetylation of the extract was carried out by adding 20 l of pyridine and acetic anhydride thereto and allowing this to stand overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding 200 l of 50 methanol aqueous solution thereto and this was concentrated by carrying out extraction twice using 200 l of hexane 1 . As a control test samples were prepared by the same method on 2 a cases in which a crude enzyme liquid derived from a transformant prepared using pESC URA was used 3 a cases in which amyrin as the substrate was not added 4 a cases in which the reaction was carried out using a crude enzyme liquid heat treated at 100 C. for 5 minutes and 5 a cases in which the same amount of glucose was added instead of galactose for the purpose of inhibiting the GAL 1 promoter of pESC CYP93E1. Each of them was dissolved in 20 l of hexane and 1 l portion thereof was subjected to GC MS analysis a gas chromatographic mass spectrometer GCMS QP 2010 mfd. by Shimadzu Corp. column Rtx 5MS mfd. by RESTEK inner diameter 0.25 mm membrane thickness 0.25 m length 30 m temperature rising program 3 minutes of holding at 230 C. temperature rising at 10 C. minute 8 minutes of holding at 330 C. . Total ion monitoring TIM was carried out and the presence or absence of the product was analyzed by a mass chromatogram of m z 218 base peak of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene . Formation of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was not found by the TIM results are not described . However 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was observed in the mass chromatogram of m z 218 by the condition of 1 . Based on this result it was confirmed that the CYP93E1 translation product has the activity to perform hydroxylation of the 24 position of amyrin.

Next in order to examine its reactivity for sophoradiol the enzyme reaction was carried out in the same manner using sophoradiol 5 l 10 mM as the substrate and GCMS analysis was carried out in the same manner as in the above. The peak of triacetyl soyasapogenol B was found by the mass chromatogram analysis m z 216 base peak of triacetyl soyasapogenol B of the product under the reaction condition of the aforementioned 1 . Based on this result it was revealed that the CYP93E1 translation product has the activity to perform hydroxylation of the 24 position of not only amyrin but also sophoradiol.

The transformed yeast was inoculated into 20 ml of the SC U medium containing 2 raffinose instead of glucose and cultured at 30 C. and at 220 rpm for 18 hours. Hemin 13 g ml in final concentration and galactose 2 in final concentration were added thereto and 10 l of 10 mM amyrin methanol solution was further added thereto as the substrate. In order to supply oxygen the upper part of the Falcon tube was sealed with a cotton plug and this was further cultured for 24 hours aseptically and aerobically. The cells were collected by centrifugation and transferred into a 2 ml capacity screw vial. A 250 l portion of 40 potassium hydroxide aqueous solution and 250 l of methanol were added thereto and the mixture was thoroughly stirred and heat treated at 100 C. for 5 minutes. This was concentrated by carrying out extraction of the fat soluble components twice using 500 l of hexane. Acetylation of the extract was carried out by adding 20 l of pyridine and acetic anhydride thereto and allowing this to stand overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding 200 l of 50 methanol aqueous solution thereto and this was concentrated by carrying out extraction twice using 200 l of hexane 1 . As a control test samples were prepared by the same method on 2 a cases in which a transformant prepared using pESC URA was used 3 a cases in which amyrin as the substrate was not added and 4 a cases in which the same amount of glucose was added instead of galactose for the purpose of inhibiting the GAL 1 promoter of pESC CYP93E1. Each of them was dissolved in 10 l of hexane and a 1 l portion thereof was subjected to GC MS analysis under the same condition as in the 4 the conditions are the same as the test of 4 . The peak of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was observed by the TIM under the condition of 1 and the MS cleavage pattern of the peak coincided with the standard preparation . Based on the results of determination by peak area ratio of TIM it can be considered that several g of 3 24 dihydroxy 12 oleanene is obtained when cultured using 1 liter of the medium under the same conditions of the above case addition of about 2 mg of amyrin .

Using a plasmid integrated with a pea derived amyrin synthase gene PSY AB034802267 3543 3460 2000 as the template and using the oligo DNA fragments shown in SEQ ID NOs 4 and 5 which correspond to the N terminus and C terminus of the polypeptide as the primers PCR 30 cycles Ex Taq DNA polymerase manufactured by Takara Shuzo was carried out at an annealing temperature of 58 C. to obtain a PSY fragment in which SalI and NheI sites were respectively introduced into the N terminus and C terminus. The pESC PSY was prepared by introducing this into SalI and NheI sites of pESC URA and the amyrin synthase activity was confirmed by a conventionally known method 267 3543 3460 2000 .

pESC PSY and pESC CYP93E1 were digested with SalI and ClaI. By ligating the thus obtained fragment containing PSY and the fragment containing CYP93E1 a PSY and CYP93E1 co expressing plasmid pESC PSY CYP93E1 was constructed. A transformant was obtained by transferring this into a yeast strain GIL 77 using Frozen EZ Yeast Transformation II.

The transformed yeast strain was inoculated into a medium prepared by supplementing 20 ml of the SC U medium containing 2 glucose as the carbon source with hemin 13 g ml in final concentration ergosterol 20 g ml in final concentration and Tween 80 5 mg ml in final concentration and cultured at 30 C. and 220 rpm for 1.5 days. The medium was exchanged with a medium prepared by adding hemin 13 g ml in final concentration ergosterol 20 g ml in final concentration and Tween 80 5 mg ml in final concentration to 20 ml of the SC U medium containing 2 galactose as the carbon source and then the culturing was further continued at 30 C. and 220 rpm for 1 day. The cells were transferred into a 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer of pH 7.5 mixed with hemin 13 g ml in final concentration and glucose 3 in final concentration and further incubated at 30 C. and at 220 rpm for 1 day. An acetylated sample for GC MS analysis was prepared in the same manner as the test method in 4 . As a control test samples were prepared by the same method on a transformant prepared using pESC URA and a transformant prepared using pESC PSY and pESC CYP93E1. Each of these samples was dissolved in 1000 l of hexane and a 1 l portion of this was subjected to GC MS analysis conditions are the same as in the test in 4 . As shown in a peak corresponding to 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was observed by TIM only when the yeast strain transformed with pESC PSY CYP93E1 was used. As a result of the determinative analysis by peak area ratio it can be considered that several hundred g of 3 24 dihydroxy 12 oleanene is obtained when cultured using 1 liter of the medium under this condition.

The transformed yeast strain was inoculated into a 500 ml capacity conical flask charged with 250 ml of a medium prepared by adding hemin 13 g ml in final concentration ergosterol 20 g ml in final concentration and Tween 80 5 mg ml in final concentration to 250 ml of the SC U medium containing 2 raffinose as the carbon source. This was prepared for 4 flasks and 1 liter in total volume of the culturing was carried out. After culturing at 30 C. and at 220 rpm for 20 hours this was supplemented with galactose 2 in final concentration and further cultured at 30 C. and at 220 rpm for 20 hours. The entire cells were transferred into 100 ml of a 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer of pH 7.5 mixed with hemin 13 g ml in final concentration and glucose 3 in final concentration and further incubated at 30 C. and at 220 rpm for 1 day.

The cells were collected from the culture mixture obtained in 9 mixed with 50 ml of 40 potassium hydroxide aqueous solution and 50 ml of methanol and heated under reflux for 1 hour. Extraction of the fat soluble fraction was carried out using 50 ml of hexane. The hexane fraction was thoroughly washed 3 times with 50 ml of saturated sodium bicarbonate aqueous solution. The extraction was carried out by repeating this operation 3 times to obtain about 23 mg of the fat soluble fraction.

This was purified by two steps of silica gel flash column chromatography. Firstly the aforementioned fat soluble fraction was dissolved in benzene and purified using a silica gel FC 40 4 g mfd. by Wako Pure Chemical Industries and a hexane ethyl acetate solvent system. Subsequently said fraction was purified using the silica gel FC 40 2 g and a benzene ethyl acetate solvent system to obtain 0.55 mg of 3 24 dihydroxy 12 oleanene.

A plasmid integrated with an derived multifunctional triterpene synthase gene YUP43 41 7705 7710 2000 which provides 9 species of triterpene including amyrin was used as the template and using the oligo DNA fragments shown in SEQ ID NOs 6 and 7 which correspond to the N terminus and C terminus of the polypeptide as the primers PCR annealing temperature 58 C. 30 cycles Ex Taq DNA polymerase manufactured by Takara Shuzo was carried out to obtain a YUP43 fragment in which SalI and NheI sites were respectively introduced into the N terminus and C terminus. The pESC YUP43 was prepared by introducing this into SalI and NheI sites of pESC URA and the multifunctional triterpene synthase activity was confirmed by a conventionally known method 41 7705 7710 2000 .

Plasmids pESC YUP43 and pESC CYP93E1 were digested with SalI and ClaI. By ligating the fragment containing YUP43 and the fragment containing CYP93E1 a YUP43 and CYP93E1 co expressing plasmid pESC YUP43 CYP93E1 was constructed. A transformant was obtained by transferring this into a yeast strain GIL 77 using Frozen EZ Yeast Transformation II.

 13 Co Expression Test of Polypeptides of Transcription and Translation Products of YUP43 and Polynucleotide of SEQ ID NO 8

By the same method of 8 samples were prepared from transformants respectively obtained using pESC URA pESC YUP43 pESC CYP93E1 and pESC YUP43 CYP93E1. Each of them was dissolved in 1000 l of hexane and a 1 l portion thereof was subjected to GC MS analysis conditions are the same as in the test of 4 . As shown in a peak of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was observed by TIM only when the yeast strain transformed with pESC YUP43 CYP93E1 was used. Since the produced amount of amyrin by YUP43 was lower than that by PSY produced amount of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene was decreased in comparison with the pESC PSY CYP93E1 transformant. On the other hand peaks considered to be hydroxylation forms of other triterpenes lupeol butyrospermol tirucalladienol taraxasterol pseudotaraxasterol baureelenol amyrin and multiflorenol were equal to or lower than the detection limit.

While the invention has been describe in detail and with reference to specific embodiments thereof it will be apparent to one skilled in the art that various changes and modifications can be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

This application is based on a Japanese patent application filed on Feb. 25 2004 Japanese Patent Application No. 2004 049123 the entire contents thereof being thereby incorporated by reference.

By the invention it became possible to handle by a genetic engineering technique an enzyme which carries out hydroxylation of the 24 position of an oleanane type triterpene. Accordingly the use of a cell into which said hydroxylase gene was integrated renders possible its use in for example the production of the hydroxylase by a yeast strain application of hydroxylation reaction microbial production of a plant triterpene and the like. In addition by integrating the hydroxylase gene into a plant there becomes a possibility of applying it into the agricultural field such as increase of the production of soyasapogenol or the like triterpene.

 shows amyrin 24 position hydroxylation activity in vitro by the translation product of SEQ ID NO 8. More illustratively it shows a mass chromatogram monitoring m Z 218 which was analyzed by GC MS after acetylation of the product. A to F show the following results. A standard sample of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene. B a product obtained by allowing a crude enzyme liquid prepared from a yeast strain transformed with pESC CYP93E1 to react with amyrin in the coexistence of an NADPH regeneration system. C a product of the reaction of B carried out by removing amyrin from the reaction system. D a product of the reaction of B carried out by using heat denatured crude enzyme liquid. E the yeast strain transformed with pESC CYP93E1 was cultured by adding glucose other conditions are the same as in B. F a crude enzyme liquid prepared from a yeast strain transformed with a void plasmid pESC URA was used other conditions are the same as in B.

 shows sophoradiol 24 position hydroxylation activity in vitro by the translation product of SEQ ID NO 8. More illustratively it shows a mass chromatogram monitoring m Z 216 which was analyzed by GC MS after acetylation of the product. A to F show the following results. A standard sample of triacetyl soyasapogenol B. B a product obtained by allowing a crude enzyme liquid prepared from a yeast strain transformed with pESC CYP93E1 to react with sophoradiol in the coexistence of an NADPH regeneration system. C a product of the reaction of B carried out by removing sophoradiol from the reaction system. D a product of the reaction of B carried out by using heat denatured crude enzyme liquid. E the yeast strain transformed with pESC CYP93E1 was cultured by adding glucose other conditions are the same as in B. F a crude enzyme liquid prepared from a yeast strain transformed with a void plasmid pESC URA was used other conditions are the same as in B.

 shows 24 position hydroxylation activity in vivo product of amyrin by the translation product of SEQ ID NO 8. More illustratively it shows a chromatogram by TIM through GC MS after acetylation of the product. A to E show the following results. A standard sample of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene 20 pmol B a product obtained by adding amyrin to a yeast strain transformed with pESC CYP93E1. C a case in which amyrin was not added other conditions are the same as in B. D the transformed yeast was cultured by adding glucose other conditions are the same as in B. E amyrin was added to a yeast strain transformed with a void plasmid pESC URA other conditions are the same as in B.

 shows amyrin 24 position hydroxylation activity in vivo by the translation product of SEQ ID NO 8. A and B show the following results. A a mass spectrum of the peak at a retention time of 15.35 minutes detected in B of . B a mass spectrum of A of standard sample of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene .

 shows production of 3 24 dihydroxy 12 oleanene by co expression of CYP93E1 and amyrin synthase PSY More illustratively it shows a chromatogram by TIM through GC MS analysis after acetylation of the fat soluble fraction obtained from respective transformed yeast GIL 77 . A to E show the following results. A standard sample of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene 20 pmol B an extract of yeast strain transformed with pESC PSY CYP93E1. C an extract of yeast strain transformed with pESC PSY. D an extract of yeast strain transformed with pESC CYP93E1. E an extract of yeast strain transformed with pESC URA.

 shows production of 3 24 dihydroxy 12 oleanene by co expression of the translation product of SEQ ID NO 8 and a multifunctional triterpene synthase YUP43 More illustratively it shows a chromatogram by TIM through GC MS analysis after acetylation of the fat soluble fraction obtained from respective transformed yeast GIL 77 . A to E show the following results. A standard sample of 3 24 diacetoxy 12 oleanene 20 pmol B an extract of yeast strain transformed with pESC YUP43 CYP93E1. C an extract of yeast strain transformed with pESC YUP43. D an extract of yeast strain transformed with pESC CYP93E1. E an extract of yeast strain transformed with pESC Ura.

