---

title: Selectable state machine user interface system
abstract: A system that concurrently provides multiple user interface (UI) mechanisms that facilitate control of an application state machine (e.g., unified message system). More particularly, the invention can create two relatively distinct user experiences, one via dual tone multi-frequency (DTMF) navigation and another through speech recognition navigation of a unified message system. In accordance therewith, one single underlying state machine can be used. Navigation and flow control (e.g., state transitions) in the state machine can be leveraged by multiple UI mechanisms that actively co-exist. The invention introduces speech recognition features together with other input mechanisms to drive the UI of an application state machine (e.g., unified messaging system). The speech recognition UI can be designed to provide a natural navigation through the application independent of a DTMF UI.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07912186&OS=07912186&RS=07912186
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07912186
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050322
---
This application claims the benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Provisional Patent application Ser. No. 60 620 826 entitled Unified Messaging System and filed on Oct. 20 2004 the entirety of which is incorporated by reference herein.

This invention is related to messaging systems and more particularly to a selectable user interface system that can employ variable interactive mechanisms to navigate through and control an underlying application state machine.

A state machine is a computing device designed with the operational states required to perform a particular task or to solve a specific problem. There are countless special purpose devices built as state machines. A voicemail system is an example of such an application state machine.

Today many state machines and particularly voicemail systems employ a dual tone multi frequency DTMF navigational technique that enables a user to control the state machine. In other words a user can navigate through voicemail menus and options by pressing appropriate keys on a telephone keypad. Many of these DTMF navigational techniques require a user to memorize option choices that correspond to the numbers on a keypad.

Other DTMF systems employ a navigational technique that allows a user to spell words via a telephone keypad. This is often cumbersome and very time consuming. Other variations of DTMF voicemail systems employ voice media processing components that present to a user a set of available options. For example a user is frequently addressed with a specific prompt such as please enter your password or press one to review all new messages. While these audible prompts are sometimes useful they tend to be time consuming and nonetheless often still require the user to employ DTMF techniques via a keypad.

Recent efforts have been directed to utilizing speech recognition techniques to enable a user to navigate through state machine menus. These efforts have been very limited in that they only recognize preprogrammed menu selections and or data. For example a system can be programmed to recognize the names of individuals employed by a company.

Despite which technique is provided state machines today are limited to employing a single navigational technique at any given time. In other words in accordance with conventional systems a user initially chooses to navigate through a state machine via DTMF or voice command techniques. However with respect to these systems both options are usually not simultaneously or concurrently available and the user does not have the option of toggling between the navigational systems during any one session.

Although attempts have been made to employ either DTMF or voice recognition techniques to effect navigation through a state machine e.g. a voicemail system a substantial need exists for a system that simultaneously or concurrently provides the functionality of multiple disparate navigational techniques thereby permitting a user to select a preferred user interface technique at any time throughout a session. Additionally a need exists for a system and or methodology that employs voice recognition mechanisms to effect versatility in connection with state machine navigation.

The following presents a simplified summary of the invention in order to provide a basic understanding of some aspects of the invention. This summary is not an extensive overview of the invention. It is not intended to identify key critical elements of the invention or to delineate the scope of the invention. Its sole purpose is to present some concepts of the invention in a simplified form as a prelude to the more detailed description that is presented later.

The subject invention in one aspect thereof allows a user to connect to a server e.g. messaging server via a telephonic communication component thereby accessing the rich information therein. The invention comprises a system and or methodology that unifies a telephonic communication component and or system with an application state machine e.g. messaging server component and or system . More particularly in one aspect the invention creates two relatively distinct user experiences one through the use of dual tone multi frequency DTMF navigation and one through speech recognition navigation. In accordance thereto one single underlying state machine can be used.

Navigation and flow control e.g. state transitions in the state machine can be leveraged by multiple user interface UI mechanisms that co exist actively. The invention introduces speech recognition features together with other input mechanisms to drive the user interface of an application state machine e.g. a unified messaging system UM . In accordance with an aspect of the invention the speech recognition UI is designed to provide a natural navigation through the application independent of a DTMF user interface. The user can navigate through the speech menu without having to enter any DTMF data.

In accordance with the subject invention both the DTMF based menu infrastructure and the speech recognition menu structure can be active and available to the user at any time. For example at any time during the experience the user can switch from speech mode to DTMF driven mode. Because the switch does not need to be explicit the user can issue either a DTMF or a speech command at any time.

In another aspect the prompts that will be played for the user upon entering any part of the application can be based on the UI mechanism that the user used to enter the state. For example the speech menu will be played if speech commands brought the user to the state. On the other hand the DTMF menu will be played if a DTMF command brought the user to the state.

In yet another aspect from either the speech or DTMF UI the user can at any time say help to review available speech commands or press 0 to review available DTMF commands. In accordance with the co existence of the UI mechanisms both sets of commands are available at all times. The default UI that is presented to the user on first entry to the UM system can be set as a personal option. Rule based logic and or artificial intelligence reasoning mechanisms can be employed to determine the default UI.

The underlying application state machine is leveraged for the multiple co existent UI models. Specific to aspects of the speech UI are additional design paradigms selected to exploit some unique features of speech recognition. For example the speech UI can have distinct prompts and menus for handling user input input validation and error handling for low confidence recognition results.

In still other aspects a set of anytime shortcuts can be available at all times to jump to the main functionality of the underlying state machine e.g. unified messaging application . In the unified messaging application example these main functionality locations can be voicemail calendar call someone email and personal options.

Each speech menu can also have menu commands that are specific to the menu context. For example with access to an application programming interface the invention can add functionality to enable telephonic generation and retrieval of email communications. The invention can further facilitate accepting or canceling calendar items e.g. meeting requests and appointments via a telephonic communications device.

To the accomplishment of the foregoing and related ends certain illustrative aspects of the invention are described herein in connection with the following description and the annexed drawings. These aspects are indicative however of but a few of the various ways in which the principles of the invention can be employed and the subject invention is intended to include all such aspects and their equivalents. Other advantages and novel features of the invention will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the drawings.

The subject invention is now described with reference to the drawings wherein like reference numerals are used to refer to like elements throughout. In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the subject invention. It may be evident however that the subject invention can be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to facilitate describing the subject invention.

As used in this application the terms component and system are intended to refer to a computer related entity either hardware a combination of hardware and software software or software in execution. For example a component can be but is not limited to being a process running on a processor a processor an object an executable a thread of execution a program and or a computer. By way of illustration both an application running on a server and the server can be a component. One or more components can reside within a process and or thread of execution and a component can be localized on one computer and or distributed between two or more computers.

As used herein the term to infer or inference refer generally to the process of reasoning about or inferring states of the system environment and or user from a set of observations as captured via events and or data. Inference can be employed to identify a specific context or action or can generate a probability distribution over states for example. The inference can be probabilistic that is the computation of a probability distribution over states of interest based on a consideration of data and events. Inference can also refer to techniques employed for composing higher level events from a set of events and or data. Such inference results in the construction of new events or actions from a set of observed events and or stored event data whether or not the events are correlated in close temporal proximity and whether the events and data come from one or several event and data sources.

Referring now to there is illustrated a high level architectural diagram of a system in accordance with an aspect of the subject invention. Generally the system can include a user interface UI selection component a UI store and a state machine component . It will be understood and appreciated that a novel aspect of the invention is to decouple the UI mechanisms from the state machine . The invention can employ multiple UI mechanisms to effect navigation within an application state machine. Further a novel aspect of the invention can concurrently employ multiple UI interfaces e.g. dual tone multi frequency DTMF speech recognition .

In other words in accordance with novel aspects of the invention multiple UI mechanisms can be active at any time allowing a user to freely switch between UI mechanisms. In the example that follows this invention employs a novel design that allows for the co existence of two or more UI mechanisms e.g. DTMF and speech recognition that enable telephone access to a user inbox. Furthermore the two or more UI mechanisms can simultaneously leverage the underlying application state machine.

The exemplary aspects that follow are directed to the use of the UI selection component and the UI store in connection with a voicemail application e.g. state machine . However it is to be appreciated that the state machine component can be any application state machine. Accordingly the UI selection component can effect utilization of any available UI mechanisms. By way of example in operation a user can employ the UI selection component to select a DTMF navigational technique to control the operation of an underlying state machine e.g. voicemail system . As well the UI selection component can be employed to facilitate a speech recognition navigational technique. It is to be understood that the UI selection component can be continuously available thereby providing a user the ability to toggle between UI navigational techniques at any time during a session.

While the exemplary aspects described herein are directed to systems that employ a DTMF and or voice recognition navigational technique it is to be understood that any navigational technique can be employed without departing from the spirit and or scope of the functionality of the invention. For example other aspects can employ a pointing device to effect navigation with reference to a state machine.

Turning now to there is illustrated a more detailed architectural diagram of an aspect of the invention. As described supra in order to create two distinct user experiences one single underlying state machine component can be used in connection with multiple UI mechanisms. In accordance therewith flow control e.g. state transitions in the state machine can be leveraged by both UI mechanisms.

As shown in the UI store can include 1 to N UI components where N is an integer. It will be appreciated that 1 to N UI components can be referred to individually or collectively as UI components . A more specific example of the UI store is illustrated in .

Referring to the exemplary aspect of as illustrated the UI store can include UI components including but not limited to a DTMF UI component and a speech UI component. Additionally the state machine component can include a unified messaging system . The unified messaging system can unite a telephonic system with an electronic messaging and or organization system. An exemplary unified messaging system will be discussed in detail infra.

As described supra the invention introduces speech recognition features together with DTMF features to drive the UI of unified messaging system . In accordance with an aspect the speech recognition UI can be designed to provide a natural navigation through the application e.g. state machine independent of the DTMF UI . Because the invention decouples these UI mechanisms the user will be able to drive through the speech menu without having to enter any DTMF input s .

It is a novel feature of the invention to enable both the DTMF based menu infrastructure and the speech recognition menu structure to be active and available to the user at any time. At any time during a session or experience the user can independently switch from speech mode to DTMF driven mode. The switch need not be explicit the user need only issue either a DTMF signal or a speech command to automatically effect the transition.

Continuing with the voicemail system example the prompts that will be played for the user on entering any part of the application will be based on the UI mechanism the user employed to enter the state. If speech commands were employed to bring the user to a state the speech menu will be played. On the other hand if a DTMF command brought the user to the state the DTMF menu will be played. Additionally from either the speech or DTMF UI the user can employ help to determine the commands. For example at any time the user can say help to review available speech commands or press to review available DTMF commands. Both sets of commands are available at all times.

A default UI that is presented to the user on first entry to the unified messaging system can be set as a personal option. As well it will be appreciated that rule based logic and or artificial intelligence AI techniques can be employed to automate the selection process. These rule based logic and AI based reasoning techniques will be discussed in greater detail infra.

Specific to the speech UI are additional design paradigms selected to exploit some novel features of speech recognition. The speech UI can have distinct prompts and menus for handling user input input validation and error handling for low confidence recognition results. Further the DTMF prompts will not be reused or converted to press or say . The speech prompts and menus can go through a full usability pass including user education review. Menus can be generated to sound natural for the user. For example a menu can be generated to say Would you like to make a call or access your mailbox rather than Say make a call to call someone or access mailbox to access your mailbox .

A set of anytime shortcuts can be available at all times to jump to the main functionality of the unified messaging application . As will be discussed in detail infra the main functionality can include voicemail calendar call someone email and personal options. Each speech menu can also have menu commands that are specific to the menu context.

In an alternative aspect the invention can limit access to features of the unified messaging application . In other words if it makes the application flow more natural some more obscure or less important features may only be provided through DTMF mode. These features can be preprogrammed and or defined by a user as desired. As will be better understood with reference to within the speech menus menu flexibility can be increased since there is no concern around reusing DTMF digits. For example in the voicemail email and calendar playback menus there does not need to be a distinction between the during playback and the after message menu.

It will be appreciated that in connection with using speech commands the DTMF paths of typing an extension and spelling out a name collapse to a single item with Find Person Name . Furthermore the infrastructure around contact navigation can also collapse into Find Person Name . Occasional word combinations such as I ll be 15 minutes late combine what was previously two entries under DTMF mode e.g. an entry for late and then a separate entry for the time. 

An overview of the speech recognition menu structure is described with reference to . These figures display both the DTMF menu infrastructure and the speech user interface overlay. The speech diagrams are intended to show the main grammar elements of an exemplary UI and the overall flow rather than every specific prompt and error handling condition. The flow diagrams included are not intended to limit the scope and or novel functionality of the invention in any way.

The aforementioned novel aspects of the invention can employ rule based logic and or AI reasoning technology to effect predict and or infer an action. More particularly it will be appreciated that the subject invention e.g. in connection with state analysis UI selection voice recognition can employ various rule based and or AI based schemes for carrying out various aspects thereof.

Continuing with the above described scenarios and with reference to a block schematic view of an alternative UI selection component is shown. As illustrated UI selection component can include a rule based logic engine . As will later be described with reference to an optional AI component not shown can be used together with or in place of the rule based logic engine to automatically infer an action or set of actions to be employed in connection with the functionality of the UI selection component described supra.

In the exemplary aspect of the rule based logic engine can be programmed or configured in accordance with a predefined preference e.g. a rule . For example a rule e.g. logic can be constructed to automatically select a specific UI based upon defined criteria. Accordingly the system can automatically select and employ a specific UI. More particularly a rule can be established to take into consideration the origination location e.g. internal external Internet . . . originator target location etc. to automatically select and employ a UI.

A schematic diagram of another alternative aspect of the subject invention is illustrated in . The UI selection component of this alternative aspect illustrated in employs an AI component that can automatically infer and or predict an action. This alternative aspect can optionally include an inference module not shown that facilitates automatic selection of the UI selection component .

In accordance with this aspect the optional AI component can facilitate automatically performing various aspects e.g. state analysis UI selection and voice recognition of the subject invention as described herein. The AI component can optionally include an inference component not shown that can further enhance automated aspects of the AI component utilizing in part inference based schemes to facilitate inferring intended actions to be performed at a given time and or state. The AI based aspects of the invention can be effected via any suitable machine learning based technique and or statistical based techniques and or probabilistic based techniques.

In the alternate aspect as further illustrated by the subject invention e.g. in connection with state analysis UI selection and voice recognition can optionally employ various AI based schemes for automatically carrying out various aspects thereof. Specifically the AI component can optionally be provided to implement aspects of the subject invention based upon AI processes e.g. confidence inference . . . . For example a process for initiating a UI based upon user preferences or sender identification can be facilitated via an automatic classifier system and process. Further the optional AI component can be employed to facilitate an automated process of selecting a UI based upon a predicted and or inferred preference.

A classifier is a function that maps an input attribute vector x x x x x xn to a confidence that the input belongs to a class that is f x confidence class . Such classification can employ a probabilistic and or statistical based analysis e.g. factoring into the analysis utilities and costs to prognose or infer an action that a user desires to be automatically performed.

A support vector machine SVM is an example of a classifier that can be employed. The SVM operates by finding a hypersurface in the space of possible inputs which hypersurface attempts to split the triggering criteria from the non triggering events. Intuitively this makes the classification correct for testing data that is near but not identical to training data. Other directed and undirected model classification approaches include e.g. na ve Bayes Bayesian networks decision trees and probabilistic classification models providing different patterns of independence can be employed. Classification as used herein also is inclusive of statistical regression that is utilized to develop models of priority.

As will be readily appreciated from the subject specification the subject invention can employ classifiers that are explicitly trained e.g. via a generic training data as well as implicitly trained e.g. via observing user behavior receiving extrinsic information . For example SVM s can be configured via a learning or training phase within a classifier constructor and feature selection module. In other words the use of expert systems fuzzy logic support vector machines greedy search algorithms rule based systems Bayesian models e.g. Bayesian networks neural networks other non linear training techniques data fusion utility based analytical systems systems employing Bayesian models etc. are contemplated and are intended to fall within the scope of the hereto appended claims.

Referring now to there is illustrated a high level architectural diagram of a system in accordance with an aspect of the subject invention. Generally the system can include a unified messaging UM system component a telephonic communication component and a computer application state machine and or server component . As described supra the UI selection component and subsequent functionality of the subject invention can be employed in connection with the unified messaging system . More particularly as illustrated in the subject invention can be employed to enable a UI to be selected thus effecting telephonic access to rich data maintained within a server component. This telephonic access can be effected via a unified messaging system .

The telephonic communication component can include any device capable of communicating voice and or audible sounds and signals e.g. DTMF . By way of example the telephonic communication component can include a traditional wired telephone as well as wireless e.g. cellular telephones. Further the telephonic communication component can be effected via a portable wireless device and or computer that employs voice over Internet protocol VOIP or fax over Internet protocol FOIP .

The server component can be employed to host any communication and or organizational application. For example the server component can host communication applications including but not limited to voicemail email text messaging applications or the like in connection with aspects of the subject invention.

In one aspect the UM system can unite the telephonic communications system with the server component e.g. mailbox server . Accordingly the telephonic communications system can access the rich information maintained in the server component thereby unifying the systems. Although illustrates a single telephonic communications system and a single server component it is to be understood and appreciated that the invention is extensible thereby being capable of uniting multiple telephonic and or server systems.

Referring now to there is illustrated an exemplary system architecture in accordance with an aspect of the invention. The system generally includes the UM system telephonic communications system and server component . In one aspect as illustrated the telephonic communication component the server component and a plurality of clients can be connected to the UM system via a wired local area network LAN connection e.g. Ethernet . Although three specific clients e.g. smart phone desktop laptop are shown it is to be appreciated that any number of clients e.g. email clients can be employed without departing from the spirit and or scope of the subject invention. It will be understood that in alternate aspects connections illustrated in can be wired wireless or a combination thereof.

Furthermore it is to be appreciated that the clients can employ disparate communication techniques in order to communicate with the server component . For example a smart phone pocket personal computer PC or other handheld device can employ specialized communication software to synchronize to the mailbox server or the active directory server . In another example a desktop e.g. client can employ a wired e.g. Ethernet connection thereby gaining access to the server component . Yet another exemplary client of the three clients e.g. laptop can employ a wireless Internet connection to access the server component .

Turning now to the UM system component a call control component text to speech TTS engine speech recognition engine voice media processing component fax media processing component and UM application component can be provided. Each of these components can be better understood with reference to the exemplary scenarios infra.

The telephonic communications component can include a public telephone connected via a public switched telephone network PSTN a private e.g. in house company phone connected via a private branch exchange PBX or private telephone switchboard and computer system that employs VOIP or FOIP via gateway . It will be appreciated that these components are exemplary and are not intended to be an exhaustive list of the telephonic communications component . In other words telephonic communications component can include any mechanism capable of generating and or transmitting audible e.g. voice fax signals.

Additionally UM system can include a UI selection component to effect selection of an appropriate UI as described supra. Although not illustrated in it is to be understood that the UI selection component can communicate with a UI store not shown in order to effect the desired and or selected UI. It will further be appreciated that the UI store not shown can be co located or located remotely from the UI selection component . For example the UI store not shown can be located within server component .

In order to provide context to the invention the following exemplary scenarios are provided. It is to be appreciated that the following scenarios are included merely to provide context to the invention. It will also be appreciated that additional scenarios exist which are not specifically disclosed herein. To this end the scenarios infra are not intended to limit the scope and or functionality of the subject invention.

A first exemplary scenario is directed to a discussion of the email integration component . More particularly this scenario is directed to integration of an out of office OOF voicemail greeting and email. With reference again to conventionally the OOF status can be separately set on both a user specific email account e.g. via client or voicemail account e.g. via telephone . As will be appreciated an OOF email auto reply generated via the server component as well as the voicemail extended absence e.g. OOF greeting often contain similar information. The subject invention can facilitate setting both the email and the voicemail OOF status from a single location in a single operation.

With continued reference to when a user sets the OOF status from the email application e.g. client the UM system can integrate e.g. synchronize the OOF message into the telephonic communications component . Accordingly calls to the user via the telephonic communications system will include an audible version of the OOF extended absence greeting. Through the use of text to speech conversion techniques of the TTS engine this greeting can audibly render the text contained in the email OOF auto reply.

Similarly in the event that a user sets the OOF from the telephonic communications component e.g. telephone through voice recognition techniques of the speech recognition engine the unified messaging system can automatically set an email OOF message in the mailbox server . Thereafter a sender of an email to the user will receive a text version of the OOF auto reply that was originated via telephonic communication mechanisms.

A second scenario is directed to the calendar integration component and particularly to calendar or planner access and management. Today users have limited access to their calendar from telephonic systems e.g. and can only read the information corresponding to appointments which is maintained within server component . In accordance with an aspect of the subject invention users can manage appointments and initiate communications related to appointments via the telephonic communications component e.g. telephone . It will be appreciated that full planner functionality can be facilitated via speech recognition component of the UM system . For example via the telephonic communications device a user can accept decline modify cancel and communicate with respect to appointments contained within the server component .

In one aspect a telephonic session with the UM system can be automatically transferred to a telephone of a meeting location. In other words via the telephonic communications component a user can connect to the UM system whereby based upon a calendar e.g. appointment entry in the server component a determination can be made with respect to an appropriate transfer target location for the call. Finally by contacting the UM system via any telephonic communications device a user can initiate a targeted or broadcast electronic message e.g. email to the meeting participants. For example a user can inform meeting participants of a delayed arrival to a meeting.

Yet another aspect is directed to remote access of contact list entries via the contact list integration component . In connection with systems today users cannot telephonically access their personal contact list which is frequently stored on the email system e.g. server . In accordance with an aspect of the invention from the telephonic communications device e.g. telephone a user can search for contacts in the contact list maintained within the server . If desired the user can immediately connect to or leave a message e.g. voice text email for the contact. If the contact is an external contact with only an email address this invention can allow a user to communicate an audible message by creating an email with a sound file attachment e.g. .wav thereby forwarding the communication to the intended target.

Turning now to a discussion of the security component functionality of the UM application component the subject invention can be employed to reset a personal identification number PIN via an email or other application. By way of example when users forget their telephone voicemail PIN e.g. password they frequently have to contact an information technology IT helpdesk or system administrator to reset it. In accordance with the UM system this invention can allow a user to log into their email on the server component using domain credentials and reset change their telephone voicemail PIN e.g. password .

Yet another scenario involving the security component is directed to digital rights management for voicemail. When leaving a voicemail today on the telephone senders do not have any way to restrict the access to and or management of the message. With this invention voice messages can be sent with restricted access. For instance a voicemail can be sent whereby a recipient can listen to the voicemail but can be restricted from forwarding or saving the message.

Referring again to the email integration component conventionally in situations where listening to a sound file is not appropriate e.g. in a meeting users are unable find out the contents of their voicemail. The UM system e.g. email integration component of the subject invention provides for text preview of voicemails and vice versa . In accordance with the UM system via an email client users can textually access voicemails on their computer laptop or other suitable device e.g. smart phone . Through voice recognition techniques e.g. speech recognition engine the subject invention can convert the voicemail thereby transcribing it into text. Therefore users can review the content of the voice message without playing the sound file. Similarly the TTS engine can be employed to convert and deliver email communications via the telephonic communications device .

Additionally the invention can facilitate converting electronic message attachments e.g. word processing documents to audible files e.g. voice . This can be accomplished via the TTS component . In accordance therewith in addition to rendering the audible content of an electronic communication the subject invention can render an audible file that contains the content of a textual attachment. It will be understood that the TTS conversion techniques and navigational concepts described herein can be applied to file system directories and the like. In other words the speech recognition engine can be employed to effect navigation within a file system directory. Accordingly the TTS engine can be employed to convert a target document to speech thus rendering the audible e.g. voice file to a user via the telephonic communications component .

Another aspect is directed to employing the email integration component to facilitate analyzing the content of an email communications message. For example when email messages are audibly rendered to a user via the telephonic communications device e.g. telephone often the messages can be very long and difficult to follow. A novel feature of an aspect of this invention can employ logic and or reasoning techniques to identify the most important messages and or sentences e.g. content included in a communication. These logic and or reasoning mechanisms can employ rule based and or artificial intelligence AI mechanisms to effect filtering and or sorting of the content. Once identified a streamlined or condensed version of the content can be audibly rendered to a user.

As previously described the UM system can limit the audible playback of email messages to include only the most important messages and or sentences included therein. It will be appreciated that because the content can be filtered and or sorted in accordance with a desired algorithm e.g. rule based AI the quantity and length of the message s that are read to the user can be decreased. Likewise important voicemail messages can be handled e.g. filtered sorted in the same manner. Of course when people receive many email messages over the telephone it can be difficult to navigate to the particular messages that are important to the user. With this invention important voicemails can be identified by the UM system and read to the user first. As well voice messages can be filtered whereby only portions of the voicemails are read to the user.

Another novel feature of the subject invention is directed to facsimile transmissions. By way of example in some organizations all inbound facsimiles are directed to one mailbox where a router looks at the facsimile and directs it via electronic means to the appropriate person in the organization. If the facsimile message contains sensitive information the person who is redirecting the facsimile would have access to information that was intended to be confidential. In accordance with an aspect of this invention the UM system can employ the fax media processing component to separate the cover page from the remaining pages of a facsimile transmission. Therefore the router who is redirecting the message can only have access to the cover page of the facsimile and not the confidential contents.

In another scenario when people call a user and are transferred to the voicemail system but do not leave a message the callee does not always know that someone has called. In accordance with an aspect of this invention the UM system can generate and forward an email message to the callee thereby notifying that someone has called but did not leave a voicemail message.

Still another novel aspect of the invention is directed to policy and compliance integration with an email system. Conventionally voice messages are stored on a server e.g. server component and are retained and or archived according to an arbitrary or preprogrammed policy. For example one such policy can delete messages after a specific number of days e.g. 21 . With this invention e.g. integration with the email system a user can control which messages are deleted or archived from the telephonic communications component . As well logic and or reasoning mechanisms can be applied to automatically manage retention and or deletion of messages.

Yet another aspect of the invention is directed to a system and or methodology to permit a user to select a keystroke profile scheme. It will be appreciated that different voicemail systems can have different keys to navigate and control the telephone user interface. If users change from one system to another they often have to learn the new keys to use the new system. With this invention button profiles can be employed for the most commonly used systems. Accordingly a user can choose a predetermined profile that is familiar to that particular user. As well buttons can be programmed as desired by a specific user. In this manner the user does not necessarily have to learn a new keystroke profile scheme to access a new system.

Another novel aspect of the security component is directed to employing voice recognition techniques to effect voicemail authentication. Today when users access their mailbox from the telephone they typically key in a PIN as their password. In many cases this is not very secure and is inconvenient to the user e.g. accessing while driving a car . With this invention users can audibly speak a phrase or desired PIN to gain access to their mailbox. This can be more convenient and also more secure as the voice phrase must match a previously recorded phrase by the user. As well the system can be programmed to learn qualities e.g. voice tonal qualities specific to a user.

Yet another exemplary aspect is directed to end user configuration of menus and prompts. When end users access their mailbox via the telephone they do not have the capability to change the buttons or the information that is played back to them during the greeting. With this invention users can specify a location of their greeting therefore depending on the user role a more detailed greeting that contains additional information may be used. For example an IT administrator might choose to put the number of critical escalation cases in their main mailbox greeting. In alternate aspects it is to be appreciated that prompts e.g. audio can be customized on a per user basis. As well the ordering of the state machine can user customizable.

In summary aspects of the subject invention are directed toward at least the following novel components employed in connection with the UM system .

OOF Voicemail Greeting Integration with Email Application The aspect that the email and voicemail systems OOF status can be content matched thereby enabling a user to set the OOF status from one place. For example the auto reply email body can be read to the user as the telephone greeting using TTS mechanisms.

Calendar Access Capability to act on and interact with calendar appointments from the telephone in a novel manner. For example a user can accept decline cancel transfer to the phone of the meeting location and initiate an email message to the meeting participants.

Contact List Access Capability to access personal contact list rather than just the company directory. Ability to send via the telephone an email and sound file attachment to an email account.

PIN Reset Allowing the user to reset a password e.g. voicemail password via an email client. It will be understood that the operating system security credentials can maintain security.

Digital Rights Management for Voicemail Digital rights for voicemails are a new and novel concept. In other words the invention can be employed to control and or restrict access to voicemail content. For instance a recipient can listen to a voicemail but can be restricted from forwarding or saving the message.

Text Preview of Voicemails Using speech to text conversion techniques the subject invention can convert recorded voicemails into a textual message. The message can then be sent to the recipient via an email client application. As well the system contemplates text to speech conversion for text messages. Moreover the system contemplates generating and attaching a sound file e.g. .wav format of a voice message to an email. Thus the email and attachment can be forwarded to the recipient.

Secure Facsimile Handling The subject invention can extract the cover page e.g. first page from a received facsimile transmission thereby retaining confidentiality of remaining pages of the transmission.

Most Importance Sentences Based upon predefined logic and or reasoning techniques the invention can determine and rank sentences of a communication e.g. email and or voicemail in terms of importance. For example ranking can occur with regard to a given an email thread and key words contained therein. It will be appreciated that the ranking of sentences and or keywords can generally provide a summary of the entire email without having to review it completely. Additionally aspects are directed to using this technology for reading textual emails via the telephone which is also a novel concept of the invention.

Important Messages The fact that users can optionally apply filtering criteria e.g. rule based AI is particularly novel with respect to email messages. The subject invention can analyze email threads and rank them accordingly. By way of example the system can determine the sender of a message employ a policy logic and or reasoning mechanism thereby ranking and or categorizing the importance of the messages. In one aspect the system can use this technology to determine an order with respect to reading the messages to the user over the telephone. As well this technology can be employed to filter emails prior to presenting them to a user via a telephone.

Missed Call Notification This component can be integrated into the unified messaging system thereby providing third party call control by monitoring traffic. In one aspect the system can monitor and advise a client of received calls.

Policy and Compliance Integration with Email System novel rule based and or AI policies can be applied to voicemails and or emails thereby effecting management and retention of the content.

Button Profiles The subject invention provides for functionality that integrates novel button profile definition mechanisms.

Spoken Password Voicemail Authentication The invention can employ a secure spoken password to access a voicemail and or email mailbox through a telephone. This audible authentication is a novel use of the authentication technology.

End User Configuration of Menus and Prompts The subject invention provides for the ability to customize end user menus and prompts.

At an audible OOF message is recorded. The system can identify corresponding email account s at . Once identified conversion can begin. At the audible OOF message can be converted to a text OOF message. Accordingly at the text OOF message can be applied to the identified email account s . Thus although different format e.g. voicemail vs. email the content of the OOF can be replicated to the disparate system. Although the methodology of illustrates a process that can convert a voicemail OOF into an email OOF it is to be understood that an alternate novel aspect of the subject invention can be employed to convert an email OOF into a voicemail system.

As described supra it is to be appreciated that the aforementioned novel aspects of the invention can employ rule based logic and or AI reasoning technology to effect predict and or infer an action. More particularly it will be appreciated that the subject invention e.g. in connection with content analysis content retention policy synchronization voice recognition can employ various rule based and or AI based schemes for carrying out various aspects thereof.

Continuing with the above described scenarios and with reference to a block schematic view of an alternative UM application component is shown. As illustrated UM application component can include a rule based logic engine . As will later be described with reference to an optional AI component not shown can be used together with or in place of the rule based logic engine to automatically infer an action or set of actions to be employed in connection with the functionality of the UM application component and UM system described supra.

In the exemplary aspect of the rule based logic engine can be programmed or configured in accordance with a predefined preference e.g. rule . For example a rule e.g. logic can be constructed to automatically prioritize emails based upon a defined hierarchy. In accordance therewith the emails can be converted and read to a user in a prioritized order. More particularly a rule can be established to take into consideration the subject sender identification recipient identification etc. to prioritize and process emails. In another aspect a rule can be established to predetermine or define a policy whereby emails and or voicemails can be managed e.g. retained forwarded deleted in accordance with the policy.

A schematic diagram of another alternative aspect of the subject invention is illustrated in . The UM application component of this alternative aspect illustrated in employs an optional AI component that can automatically infer and or predict an action. This alternative aspect can optionally include an inference module not shown that facilitates automatic control and or operation of the UM application component .

In accordance with this aspect the optional AI component can facilitate automatically performing various aspects e.g. analysis and prioritization of content content retention policy synchronization voice recognition of the subject invention as described herein. The AI component can optionally include an inference component not shown that can further enhance automated aspects of the AI component utilizing in part inference based schemes to facilitate inferring intended actions to be performed at a given time and or state. The AI based aspects of the invention can be effected via any suitable machine learning based technique and or statistical based techniques and or probabilistic based techniques.

In the alternate aspect as further illustrated by the subject invention e.g. in connection with content analysis content retention policy synchronization voice recognition can optionally employ various artificial intelligence based schemes for automatically carrying out various aspects thereof. Specifically the AI component can optionally be provided to implement aspects of the subject invention based upon AI processes e.g. confidence inference . For example a process for determining the prioritization of content in an email based upon user preferences or sender identification can be facilitated via an automatic classifier system and process. Further the optional AI component can be employed to facilitate an automated process of rendering prioritized content to a user based upon a predicted and or inferred preference.

A classifier is a function that maps an input attribute vector x x x x x xn to a confidence that the input belongs to a class that is f x confidence class . Such classification can employ a probabilistic and or statistical based analysis e.g. factoring into the analysis utilities and costs to prognose or infer an action that a user desires to be automatically performed.

A support vector machine SVM is an example of a classifier that can be employed. The SVM operates by finding a hypersurface in the space of possible inputs which hypersurface attempts to split the triggering criteria from the non triggering events. Intuitively this makes the classification correct for testing data that is near but not identical to training data. Other directed and undirected model classification approaches include e.g. naive Bayes Bayesian networks decision trees and probabilistic classification models providing different patterns of independence can be employed. Classification as used herein also is inclusive of statistical regression that is utilized to develop models of priority.

As will be readily appreciated from the subject specification the subject invention can employ classifiers that are explicitly trained e.g. via a generic training data as well as implicitly trained e.g. via observing user behavior receiving extrinsic information . For example SVM s can be configured via a learning or training phase within a classifier constructor and feature selection module. In other words the use of expert systems fuzzy logic support vector machines greedy search algorithms rule based systems Bayesian models e.g. Bayesian networks neural networks other non linear training techniques data fusion utility based analytical systems systems employing Bayesian models etc. are contemplated and are intended to fall within the scope of the hereto appended claims.

Illustrated in are flow diagrams of an exemplary user interface UI of a UM system in accordance with an aspect of the invention. As described supra this UM system can facilitate management of voicemail email and faxes stored in a server mailbox. The subject invention facilitates access to and management of this information from a telephone UI. In accordance with the UI users are able to access their voicemail and other useful information from the telephone in lieu of accessing a desktop computer or handheld device.

In accordance with the invention are illustrative examples of a DTMF process flow in accordance with a disclosed aspect. Similarly are illustrative examples of a speech activated process flow in accordance with a disclosed aspect. As described supra it is to be appreciated that the DTMF and speech recognition interfaces can be active concurrently with respect to UM system navigational mechanisms.

Following are exemplary scenarios that this invention can address. In the first scenario suppose a user is headed to a meeting in a remote location but is not sure which room in the building the meeting will be held. The user may want to quickly find this information while driving his car toward the meeting. One aspect of this invention can facilitate telephonic retrieval of this information.

In another scenario suppose a user is actually late to a meeting and desires to call into the conference room to participate over the phone before getting there. Here the user can telephonically access the meeting location information and subsequently be transferred to the meeting location.

In a third scenario suppose a user is driving to work in the morning and wants to get a head start on the some of the issues that are pending in emails or voicemails. From the telephone UI the user can quickly review the different issues reply as desired and follow up with the people involved with the issues.

In a final exemplary scenario suppose a user is in a hotel room without access to a printer and wishes to send emails as well as calendar appointments for the following day to the hotel fax so that the user can review materials and plan the day. One aspect of the invention facilitates this functionality via a telephonic connection. The procedure flow of these and other aspects will be better understood upon a review of that follow.

Referring now to an exemplary process task flow diagram of calling into a UM is shown. The process illustrates a flow of procedures in accordance to a call initiated by an external caller and an internal caller . As illustrated the process flow of the exemplary aspect is dependent upon the type of caller e.g. external or internal as well as the contact number dialed at . An external caller will be prompted with the company information at whereby an internal caller with internal information at .

In each scenario a caller can contact a user located on the system by spelling the name and employing the directory search at or by connecting directly to the extension by entering the numeric extension. If the user does not answer at the system can play the appropriate greeting e.g. external internal OOF in accordance with the type of caller. Accordingly a voicemail message can be recorded at . If a pre designated key e.g. is pressed the system can enter the callee mailbox at .

It is to be appreciated that the callee can access the mailbox directly from by choosing a pre designated key e.g. from the company and or internal greeting menu . This direct access will prompt the callee for necessary information at . In each case once the appropriate security credential information is entered at access to the UM is gained at . illustrates a continued procedure flow diagram once access is granted.

Referring now to once access to the UM is granted at the user can be prompted with a main menu at . By way of example the user can be prompted to press 1 for voicemail 2 for calendar options 3 for contacts 4 for email and so on. Option numbers 2 and 3 e.g. calendar options and contacts will be discussed in greater detail with reference to respectfully. By way of further example a user can choose 5 to send a message e.g. voicemail email or 7 to set an OOF. Additional exemplary menu choices are illustrated in block .

As shown if voicemail or email is chosen the system proceeds to whereby content can be presented to the user. In other words the user can be presented with voicemail email and or meeting request content. It is to be appreciated that logic and reasoning mechanisms can be employed to manage organize filter and or sort the content as described supra. As illustrated once the content is presented the user can be presented with an after message menu thereby presenting additional options. By way of example by pressing 4 a user can send a facsimile of a desired message. In other words once a user listens to a voicemail and or TTS converted email the user can opt to send a facsimile of the message to a desired location. As well by pressing 3 the user can reply to the message or accept a meeting appointment request. By choosing option 2 a user can call the sender of a particular message at . This call option will be discussed in greater detail with reference to . It is to be appreciated that the options shown in the UI process flow of are exemplary and are not intended to be an exhaustive list of options available to a user.

At a list of exemplary play commands which are presented during playback of a message are shown. Again this list is not intended to be exhaustive in view of the functionality described herein. As illustrated it will be appreciated that the system can effect a pause undelete repeat etc. task in accordance with options shown at .

Turning now to an exemplary flow diagram of calendar access is shown. At the system can play the number of pending meetings. As well as illustrated at the user can manage the meeting appointments and or requests by selecting any of various options. For example the user can select option 2 to call the meeting location 2 2 to call the meeting organizer or 3 to indicate a late arrival to the subject meeting. As well additional navigational options can be presented to the user as illustrated.

Illustrated in is a process flow diagram to record a message. The message is recorded at . At the user is presented with a variety of options to manage the recording. For example the user can mark the message with high priority by depressing 1 1 or restrict access by depressing 5 . Once complete the user can exit the system at .

Referring now to an exemplary process task flow diagram of calling into a UM system is shown. As discussed with reference with the process illustrates a flow of procedures in accordance to a call initiated by an external caller and an internal caller . As illustrated the process flow of the exemplary aspect is dependent upon the type of caller e.g. external or internal as well as the contact number dialed at . An external caller will be prompted with the company information at whereby an internal caller with internal information at .

In each scenario a caller can contact a user located on the system by employing the directory search of or by connecting directly to the extension by entering the numeric extension. As illustrated in the user can speak commands at to effect a desired option. As well at the user can verbally instruct the system of a desired target person to contact. At any time a user can speak the word help to access available system options. illustrates a continued procedure flow diagram that includes voice options once access is granted.

Referring now to once access to the UM system is granted at the user can be prompted with a main menu at . By way of example the user can be prompted to press 1 for voicemail 2 for calendar options 3 for contacts 4 for email and so on. By way of further example a user can choose 5 to send a message e.g. voicemail email or 7 to set an OOF. Additional exemplary DTMF menu choices are illustrated in block . As well if desired voice commands can be employed at in order to effect navigation.

As shown if voicemail or email is chosen the system proceeds to whereby content can be presented to the user. In other words the user can be presented with voicemail email and or meeting request content. It is to be appreciated that logic and reasoning mechanisms can be employed to manage organize filter and or sort the content as described supra. As illustrated once the content is presented the user can be presented with an after message menu thereby presenting additional options. By way of example by pressing 4 a user can send a facsimile of a desired message. In other words once a user listens to a voicemail and or TTS converted email the user can opt to send a facsimile of the message to a desired location. As well by pressing 3 the user can reply to the message or accept a meeting appointment request. By choosing option 2 a user can call the sender of a particular message at . It is to be appreciated that the options shown in the UI process flow of are exemplary and are not intended to be an exhaustive list of options available to a user.

It will further be appreciated that the voice commands shown at can be employed during or after message playback. In other words the voice commands can be reused in either scenario. These reusable commands are listed on as anytime commands.

At a list of exemplary DTMF play commands which are presented during playback of a message are shown. Again this list is not intended to be exhaustive in view of the functionality described herein. As illustrated it will be appreciated that the system can effect a pause undelete repeat etc. task in accordance with options shown at . In one aspect at speech commands and options can be employed in connection with pausing a playback.

Turning now to an exemplary flow diagram of calendar access is shown. At the system can play the number of pending meetings. As well as illustrated at the user can manage the meeting appointments and or requests by selecting any of various options. For example the user can select option 2 to call the meeting location 2 2 to call the meeting organizer or 3 to indicate a late arrival to the subject meeting. As well additional navigational options can be presented to the user as illustrated. For example as illustrated a user can employ speech commands at to effect calendar playback.

Illustrated in is a process flow diagram to record a message. The message is recorded at . At the user is presented with a variety of options to manage the recording. For example the user can mark the message with high priority by depressing 1 1 or restrict access by depressing 5 . Once complete the user can exit the system at . As discussed with respect to the other exemplary flow diagrams a user at any time can opt to communicate with the system via another available UI e.g. speech recognition . In the example of the user can speak the commands identified at thus navigating through the application state machine e.g. UM system .

Referring now to there is illustrated a block diagram of a computer operable to execute the disclosed architecture. In order to provide additional context for various aspects of the subject invention and the following discussion are intended to provide a brief general description of a suitable computing environment in which the various aspects of the subject invention can be implemented. While the invention has been described above in the general context of computer executable instructions that may run on one or more computers those skilled in the art will recognize that the invention also can be implemented in combination with other program modules and or as a combination of hardware and software.

Generally program modules include routines programs components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the inventive methods can be practiced with other computer system configurations including single processor or multiprocessor computer systems minicomputers mainframe computers as well as personal computers hand held computing devices microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics and the like each of which can be operatively coupled to one or more associated devices.

The illustrated aspects of the invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where certain tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules can be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

A computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by the computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media can comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital video disk DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by the computer.

Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of the any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

With reference again to there is illustrated an exemplary environment for implementing various aspects of the invention that includes a computer the computer including a processing unit a system memory and a system bus . The system bus couples system components including but not limited to the system memory to the processing unit . The processing unit can be any of various commercially available processors. Dual microprocessors and other multi processor architectures may also be employed as the processing unit .

The system bus can be any of several types of bus structure that may further interconnect to a memory bus with or without a memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of commercially available bus architectures. The system memory includes read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS is stored in a non volatile memory such as ROM EPROM EEPROM which BIOS contains the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within the computer such as during start up. The RAM can also include a high speed RAM such as static RAM for caching data.

The computer further includes an internal hard disk drive HDD e.g. EIDE SATA which internal hard disk drive may also be configured for external use in a suitable chassis not shown a magnetic floppy disk drive FDD e.g. to read from or write to a removable diskette and an optical disk drive e.g. reading a CD ROM disk or to read from or write to other high capacity optical media such as the DVD . The hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive can be connected to the system bus by a hard disk drive interface a magnetic disk drive interface and an optical drive interface respectively. The interface for external drive implementations includes at least one or both of Universal Serial Bus USB and IEEE 1394 interface technologies.

The drives and their associated computer readable media provide nonvolatile storage of data data structures computer executable instructions and so forth. For the computer the drives and media accommodate the storage of any data in a suitable digital format. Although the description of computer readable media above refers to a HDD a removable magnetic diskette and a removable optical media such as a CD or DVD it should be appreciated by those skilled in the art that other types of media which are readable by a computer such as zip drives magnetic cassettes flash memory cards cartridges and the like may also be used in the exemplary operating environment and further that any such media may contain computer executable instructions for performing the methods of the subject invention.

A number of program modules can be stored in the drives and RAM including an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . All or portions of the operating system applications modules and or data can also be cached in the RAM . It is appreciated that the subject invention can be implemented with various commercially available operating systems or combinations of operating systems.

A user can enter commands and information into the computer through one or more wired wireless input devices e.g. a keyboard and a pointing device such as a mouse . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone an IR remote control a joystick a game pad a stylus pen touch screen or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through an input device interface that is coupled to the system bus but can be connected by other interfaces such as a parallel port an IEEE 1394 serial port a game port a USB port an IR interface etc.

A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . In addition to the monitor a computer typically includes other peripheral output devices not shown such as speakers printers etc.

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections via wired and or wireless communications to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer s . The remote computer s can be a workstation a server computer a router a personal computer portable computer microprocessor based entertainment appliance a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described relative to the computer although for purposes of brevity only a memory storage device is illustrated. The logical connections depicted include wired wireless connectivity to a local area network LAN and or larger networks e.g. a wide area network WAN . Such LAN and WAN networking environments are commonplace in offices and companies and facilitate enterprise wide computer networks such as intranets all of which may connect to a global communication network e.g. the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the local network through a wired and or wireless communication network interface or adapter . The adaptor may facilitate wired or wireless communication to the LAN which may also include a wireless access point disposed thereon for communicating with the wireless adaptor . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer can include a modem or is connected to a communications server on the WAN or has other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as by way of the Internet. The modem which can be internal or external and a wired or wireless device is connected to the system bus via the serial port interface . In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof can be stored in the remote memory storage device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers can be used.

The computer is operable to communicate with any wireless devices or entities operatively disposed in wireless communication e.g. a printer scanner desktop and or portable computer portable data assistant communications satellite any piece of equipment or location associated with a wirelessly detectable tag e.g. a kiosk news stand restroom and telephone. This includes at least Wi Fi and Bluetooth wireless technologies. Thus the communication can be a predefined structure as with conventional network or simply an ad hoc communication between at least two devices.

Wi Fi or Wireless Fidelity allows connection to the Internet from a couch at home a bed in a hotel room or a conference room at work without wires. Wi Fi is a wireless technology like a cell phone that enables such devices e.g. computers to send and receive data indoors and out anywhere within the range of a base station. Wi Fi networks use radio technologies called IEEE 802.11 a b g etc. to provide secure reliable fast wireless connectivity. A Wi Fi network can be used to connect computers to each other to the Internet and to wired networks which use IEEE 802.3 or Ethernet . Wi Fi networks operate in the unlicensed 2.4 and 5 GHz radio bands at an 11 Mbps 802.11a or 54 Mbps 802.11b data rate for example or with products that contain both bands dual band so the networks can provide real world performance similar to the basic 10 BaseT wired Ethernet networks used in many offices.

Referring now to there is illustrated a schematic block diagram of an exemplary computing environment in accordance with the subject invention. The system includes one or more client s . The client s can be hardware and or software e.g. threads processes computing devices . The client s can house cookie s and or associated contextual information by employing the subject invention for example. The system also includes one or more server s . The server s can also be hardware and or software e.g. threads processes computing devices . The servers can house threads to perform transformations by employing the subject invention for example. One possible communication between a client and a server can be in the form of a data packet adapted to be transmitted between two or more computer processes. The data packet may include a cookie and or associated contextual information for example. The system includes a communication framework e.g. a global communication network such as the Internet that can be employed to facilitate communications between the client s and the server s .

Communications can be facilitated via a wired including optical fiber and or wireless technology. The client s are operatively connected to one or more client data store s that can be employed to store information local to the client s e.g. cookie s and or associated contextual information . Similarly the server s are operatively connected to one or more server data store s that can be employed to store information local to the servers .

What has been described above includes examples of the subject invention. It is of course not possible to describe every conceivable combination of components or methodologies for purposes of describing the subject invention but one of ordinary skill in the art may recognize that many further combinations and permutations of the subject invention are possible. Accordingly the subject invention is intended to embrace all such alterations modifications and variations that fall within the spirit and scope of the appended claims. Furthermore to the extent that the term includes is used in either the detailed description or the claims such term is intended to be inclusive in a manner similar to the term comprising as comprising is interpreted when employed as a transitional word in a claim.

