---

title: Methods, tools, and interfaces for the dynamic assignment of people to groups to enable enhanced communication and collaboration
abstract: A system for optimizing the value of communications between communicating parties is provided. The system includes a communication group manager that facilitates specifying policies, preferences and/or automated analysis of ideal communication channels, routing and/or scheduling in terms of communicating party groups that can be pre-populated clusters of communicating parties, assembled based on relationships (e.g., organizational), and/or assembled based on satisfying inclusion criteria (e.g., age, location, competence, communication history, meeting history). The communication group manager maps communicating parties into predefined and/or dynamically created groups that facilitate specifying and/or automatically computing ideal communication actions like selecting a channel, displaying lists of potential channels sorted by communicating party preferences, and (re)scheduling communications to different channels and/or times. Ideal communication actions can be identified by maximizing a measure of expected communication utility, where groups provide simplifying abstractions to facilitate assessment of outcome utilities. The method can employ representations of preferences of the contactor and contactee that allow for group-specific preference considerations that weight differentially contactor and/or contactee preference considerations in communication action optimization. The system includes a group wise communication coordinator that identifies optimal group communication sets. The method facilitates a recipient communicating with a group member where the communication utility is optimized based on a preference, and a context associated with the group to which the member belongs.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08271631&OS=08271631&RS=08271631
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 08271631
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050131
---
This application is a divisional of co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 036 566 filed Dec. 21 2001 entitled METHODS TOOLS AND INTERFACES FOR THE DYNAMIC ASSIGNMENT OF PEOPLE TO GROUPS TO ENABLE ENHANCED COMMUNICATION AND COLLABORATION. This application is also related to co pending divisional U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 047.066 filed on Jan. 31 2005 entitled METHODS TOOLS AND INTERFACES FOR THE DYNAMIC ASSIGNMENT OF PEOPLE TO GROUPS TO ENABLE ENHANCED COMMUNICATION AND COLLABORATION co pending divisional U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 047 318 filed on Jan. 31 2005 entitled METHODS TOOLS AND INTERFACES FOR THE DYNAMIC ASSIGNMENT OF PEOPLE TO GROUPS TO ENABLE ENHANCED COMMUNICATION AND COLLABORATION co pending divisional U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 047 228 filed on Jan. 31 2005 entitled METHODS TOOLS AND INTERFACES FOR THE DYNAMIC ASSIGNMENT OF PEOPLE TO GROUPS TO ENABLE ENHANCED COMMUNICATION AND COLLABORATION co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 809 142 filed Mar. 15 2001 entitled SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR IDENTIFYING AND ESTABLISHING PREFERRED MODALITIES OR CHANNELS FOR COMMUNICATIONS BASED ON PARTICIPANTS PREFERENCES AND CONTEXTS co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 982 306 filed on Oct. 17 2001 entitled SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR IDENTIFYING AND ESTABLISHING PREFERRED MODALITIES OR CHANNELS FOR COMMUNICATION BASED ON PARTICIPANTS PREFERENCES AND CONTEXTS co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 281 547 filed on Oct. 28 2002 entitled SYSTEM FOR PERFORMING CONTEXT SENSITIVE DECISIONS ABOUT IDEAL COMMUNICATION MODALITIES CONSIDERING INFORMATION ABOUT CHANNEL RELIABILITY co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 281 718 filed on Oct. 28 2002 entitled SYSTEM AND METHODS ENABLING A MIX OF HUMAN AND AUTOMATED INITIATIVES IN THE CONTROL OF COMMUNICATION POLICIES co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 187 078 filed on Jun. 28 2002 entitled METADATA SCHEMA FOR INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS and co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 281 546 filed on Oct. 28 2002 entitled REPRESENTATION DECISION MODELS AND USER INTERFACE FOR ENCODING MANAGING PREFERENCES AND PERFORMING AUTOMATED DECISION MAKING ABOUT THE TIMING AND MODALITIES OF INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS. The entireties of the aforementioned applications are incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention relates generally to managing communication groups and more particularly to creating and managing distinctions about people their context and communication policies related to such people and contexts to facilitate dynamically assigning people to communication categories and managing such categories to facilitate maximizing utility of communications based on category membership of the contactor the current and or anticipated context situation of the contactee and communication channel s available to the communicating parties.

As people move in and out of groups and as people s contexts change policies concerning how such people communicate can change. Associations between people are constantly changing. New associations come into being old associations fall apart and existing associations add members lose members and have the status of the relationships between the members change. Furthermore communication channels available to a member of a group for the group as a whole and or for a subset of the group may change.

Consider the problems associated with disseminating information to a dynamically changing group e.g. a programming team tasked with developing a new release for a product while maintaining an existing product . The team may typically include an architect designers analysts programmers quality assurance personnel technical support members secretaries and managers. Throughout the lifetime of the project the membership may change e.g. a first programmer leaves the team a new programmer joins the team the relationships within the group may change e.g. an analyst is promoted to a designer and the responsibilities of members may change e.g. a programmer may be transitioned from new development to maintenance programming . The desired flow of information within the group from the group and to the group may change based on such changes to the group. Typically the desired communication paths the desired communication channels and or the desired points of contact with the group may be maintained manually e.g. a printout of a phone chain a printout of an organizational chart and may quickly become out of date. Thus sub optimal communications within and with the group may be expected.

The following presents a simplified summary of the invention in order to provide a basic understanding of some aspects of the invention. This summary is not an extensive overview of the invention. It is not intended to identify key or critical elements of the invention or to delineate the scope of the invention. Its sole purpose is to present some concepts of the invention in a simplified form as a prelude to the more detailed description that is presented later.

The present invention relates to systems and methods for dynamically assigning entities e.g. people processes computer components to communication categories and for dynamically managing categories to facilitate maximizing utility of communications based on membership in such communication categories. Thus the present invention relates to creating and managing distinctions about people their context and their tasks. Context can be abstracted by examining for example a communication sender the relationship of the sender to a user the time of day at which the sender is attempting to communicate the task s with which the user and or sender are engaged the age of project s to which the user and or sender are engaged the sender and or user location and so on. Thus multiple attributes concerning people including their preferences contexts tasks and priorities are analyzed to facilitate building and managing collections of people and to further facilitate establishing and adapting communication policies for people in the collections.

One aspect of the invention relates to a system that dynamically manages groups of communicating parties to facilitate identifying meaningful subsets of managed parties that will facilitate maximizing utility of a communication between the subset of managed parties. The system facilitates establishing analyzing and modifying activity based associations of people. The system can be implemented via hardware and or software and can be embodied on a computer readable medium.

Another aspect of the present invention concerns a communication group manager that facilitates specifying in terms of different groups of people policies and preferences employed in ideal communication routing and scheduling. The communication group manager also facilitates determining in terms of different groups of people how automated analysis of such ideal communication routing and scheduling can be performed. Such groups of people can be defined by a user e.g. placed in a list via a user interface can be automatically assembled based on descriptions of relationships between people e.g. familial organizational and or can be automatically assembled based on a person having one or more properties that satisfy group inclusion criteria e.g. age location concerned about specific subject matter . The communication group manager facilitates improving communication utility by maximizing the expected utility of a communication through actions including but not limited to selecting a communication channel displaying a list of communication channels displaying a list of communication channels sorted for example by the preferences of the communicating parties and or rescheduling communications to different channels and or times than originally selected by the communicating parties. The grouping of people into communication categories simplifies employing abstractions employed in assessing utilities of outcomes and the computation of ideal communication actions.

Another aspect of the invention relates to a method for dynamically managing communicator category membership. The method includes monitoring communications between category members and updating category membership based on the monitoring. Thus people can be moved between groups based on activity centric analysis.

Yet another aspect of the invention relates to a method for managing group communications. The method includes determining when a group communication will occur determining who will be involved in the group communication based at least in part on category membership determining which communication channels will maximize utility of the communication and establishing the communication. This method can in some cases create groups that will exist for short durations based for example on relationships that will only exist for short durations e.g. ad hoc group editing a paragraph in a contract .

To the accomplishment of the foregoing and related ends certain illustrative aspects of the invention are described herein in connection with the following description and the annexed drawings. These aspects are indicative however of but a few of the various ways in which the principles of the invention may be employed and the present invention is intended to include all such aspects and their equivalents. Other advantages and novel features of the invention may become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the drawings.

The present invention is now described with reference to the drawings where like reference numerals are used to refer to like elements throughout. In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. It may be evident however to one skilled in the art that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to facilitate description of the present invention.

As used in this application the term computer component is intended to refer to a computer related entity either hardware a combination of hardware and software software or software in execution. For example a computer component may be but is not limited to being a process running on a processor a processor an object an executable a thread of execution a program and a computer. By way of illustration both an application running on a server and the server can be computer components. One or more computer components may reside within a process and or thread of execution and a computer component may be localized on one computer and or distributed between two or more computers.

It is to be appreciated that various aspects of the present invention employ representations of deterministic policies specified as functions or rules that take as arguments contextual information details about the nature of the participants and the content or task at hand. One example of the present invention also employs technologies associated with facilitating inference and decision making under uncertainty and optimization of expected utility and or minimization of expected costs. Thus statistical inference can be performed with models constructed by hand from data with machine learning methods or by a mixture of machine learning and human assessment. Such models can be used in conjunction with deterministic policies where depending on the context an inferential rule or deterministic rule is used. A variety of machine learning systems methodologies including Bayesian learning methods that search over alternative dependency structures and apply a score such as the Bayesian Information Criteria etc. Bayesian classifiers and other statistical classifiers including decision tree learning methods support vector machines linear and non linear regression and neural network representations can be employed to build and update inferential models.

The communication group manager can establish a group of communicating parties delete a group of communicating parties merge groups of communicating parties and partition groups for example. The communication group manager also adds new communicating parties to groups removes communicating parties from groups moves parties between groups and changes data associated with groups for example. Thus the system analyzes a set of communicating parties and manages one or more categories or subsets of communicating parties e.g. category category to facilitate maximizing utility of a communication.

The communication group manager can establish a group based for example on relationships between communicating parties. For example an organization may have an organization chart that lists the name and position of employees in the organization. Individuals and or the organization may desire to create communication groups based for example on the relative position of people in the organizational chart. Thus communications from employees located more than a pre determined number of levels below a user can trigger an employee automatically being assigned to a first communication group while communications from employees located more than a pre determined number of levels above a user can trigger an employee automatically being assigned to a second communication group. Relationship based assignment to groups is but one example of dynamic group creation and will be discussed in greater detail in association with .

The group manager can also dynamically assign people to groups based on activities. For example communications communication history meetings projects and current states can lead to the group manager dynamically assigning a person to a group. By way of illustration a person with whom the user communicates concerning topic X may dynamically be assigned to a group for people with whom the user has communicated concerning topic X during the last seven days. If after seven days there have been no subsequent communications between the parties concerning topic X then the group manager can dynamically de assign the person from the group. By way of further illustration a person who is being consulted concerning a real time edit of a paragraph in a contract can be dynamically assigned to groups that include groups of people who have been consulted on the contract groups of people who have been allowed to edit the contract groups of people with whom the user has communicated concerning the contract and groups of people with whom the user has communicated in the last twelve hours. Thus the dynamic assignment of people to groups can lead to an individual being assigned to a number of groups substantially simultaneously. Dynamic assignment based on activities is but one example of the operation of the system and further discussion of dynamic assignment is provided in association with .

The communication group manager can also be employed to prepopulate clusters of users into groups. For example a user interface can be employed to display a list of people of whom the communication group manager is aware. Then a user can define named groups of people and assign different people to these groups. Such groups can be stored for example in lists files trees and other data structures.

The groups whether established through prepopulation relationship based processing activity centric processing context centric processing or other means can be employed to facilitate the specification of or automatic computation of communication actions. For example actions including but not limited to selecting a communication channel displaying lists possibly sorted of communication channels rescheduling communication times and reselecting communication channels can be performed by the communication group manager based at least in part on the abstractions captured by membership in a group.

Concerning utility of a communication the value of a current potential communication can be evaluated by considering a measure of the history of utility of communication with a member of a group attributes of the communication that can be stored as metadata e.g. intended focus of communication nature of communication channel reliability of communication channel and or combinations thereof. Such an expected utility can be computed through the use of probabilistic models such as Bayesian networks and decision trees that provide probability distributions over outcomes based on observations or attributes associated with the communication setting and so on. Coupling probabilistic inference models with preferences and employing the principles of maximum expected utility for optimization provides a useful method for computing the value of different communication actions. In one example of the present invention utility represents communication effectiveness correlated to adherence to user preferences. Such effectiveness can be measured by factors including but not limited to reliability achieved on the communication channel quantity of information content transferred quality of information content transferred and relevancy of information content transferred.

An expected utility function takes into consideration probability distributions over future outcomes and user preferences while reasoning under uncertainty. An example expected utility function can be calculated using 

Where p s d c represents the probability of achieving a future state sgiven a decision dconcerning situation c capturing communication channel parameters nature of the contactor and a context for the contactee. Each individual outcome state s s represents a possible match of preferences to related communication parameters. The function u s d represents the utility of state safter the decision dhas been made.

Assume that the present invention considers two possible utilities Uand U. Based on selecting particular communication parameters e.g. time media location the system can compute Pand P the probabilities of achieving Uand U where P 1 P. Although two utility states are identified it is to be appreciated that a greater number of utility states can be employed with the present invention. The expected utility of a decision dis then .

After computing the dE D the system can select the decision d where d arg max d D E u d c where d represents the decision associated with maximum expected utility E.

A high utility can be associated with for example a large amount of valuable information being transferred. A low utility can be associated with for example a small amount of valuable information being transferred. Similarly a low cost can be associated with a low drain on the attentional resources of the contactee as might be captured by a low interruptability factor e.g. user does not have to leave important meeting or shut down an application and with a low amount of hanging e.g. the number type and or importance of people and or resources left waiting for the return of the attentional resource of the user . A high cost can be associated with a significant drain on the attentional resources of the contactee as might be associated with an action of high interruptability e.g. pulling a person from an important meeting leaving many important people waiting. The utilities can take into consideration both the value and the disruptiveness of communication outcomes combining the costs and benefits in a single assessment or explicitly breaking out the cost and benefits of the communication and providing a means for coupling the two together e.g. employing an additive multi linear model summing costs and benefits after selective weighting of the separate factors .

The context of a person can also include for example the location of a person. For example cellular phones can provide location information. World events may transpire that require mass notification by very rapid means of an impending disaster to as many people as possible who are located in a certain geographic region. The system can through context analysis dynamically assign people to groups based on their geographic location if known. Furthermore the system can reason under uncertainty concerning a person s location and dynamically assign them to a group based on such reasoning. Thus the activity centric dynamic assignment of people to groups is complemented by context centric dynamic assignment of people to groups which facilitates maximizing the utility of communications based on membership in a group.

The system facilitates maximizing utility of a communication based on a communicating party s membership in a group the availability of a useful communication group and preferences and or contexts associated with the group s . Increasing the utility of a group communication is a long standing problem. Increasing utility of a group communication has been complicated by issues including but not limited to the complexities of scheduling group communications and the difficulties of assembling a useful group of entities with which to communicate. Scheduling problems arise due to factors like group members who travel group members who live in different time zones mismatched communication technology conflicting schedules conflicting available communication channels monetary constraints and the like. Assembling a useful group of entities to communicate can be complicated by problems like shifting roles of group members schedule conflicts preferred communication channel conflicts personality conflicts knowledge conflicts and budget constraints.

The system includes a communication group manager . The communication group manager is a computer component that creates and manages groups whose members communicate along selected communication channels. The system also includes a groupwise communication coordinator . The groupwise communication coordinator is a computer component that selects and schedules connects group members from available communicating parties for communications. The communication group manager can create and manage groups that were formed by for example prepopulating clusters relationship processing activity centric processing context centric processing and or the satisfaction group inclusion criteria by communicating parties.

The system can also include a channel manager which will be described in greater detail in association with . While a channel manager is illustrated in the system in it is to be appreciated that the communication group manager and the groupwise communication coordinator can be employed in systems that do not include the channel manager . The channel manager is a computer component that selects a communication channel that will facilitate maximizing utility of a communication.

When scheduling a group communication there may be a value to considering the cost of the communication. For example the cost of the communication time e.g. telephone time videoconference time packet costs the cost of the personnel e.g. hourly rate of attendees opportunity cost of attendees and the cost of delaying the communication e.g. value of group communication while the stock market is open is different from value of group communication after the stock market has closed may be considered. Conventionally such costs if analyzed at all may have been manually analyzed by a skilled meeting scheduler. However such skilled schedulers may be unique individuals with limited availability who are expensive to employ.

The utility of the communication can be evaluated according to formulae that consider the cost of the communication and the value of the communication as viewed from the points of view of both a sender and a receiver. An exemplary formula can take the form utility cost 

The utility calculations may weight the costs and or benefits to the contactors and or contactees differently based for example on membership in a group. By way of illustration the value can be computed via a combination function f of other functions g and h that operate separately on the costs and the benefits to the contactor the sender and the contactee recipient of the initial communication as follows utility value1 cost3 value2 cost4 .

By way of further illustration consider a case where the value is a function of the difference of the costs and the benefits to the contactor and the contactee as follows utility value1 cost3 value2 cost4 .

One example of such a difference function employs a multi linear weighted combination of the separate terms for contactee and contactor utility value1 cost3 value2 cost4 .

For such a formulation diminishing wto zero removes the preferences of the contactor and makes communication decisions depend on the preferences of the contactee. Diminishing wto zero makes communication decisions depend on the preferences of the contactor. Such adjustments to the weights which can lead to diminutions and or enhancements of the relative importance of the contactor and or contactee costs and or benefits can be based for example on membership in a group. For example a communication recipient contactee may desire to take into account the preferences of people in a group defined as those with whom I am meeting today by assigning a high weight to w. However for other groups the user may desire that communication actions be based on maximizing expected utility by setting weight wto zero thus considering only the preferences of the contactee. An enterprise may impose a communication policy imposing a strong weight won the group of senior managers preferences and less weight won the contactees preferences when contacting people they manage and others at lower levels in an organization hierarchy for example.

Similarly weights associated with groups can be affected by context e.g. time location activity . By way of illustration the preferences of a group defined as those actively engaged in combat may be given a higher weight than a group defined as those on vacation where membership in the group changes dynamically. By way of further illustration the preferences of a group defined as those who have less than thirty minutes of free time today might be given higher weight where membership in such a group can be dynamically determined through analysis of calendar data.

The cost to the sender cost can be analyzed by examining a set of cost factors cost a b c . . . that can include but are not limited to the cost of making a connection instantly the cost of making a connection at a later time the cost of employing a particular channel and or set of channels and the cost of not making a connection where the costs may include actual costs and or expected costs. Such costs can be measured by actual and or opportunity cost in time communication resources and or human resources.

The value to the sender value can also be analyzed by examining a set of value factors value m n o . . . that can include but are not limited to the value of making an instant connection the value of making a later connection and the value of employing a particular channel and or set of channels where the values can include actual values and or expected values. The values can similarly be measured by actual and or opportunity cost of time communication resources dollars and or human resources. The expected costs and or expected values can be computed through deterministic processing and or reasoning under uncertainty.

The cost to the receiver cost can be analyzed by examining a set of cost factors cost x y z . . . that can include but are not limited to the cost of making a connection instantly the cost of making a connection at a later time the cost of employing a particular channel and or set of channels and the cost of not making a connection where the costs can include actual costs and or expected costs. Such costs and or values can be measured by actual cost in time money human resources and or opportunity cost in time money human resources and or communication resources for example.

The value to the receiver value can also be analyzed by examining a set of value factors value p q r . . . that can include but are not limited to the value of making an instant connection the value of making a later connection and the value of employing a particular channel and or set of channels where the values can include actual values and or expected values. The expected costs and or expected values can be computed through reasoning under uncertainty. The costs can vary over time thus a first set of costs costTcomputed for a first time Tmay not be equal to a second set of costs costTcomputed for a second time T. Similarly the values can vary over time and a first set of values valueTmay not be equal to a second set of values valueT. Thus rather than producing a single value the system can produce a set of expected utilities for the communications via a plurality of communication channels.

Assembling a useful group has further complicated increasing the utility of a group communication. By way of illustration a group meeting concerning which direction a ship should sail around an iceberg has limited value if the person steering the ship and the person with the power to order a direction change are not included.

Thus one example of the present invention is employed to facilitate optimizing utility of a communication where the system includes the channel manager that identifies communication channels that facilitate maximizing utility of the communication and a communication group manager that manages a group of communicating parties that are analyzed by the channel manager to facilitate optimizing utility of the communication. The communication channels can include but are not limited to telephone channels facsimile channels computer channels paging channels proxy channels and personal channels. Information concerning such communication channels can be stored for example in a communication channel data store .

The channel manager identifies a communicating party group from the available communicating parties analyzes data associated with that group e.g. membership inclusion criteria context preferences identifies an individual communicating party group member that is involved with the communication that has unique characteristics e.g. most important recipient least important recipient highest capacity lowest capacity and or analyzes data associated with that communicating party group member e.g. identity location needs . Based on such analysis the channel manager computes which communication channels are likely to produce the greatest expected utility for the communication.

Channel selection depends at least in part on communicating party group membership. Group membership is predicated on the existence of groups. Thus communicating parties may be analyzed by the communication group manager to produce groups. Multiple attributes concerning the communicating parties e.g. people processes computers apparatus their preferences and their priorities are analyzed to facilitate building and managing groups. The attributes are further analyzed to facilitate establishing and adapting communication policies for members of the groups where such policies can affect channel time group and security selections for example. The groups can be based on factors like the presence or absence of an entity in an address book the time since the entity last communicated with another entity and or group the time left until a deadline with which the entity must comply the presence and or location of an entity in a collection e.g. organization chart family tree team roster the degree to which an entity is trusted by an individual a group or by a related individual and or group whether a person has authored a document in which the user is interested whether such document was authored within a pre determined configurable period of time e.g. within the last thirty days whether a person has met with the user within a pre determined configurable period of time e.g. within the last week whether the person is scheduled to meet with the user within a pre determined configurable period of time e.g. has a meeting scheduled in the next two weeks whether the person is actively working on a project of interest to the user and who is attempting to initiate a communication. Thus the communication group manager analyzes multiple attributes to determine how and or when to establish a group of communicating parties.

By way of illustration of group membership being employed in channel selection a user may be a person who has a tight schedule and who has to attend a lot of meetings. The subject matter of these meetings may be disjoint and thus it may require mental gymnastics to keep the purpose of each meeting straight and to be able to focus on impending meetings. Thus such a person can establish communication policies that are employed in dynamic assignment of people to communication groups based on the proximity of a desired communication to a meeting that concerns the communication. Communications that are attempted within a first time period e.g. within an hour of the meeting can trigger assigning the contactor to a high priority communication group that is more likely to get the immediate attention of the contactee. Communications that are attempted outside that first time period e.g. three weeks before the meeting with at least ten intervening meetings on disjoint subjects can trigger assigning the contactor to a lower priority communication group whose messages will be examined by the contactor at a more convenient time than immediately before a meeting on another subject. Thus the utility of communications to the user is increased by filtering communications in critical time periods e.g. immediately before a meeting to those communications that relate to the meeting. Thus group membership simplifies aggregating abstractions for outcome utility processing and or computation of ideal communication actions.

Information concerning the groups can then be stored in a group data store for example. The group data store may therefore store data including but not limited to group identity data group preference data and group context data. The group identity data can include but is not limited to the name of a group the membership of a group where the membership can be stored in one or more data structures including but not limited to a list a linked list an array a table a database a datacube and the like group classification data and group inclusion criteria. Group classification data can be for example information concerning how the group was formed when the group was formed additions deletions updates performed for the group and group creator metadata associated with the group. The group inclusion criteria can be for example information concerning traits that make a communicating party eligible for membership in the group. Such traits can include but are not limited to the presence or absence of a communicating party in an address book the time since the communicating party last communicated through the system the time left until a deadline with which the communicating party must comply the presence and or location of the communicating party in a collection e.g. organization chart family tree team roster the relative location of a person in that organization chart e.g. x levels up y levels down x and y being integers the degree to which a communicating party is trusted e.g. nuclear family member vs. known spammer and who is attempting to initiate the communication through the system . Such traits can also include for example membership information associated with a project. A project can be a long term undertaking e.g. developing a new car or a short term undertaking e.g. driving to the corner store . Thus groups associated with projects can be formed and dissolved dynamically and over varying time periods.

The collections of communicating parties which can be for example computer components humans and or machines are dynamic and can change in response to factors like time since last communication value of last communication average value of communication change in status e.g. joined organization left organization moved within organization and time to deadlines. Thus the communication group manager can also dynamically modify the initial groups.

The groups may not be mutually exclusive with a communicating party appearing in several groups. Determining when to create delete adapt a group and determining when to include exclude a communicating party from a group involves processing information including but not limited to the identity of the communicating party the location of the communicating party the assigned task the current activity of the communicating party the attentional focus of the communicating party the time of day the ambient acoustics at the location of the communicating party deadlines applicable to the communicating party assets e.g. hardware software proxies available to the communicating party cost of assets value of assets preferences subscription to services and the like. Data concerning such information may not be complete and thus reasoning employed to include exclude modify a communicating party in a collection can involve both deterministic reasoning and reasoning under uncertainty. Thus the communication group manager analyzes such data in determining when to create a new group of communicating parties when to delete a group of communicating parties when to merge two or more groups of communicating parties and or when to partition a group of communicating parties into two or more groups. Furthermore the communication group manager also analyzes such data to determine when to add a communicating party to a group when to remove a communicating party from a group when to move a communicating party between groups and or when to update information concerning the communicating party. By way of illustration deadlines can affect the dynamic assignment of people to groups. For example for a contactee who manages people involved on a project whose deadline is a long time away people working on the project can be assigned to a low priority communication group whose communications will likely be reviewed at a time and manner of the desired contactee s choosing. Thus the contactee can receive higher priority messages concerning projects with closer deadlines before lower priority messages. However as the deadline approaches for the project the people in the group can be progressively migrated to communication groups with higher and higher priorities until as the deadline looms such people may have migrated to the highest priority groups available and thus may have for example breakthrough priority for the contactee.

The communication group manager and or the group wise communication manager also consider group preference data and or group context data when determining how to manage groups and or how to employ group members. The group preference data can include but is not limited to hardware that the group desires to use and or hardware that an individual desires to use when interacting with members of that group software that the group desires to use and or software that an individual desires to use when interacting with members of that group a time of day when the group desires to communicate or at which an individual desires to communicate with a group a desired size for the group and a desired date before which or after which communications with and or between the group will be given greater and or lesser urgency. For example as a deadline approaches priority for communication with the group with the deadline may increase while priority with non deadline groups may decrease. Such preference data can be stored for example in the group data store . While an individual group data store channel data store and communication data store are illustrated it is to be appreciated that the group data store channel data store and communication data store can be implemented in a single data store and or can be distributed in different combinations between two or more communicating and or cooperating data stores.

By way of illustration of the use of time of day preferences in group assignment consider a time period of great interest to parents with school aged children immediately after school lets out. During this time many parents are still at work and yet many child sized crises occur e.g. I can t find my red jacket can I go to Joe s for dinner . The impatient child may require immediate answers concerning these questions and the parent can benefit from receiving such information e.g. child going to Joe s and not returning home immediately . Thus during these time periods communications from the child may be routed via high priority communication devices based at least in part on the child s membership in a group e.g. child in family and the time at which the communication is attempted.

The groups are analyzed to facilitate maximizing utility of a communication either for an individual or a group. Thus the context of the groups is analyzed as is the pending communication itself. A communication can be classified by factors including but not limited to the type of communication its content length sender s recipient s context and the like. Information concerning the communication can be stored in a communication data store . Data packets containing channel groups and or communication information can be transmitted between the various system components. For more information concerning sample data packets see the discussion associated with .

The context of the communicating party can include data concerning but not limited to hardware data e.g. current anticipated capacity current anticipated bandwidth current anticipated availability current anticipated status current anticipated cost revision data metadata software data e.g. current anticipated capacity current anticipated bandwidth current anticipated availability current anticipated status current anticipated cost revision data metadata and observed data e.g. time date activity task location communication history environment . Such context information can be stored in the group data store for example. The preference context and or status data can be deterministic and or uncertain. Thus the system can reason under uncertainty to infer values for uncertain data points.

The system also includes a group wise communication coordinator . The group wise communication coordinator is operably connected to e.g. is in electrical data physical and or logical contact with the communication group manager . The group wise communication coordinator identifies a subset of the communicating parties based at least in part on group membership channel data and or communication data where establishing the group communication between the identified subset of communicating parties will facilitate maximizing utility of the communication. Volunteer fire fighter examples provided hereafter illustrate selecting a meaningful subset of communicating parties to establish a useful group communication.

Thus one example of the present invention facilitates optimizing the utility of a group communication and includes a group wise communication coordinator that identifies a group of communicating parties that can communicate via the communication channels where establishing the communication along the identified communication channels facilitates maximizing the utility of the communication. In the example the groupwise communication coordinator includes a group wise communication assembler that assembles the group of communicating parties and a group wise communication scheduler that schedules a time for the group communication that maximizes the utility of the communication.

While the group data store can store information concerning the groups as groups the group data store can also store information concerning the group members. For example the group data store can store communicating party group member data including but not limited to the identity of a communicating party group member e.g. name classification group memberships preferences associated with the communicating party group member e.g. hardware software time date location and context data e.g. hardware software observed .

Thus in one example of the present invention the system creates and manages groups of communicating parties identified by an individual so that group parameters e.g. individual preferences for communicating with group members can be applied to an individual member of the group to maximize the utility of the communication. Thus referring to communication COMM the system facilitates maximizing the utility of the communication COMMbetween the communicating parties MA and MB where MB is a member of the group that includes members from MB through MX X being an integer. Since MB through MX are members of a group the communicating party MA does not have to store individual preferences for the member MB but can apply group information concerning the group s to which MB belongs to the member MB. Division head and working group examples provided hereafter illustrate communications like COMM.

The system also facilitates selecting a subset of communicating parties from the managed groups of communicating parties that will facilitate maximizing the utility of a group communication. Thus referring to communication COMMbetween communication group members M M and M through Mn n being an integer the subset of communicating parties can be selected by the group wise communication coordinator to facilitate maximizing the utility of the group communication. The communication can then proceed for example along a communication channel s selected by the channel manager . The subset M through Mn can include less than the entire set to which M through Mn belong. Volunteer fire fighter examples provided hereafter illustrate communications like COMM.

Therefore based on the capabilities described above group management decisions can be based on one or more determinations of whether two or more communicating parties are or are likely to become concurrently engaged in a related activity are or are likely to become concurrently engaged in a similar activity are or likely to concurrently process one or more related documents are or are likely to concurrently view one or more related documents are or are likely to concurrently become engaged in a shared project are or are likely to become scheduled to communicate within a pre defined period of time have communicated within a pre defined period of time are or are likely to become scheduled to meet within a pre defined period of time and have met within a pre defined period of time. Similarly group management decisions can be based on one or more determinations of whether a communicating party has engaged in one or more pre defined activities of interest within a pre defined period of time is likely to engage in one or more pre defined activities of interest within a pre defined period of time has purchased one or more pre defined items of interest within a pre defined period of time has registered an interest in one or more pre defined items of interest within a pre defined period of time and the degree to which a communicating party is trusted by one or more other communicating parties. It is to be appreciated that there can be one or more different pre defined times for each of the items listed above and that such times can be independent of each other. It is to be further appreciated that there can be one or more different activities and or items of interest for the items listed above and that such activities and or items can be independent of each other.

While is a schematic diagram illustrating components for the system it is to be appreciated that the system can be implemented as one or more computer components as that term is defined herein. It is to be further appreciated that computer executable components operable to implement the system can be stored on computer readable media including but not limited to an ASIC application specific integrated circuit CD compact disc DVD digital video disk memory read only memory ROM random access memory RAM programmable ROM PROM floppy disk hard disk EEPROM electrically erasable programmable read only memory carrier wave and memory stick.

The groups can include one or more groups for example the groups A B and C. A communicating party from the available communicating parties can be placed in one or more of the groups . Thus illustrates an intersection between groups A and B B and C A and C and A B and C. While three groups are illustrated it is to be appreciated that a lesser and or greater number of groups can be established by the system . It is to be further appreciated that although intersection between the groups A B and C is illustrated that groups formed by the group establisher and or groups modified by the group modifier can have a greater and or lesser degree of intersection and can in one example of the present invention be mutually exclusive.

In one example of the present invention the group establisher performs actions including but not limited to creating new groups of communicating parties deleting groups of communicating parties merging two or more groups of communicating parties into one group and partitioning a group of communicating parties into two or more groups. By way of illustration the group establisher can analyze the communicating parties and determine that a combination of a number and type of communicating parties that satisfies a pre determined configurable threshold for group creation warrants the creation of a new group. The pre determined configurable threshold can be based for example on a function that considers both the number of communicating parties with similar traits e.g. name location preferences communication channels available and the degree of similarity between such traits. For example identifying three communicating parties that share ten traits can trigger the creation of a new group. The number and type of group members can be configured e.g. via a graphical user interface and can be adapted pursuant to human and or machine learning during the operation of the present invention. Thus the group establisher can receive feedback concerning groups that it creates and can therefore engage in a higher and or lesser degree of group formation based on such feedback. By way of further illustration the group establisher can examine the set of groups that it created and that the group modifier modified and determine that two groups have become so similar that the two groups should be merged into one group. By way of still further illustration the group establisher can examine a group that it created and that the group modifier modified and the group establisher may determine that the group has become so diverse that two more focused groups are warranted.

Such changes occur because the available communicating parties change. For example additions to the available communicating parties may occur deletions from the available communicating parties may occur and updates to existing members of the available communicating parties may occur. By way of illustration of an addition a new computer network may become available to the system and thus the available communicating parties can expand to include communicating parties e.g. humans computers associated with the newly available network. By way of illustration of a deletion a worker may leave an organization that employs the system and thus the available communicating parties can be reduced. By way of illustration of an update a worker in an organization that employs the system may change jobs within the organization e.g. promoted to a higher rank and thus data associated with the promoted worker can be updated to reflect greater security higher priority and more consideration of that worker s preferences. Such an update can be achieved via the present invention by moving the worker to a different group for example.

The context and preferences of communicating parties and or groups with which the system interacts are not static. Thus the group establisher and or the group modifier can analyze context and or preference information concerning the communicating parties and or the established modified groups . Such context and or preference information can be stored for example in a context preference data store . While a single context preference data store is illustrated it is to be appreciated that the data store can be implemented in two or more data stores distributed between two or more computer components.

Since the context and preferences of the communicating parties the groups and or individuals who desire to employ the groups and or information associated with the groups to facilitate maximizing the utility of a communication may change the communication group establisher can analyze such preferences and contexts when establishing a group. Additionally and or alternatively the group establisher can analyze information like communication channels employed by the communicating parties and or the groups communication channels available to the communicating parties and or groups . For example the group establisher can create a group based on the ability of communicating parties to share a particular communication channel e.g. collaborative editing instant messaging . The group establisher can also analyze information like the frequency with which parties communicate. For example if a group of five communicating parties communicates daily or perhaps even more frequently then the group establisher can create a group to increase the utility of communications between such a tight group of frequent communicators. By way of illustration if a graduate assistant receives email from a group of undergraduates on a daily basis concerning the course that the graduate assistant is teaching then the group establisher can create a group that facilitates maximizing the utility of the email communications between the students and the graduate assistant. The group establisher can also consider the amount of time remaining until a deadline must be met by a group when creating a group. For example the graduate assistant may be tutoring one hundred students but ten of those students may be seniors who are four weeks from potential graduation. Thus the group establisher can for example create a group that facilitates maximizing the utility of communications between the hopefully graduating seniors and their tutor. The group establisher can also consider the position of communicating parties when creating groups. For example the graduate assistant may receive communications from professors other graduate assistants and students. The group establisher can determine that heightened security should be applied to communications from professors and thus can create a separate group with separate inclusion criteria e.g. above graduate assistant on organization chart and separate security e.g. encrypted email only . Similarly the graduate assistant may receive communications from family members both distant and near especially if the graduate assistant has a frequently queried skill e.g. system administrator skills tax preparation skills . Thus the group establisher may set up different groups based at least in part on the location of an individual in the graduate assistant s family tree.

The group establisher can also consider the trustworthiness of communicating parties when determining whether to create delete merge partition groups. For example a first set of communicating parties may be considered very trustworthy e.g. professors while another set of communicating parties may not be considered to be as trustworthy e.g. competing graduate assistants . Thus the group establisher can create separate groups based on such trustworthiness. In some situations the group establisher may not have information concerning the trustworthiness of a communicating party as related to a first communicating party but the group establisher may have information concerning the trustworthiness of a communicating party as determined by a second related communicating party.

The group establisher can also consider the initiator of a communication in determining when to create delete merge partition a group. For example if a communicating party frequently initiates communications with a group of communicating parties e.g. sends five emails a day to members of a fantasy soccer league then the group establisher can establish a separate group for such communicating parties. Thus the group establisher can consider not only identity of communicating parties but also subject matter of communications when dynamically assigning people to groups. For example a first communicating party may have communicated with a user concerning one topic exclusively. However when the first communicating party asks about the fantasy soccer league the first communicating party may be dynamically assigned to the group associated with the soccer league.

The group modifier can similarly analyze context preferences and channel properties when determining whether to modify e.g. add delete move update a member s relationship with a communication group. Since the context preferences and channel properties can change and in fact are likely to be in constant flux the group modifier can dynamically modify the member s relationship. Furthermore the group modifier can monitor communications undertaken by communication group members and dynamically update group membership based on such communications.

By way of illustration a communication group manager can determine that a channel user has initiated an increasing number of high priority channel communications with a select group of communication recipients. This may occur for example when a release deadline is approaching and a manager is frequently checking status with project leaders. Thus based on machine learning the communication group manager can form a new group e.g. people to whom the user has initiated communications with a certain frequency within a certain time period via pre determined means that have been responded to within a pre determined response period and can assign high priority real time communication channel preferences to such a group. By way of further illustration based on machine learning the communication group manager can form a new group e.g. people who have contacted the user more than a pre determined number of times to whom the recipient has not responded or to whom the recipient has sent cease and desist responses e.g. stop sending me unsolicited email spam and can assign low priority non real time communication channel preferences and or blocks to such a group.

The group modifier can similarly consider communication channels available to the communication group member and the lengths of communications in which communicating parties engage e.g. one kilobyte transfers ten megabyte transfers one minute phone calls hour long phone calls . For example short phone calls can be analyzed and affect group membership in a group that has established cellular communications as a preference while long phone calls which are more likely to drain battery resources can affect group membership in a group that has established POTS plain old telephone system telephony as a preference. The group modifier can also consider factors including but not limited to the subject matter of communications the time between communications group deadlines organizational position family relationships indicia of trustworthiness and initiating party data to determine whether to modify a group. It is to be appreciated that the system can be employed with the system .

While illustrates components for the system it is to be appreciated that the system can be implemented as one or more computer components as that term is defined herein. Thus it is to be appreciated that computer executable components operable to implement the system can be stored on computer readable media including but not limited to an ASIC CD DVD ROM RAM PROM floppy disk hard disk EEPROM carrier wave and memory stick.

Given the groups e.g. group A group B group C which may have been formed for example by a group establisher e.g. group establisher the groupwise communication assembler assembles a subset of communicating party members from the groups so that the subset facilitates maximizing the utility of the group communication. Such assembling is based at least in part on the status of the communicating parties where status information can be stored in a status data store . The groupwise communication scheduler schedules a time s for the communication between the meaningful subset where the selected time s facilitate maximizing the utility of the group communication. Thus abstractions concerning the members of the groups that are captured by inclusion in a group facilitate selecting an ideal time channel and or group for example for a communication. In one example of the present invention the ideal time channel and or group is determined by maximizing a measure of utility. Calculations concerning such maximization can be simplified by the abstractions captured by the groupings.

The groups may include for example communication party members M through MN N being an integer. In one group communication handled by the present invention the groupwise communication assembler can be tasked with assembling a meaningful group for a group communication COMMthat concerns an approaching deadline for a software project. A group establisher e.g. group establisher may have formed a group A that includes the members of the programming team and may similarly have formed a group B that includes contracting executives from the company for whom the software is being written. Thus the groupwise communication assembler can identify group member classifications e.g. programming team management contracting party management that are required for the communication COMM. Since project status updates typically do not require participation of one hundred percent of the management teams on both sides of the project the groupwise communication assembler can therefore identify a minimal number of communicating parties from the group member classifications required for the communication. For example the communication COMMmay require two members from the programming team management which may have five total members and two members from the contracting party management which may have three total members . Having identified the group member classifications and the minimal number of communicating parties the groupwise communication assembler can then verify that the minimal number of communicating parties are available at various times for a group communication. For example the groupwise communication assembler can examine the calendars and schedules of the communicating parties if available to determine a set of available times for the communication COMM. If calendar and or schedule data is not available then the groupwise communication assembler can reason under uncertainty to predict times at which the communicating party members are likely to be available. For example if ten previous communications between the programming team management and the contracting party management have occurred at 10 30 a.m. on a Monday then the groupwise communication assembler can infer that the communicating parties are likely to be available for COMMat a similar time. Furthermore the groupwise communication assembler can determine that dynamically creating a new group each Monday morning of people who are available for a weekly update is appropriate. Thus each Monday morning people can dynamically be assigned to a group for the purpose of the update and for the duration of the meeting with the group being dissolved after the meeting.

The groupwise communication scheduler can then schedule calendar and or initiate processing to establish the communication COMM. By way of illustration if the groupwise communication assembler identified ten different meaningful subsets of communicating parties that satisfied the group member classification and minimal number of parties criteria then the groupwise communication scheduler can compute the expected utility for each of these meaningful subsets and schedule calendar and or initiate the group communication COMMbased on maximizing the expected utility. For example a conference call can be scheduled between a subset of the programming team management and the contracting party management identified by the groupwise communication assembler at a time that was identified as available in their respective calendars and reserved by the groupwise communication scheduler . Thus the communication COMMmay proceed between the subset of communicating parties M M and M through MN N being an integer that the groupwise communication assembler predicts will maximize the utility of the communication COMMat the time s predicted by the groupwise communication scheduler to maximize the utility of the communication COMM.

The groupwise communication assembler can also be tasked with assembling a group with which a communicating party MP desires to have a communication COMM. For example a local national guard company commanding officer may desire to initiate a call up of his forces in preparation for deployment. Thus the groupwise communication assembler can select a meaningful subset of communicating parties e.g. executive officer platoon commanders platoon seconds in command company sergeant major platoon sergeants that are sufficient to initiate the call up. Such a meaningful subset can be required to have a minimal number of parties from each of several categories e.g. a pre determined number of officers from each platoon a pre determined number of non commissioned officers from each platoon . The groupwise communication scheduler can then attempt to initiate schedule and or calendar the call up communication COMMas soon as possible. It is apparent that the communication COMMmay be less time critical than the communication COMM and thus the relative weights accorded to the preferences of the communicating parties may be varied based on the time critical nature of a communication. For example preferences associated with M through MN can be analyzed to facilitate maximizing the utility of COMMwhile considering the convenience of the time for the communicating parties while preferences associated with commanding officer MP can be weighted more heavily than the preferences of MQ through MR due to the time critical nature of COMM. It is to be appreciated that the system can be employed with the system .

The system considers the preferences of the members of the volunteer fire department . Thus data concerning such preferences can be stored in a preferences data store . While a single preferences data store is illustrated it is to be appreciated that the preferences data store can be distributed between two or more communicating and or cooperating data stores . The preferences data store can store the preference data in data structures including but not limited to one or more lists arrays tables databases stacks heaps linked lists and data cubes.

The system also considers the context of the communicating parties and the communication channels by which the communicating parties will communicate. Thus data concerning such context can be stored in a context data store . While a single context data store is illustrated it is to be appreciated that the context data store can be distributed between two or more communicating and or cooperating data stores . The context data store can store the preference data in data structures including but not limited to one or more lists arrays tables databases stacks heaps linked lists and data cubes.

The volunteer fire department may include groups like a leaders group a drivers group a firemen group and an EMTs emergency medical technician group . While the four groups are shown as mutually exclusive groups it is to be appreciated that there may be intersection between the groups. For example a fireman may also be an EMT. When a call is received by the volunteer fire department the communication group manager and the group wise communication coordinator can cooperate to identify useful teams of volunteer firefighters and to establish communications with one or more such useful teams. The system can be employed for example by the volunteer fire department to maximize the utility of communications concerning assembling a fire fighting team to fight a fire. Therefore the channel manager can identify potential communication channels through which the group communication may occur. The communication group manager may have previously have been employed to create and or modify groups associated with the firefighters and thus the groupwise communication coordinator can select a meaningful subset from the volunteer fire department and establish the communication . By way of illustration to fight a detached home fire a meaningful subset may require one leader two drivers one for fire truck one for ambulance six firemen and one EMT. Thus from the available leaders e.g. leaders L through LW the available drivers e.g. drivers D through DX the available firemen e.g. firemen F through FY and the available EMTs e.g. EMTs E through EZ the groupwise communication coordinator can identify subsets like L D D F . . . F E E and L D D F . . . E E and then attempt to establish communications to assemble such subsets. While the system considers the preferences of the communicating parties e.g. desired communication channels desired communication times desired communication group due to the time critical nature of a burning house the preferences of the leader group can be given precedence over the preferences of other groups. Furthermore while the system considers the context in which the communicating parties are situated and or the context of the communication channels again due to the time critical nature of responding to a burning house certain contextual factors e.g. widest possible communication to most possible members of subsets in most timely fashion can be weighted more heavily than other contextual factors e.g. time of day . For example while a volunteer fireman may prefer to receive phone calls on a land line when a house is burning simultaneous communications via a siren in the town hall land line phone cellular phone page and personal modalities may be selected to assemble the meaningful subset in the most timely manner possible.

The system can also be employed for example by the volunteer fire department to maximize the utility of communications concerning assembling an EMT team to respond to an automobile accident. Thus a different meaningful subset e.g. one leader one driver three EMTs may be required. While two different types of communications are illustrated it is to be appreciated that a greater and or lesser number of types of communications can be processed by the present invention. It is to be further appreciated that although the volunteer fire department is illustrated with four groups that a greater and or lesser number of groups may be processed by the present invention.

After the useful subsets of communicating parties have been identified the system can dynamically assign such parties to a group based on the activity in which they will engage. For example a currently fighting a fire group can be established or a currently responding to a car crash group can be established. Such activity based associations of people can facilitate increasing the utility of communications between such group members and or with such group members. For example radio frequency bandwidth is an increasingly scarce resource. Thus while hundreds of firemen may have access to available frequencies only those actively engaged on a call e.g. burning house car crash may be allowed to transmit over such frequencies which increases the likelihood that their communications will be effective.

The system can apply a different analysis to the preferences of the communicating parties and the context of such parties. For example given that the volunteer fire department desires to receive additional funding from the contributors the preferences and context of such contributors can be weighted more heavily than the other members of the volunteer fire department . By way of illustration the communication may concern the annual Fourth of July celebration that serves as the primary fund raiser for the volunteer fire department. While the majority of the leaders drivers firemen and EMTs prefer to plan the fund raiser by email and telephone communications the two contributors who contribute the most money and or equipment may prefer a lengthy weeknight meeting. Thus to facilitate maximizing the utility of the communication e.g. raising the most amount of money the preferences of the leaders drivers firemen and EMTs may be subjugated to the preference of the contributors . Furthermore the context of the contributors e.g. extremely busy physically challenged can be weighted more heavily in scheduling the time and or place for the meeting e.g. wheelchair accessible hall close to contributor s home . Thus the system can reason differently given different communication needs e.g. time critical vs. preference critical . Furthermore once the identities of the contributors and firemen who will be attending the lengthy weeknight meeting are established a separate group can be formed to facilitate communication between the members. Such activity centric dynamic groupings facilitate creating and dissolving groups based on activities.

In some situations the system may have incomplete information concerning the preferences and or the context of the communicating parties. Thus the system can reason under uncertainty concerning the preferences and or context . In one example of the present invention the system can employ decision theoretic formulae to facilitate such reasoning.

An aspect of the present invention e.g. a group establisher may have formed the groups and based on initial configuration data supplied by the division head e.g. organization chart and on initial preferences contexts and or assumptions. This would be an example of a pre populated cluster. Thus the group may be a programming team associated with new development of a product while the group may be a programming team associated with maintenance programming. The programming team may include managers architects designers and programmers and the maintenance team may similarly include managers architects designers and programmers.

While illustrates a number of additions deletions migrations replications and promotions associated with the processing of a group modifier programmed in accordance with the present invention it is to be appreciated that such additions deletions migrations replications and promotions are intended to be illustrative and not limiting and that a group modifier may perform a greater and or lesser number of such modifications.

In view of the exemplary systems shown and described above methodologies that are implemented in accordance with the present invention will be better appreciated with reference to the flow diagrams of . While for purposes of simplicity of explanation the illustrated methodologies are shown and described as a series of blocks it is to be understood and appreciated that the present invention is not limited by the order of the blocks as some blocks can in accordance with the present invention occur in different orders and or concurrently with other blocks from that shown and described herein. Moreover not all illustrated blocks may be required to implement a methodology in accordance with the present invention. Furthermore additional and or alternative methodologies can employ additional blocks not illustrated herein. In one example of the present invention such methodologies can be implemented as computer executable instructions and or operations which instructions and or operations can be stored on computer readable media including but not limited to an ASIC a CD a DVD a RAM a ROM a PROM an EEPROM a disk a carrier wave and a memory stick.

At general initializations occur. Such initializations can include but are not limited to allocating memory establishing pointers establishing data communications acquiring resources setting variables and displaying process activity. At potential communication group members are identified. For example humans apparatus computers and or computer components that may be placed in communication groups can be identified. Identifying a communicating party that is eligible for membership in a communication group can include but is not limited to identifying the name of the communicating party identifying a communication group member with which the communicating party desires to communicate identifying a subject matter for the communication identifying a communication group to which the communicating party belongs identifying communication group members with which the communicating party has communicated and determining senders who have communicated with the communicating party.

At potential communication channels that can be employed for communications between communication group members are identified. Such channels can include but are not limited to telephone channels computer channels personal channels and the like.

At data associated with the potential channels is analyzed to facilitate predicting an expected utility associated with the channel. Such data can include but is not limited to status data and context data. Such status and or context data may be deterministic and or uncertain. Thus the analysis performed at may include reasoning under uncertainty that can be performed in one example of the present invention via decision theoretic formulae.

At data associated with the potential groups is analyzed to facilitate predicting an expected utility for a group communication between and or with the group. Such data can include but is not limited to group inclusion criteria and group preference data. Again such data may be deterministic and or uncertain and thus the processing performed in association with may include reasoning under uncertainty. At data associated with the potential group communication is analyzed to further facilitate predicting an expected utility for a group communication between and or with the group. For example data including but not limited to the communication subject matter the communication length the communication urgency and the communication initiator may be analyzed. Some such data may be known and other such data may be unknown. For example the subject matter of the communication may be known e.g. fire alarm for burning house but the communication length may not be known. However given evidence E about the subject matter the length may be inferred according to 1 p length E . Thus an inference may be made which facilitates completing data associated with the communication. Further inference processing and reasoning under uncertainty is described in association with .

At a potential group of communicating parties chosen from the potential group members identified at can be formed. Since the group captures abstractions about the policies preferences context and so on of a communicating party utility maximizing processing can be based on such abstractions thus simplifying assessment of utilities of outcomes and the computation of utility maximizing actions e.g. communication channel selection possible communication channel listings communication time scheduling . Given the group formed at the expected utility of the communication between the potential group can be computed at . The utility computation can consider factors including but not limited to the preferences of the communicating parties the context of the communicating parties the status of communication channels group membership and the like. Since there may be more than one potential group that can be assembled for a meaningful group communication at a determination is made concerning whether there is another potential group to examine. If the determination at is YES processing returns to otherwise processing progresses to . At the utilities computed at for the various groups identified at are ranked. At a channel and group that will maximize the utility of the communication is selected. In one example of the present invention the group communication can then be scheduled calendared and or initiated by a groupwise communication scheduler while in another example of the present invention the groupwise communication scheduler can present options to communicating parties allowing them to select from the choices. Based on the choices and the communicating party responses machine learning can be undertaken that will modify the way in which the potential groups are formed and or the expected utilities are predicted.

At potential communication group members are identified. The potential members can include but are not limited to humans apparatus computers processes and computer components. For example a programmer the programmer s proxy e.g. assistant secretary the programmer s email monitor and the programmer s universal messaging system can be identified as potential group members. By way of illustration the programmer and or the programmer s proxy can communicate with other entities. Similarly the programmer s email can initiate communications with the programmer e.g. page indicating that programmer has urgent email and or individuals that desire to communicate with the programmer e.g. programmer sets up automatic email reply when on vacation . Thus the communication group members can be human machine and computer components.

At the method identifies potential groups that can be established. For example potential groups including but not limited to organizational chart groups most frequently communicated with groups family groups ad hoc groups random groups work flow groups and special interest groups can be identified. Such groups can initially be statically defined e.g. membership in an organizational chart . However such groups can also be dynamically defined based on activities in which members are engaging. For example a group of people with whom a user is going to meet on a certain day can be identified as potential group members where the membership is predicated solely on calendar data indicating that they have a meeting with the user. In one example of the present invention the method can provide a potential group s and or the user of the present invention can additionally and or alternatively provide a potential group s . At the potential group members identified at are initially placed in zero or more of the potential groups identified at . By way of illustration a first programmer may be placed in an organizational chart group a most frequently communicated with group and a special interest group while a second programmer may not be placed in any of the potential groups.

After the initial identification and placement performed from through modifications to the groups can be performed from through . Thus at a determination is made concerning whether a new member has been identified. For example an organization may hire a new programmer and add the programmer to the organizational chart. Similarly a member already in a group may acquire a computer program that is designed to remind the member of important events and thus the computer program will be initiating communications and is therefore identified as a new member. Furthermore a person may update their calendar with meeting information which leads to that person being added to the group of people with whom the user will meet. If the determination at is YES then at the newly identified member is added to one or more groups. By way of illustration the recently hired programmer may be added to both an organizational chart group and a work flow group.

At a determination is made concerning whether a member should be deleted. For example if an employee leaves the organization then the employee may be identified as a group member that is to be deleted from the organizational chart group. Similarly if communications with a group member with whom communications had occurred very frequently e.g. ten times per day for the past year drop off to the point where they are no longer considered a frequent communicator e.g. at least once per day then the group member can be identified as a group member that is to be deleted from the frequently communicated with group. Furthermore if a person updates their calendar to indicate that they will not be attending a meeting with the user then the person can be dynamically removed from the group of people with whom the user will meet. If the determination at is YES then at the identified group member will be deleted from one or more groups.

At a determination is made concerning whether the status of a group member should be updated. For example a member of the organizational chart group may be promoted and thus the status of such a member should be updated. Such updates can include changing the preferences applied to such a group member e.g. encrypted vs. unencrypted email . If the determination at is YES then at the status of the group member can be updated. At a determination is made concerning whether there is another update. If the determination is YES then processing returns to otherwise processing concludes.

At groups associated with the recipient are identified. For example the recipient may have established one or more initial groups e.g. close family family trusted friends friends acquaintances others to which the recipient assigned group preferences. Identifying a group associated with the recipient where that group will then be managed by the method can include but is not limited to analyzing the number of members in a communication group e.g. more than a pre determined configurable upper bound less than a pre determined configurable lower bound analyzing the frequency of communications with group members analyzing the length of a communication analyzing the subject matter of a communication analyzing the urgency of a communication analyzing the similarity of communication types with group members e.g. similar subject matter length urgency analyzing an organizational chart and analyzing membership in a trusted set of communicators. By way of illustration a communication group can include a group member who is considered a trusted communicator by one or more group members. However other group members may have no information concerning the trust level to accord to the group member and thus other group members can analyze the trust level accorded to the group member by other group members.

Over time monitoring communications occurring with members of such groups can reveal patterns trends and or information that can be employed to facilitate improving the performance of the communication system which in turn facilitates maximizing the utility of recipient communications with the group members. Thus at communications with the recipient are monitored. Such monitoring can include but is not limited to identifying an initiator of a communication identifying a recipient of the communication tracking the length of a communication identifying a subject matter of the communication identifying a communication channel along which the communication will travel identifying a related communication and identifying an urgency of the communication. Monitor data associated with such monitoring can be stored for example in a monitor data store. Furthermore category data associated with one or more communicating party categories can be updated based on the monitor data.

Monitoring the recipient communication can lead to a decision concerning whether a group should be managed where such managing includes but is not limited to creating a group deleting a group merging groups together partitioning a group adding a group member removing a group member migrating a group member between groups updating the status of a group member and replicating a group member between groups. Such monitoring can be activity based therefore the activities in which a person is engaged as revealed by their communications can be employed to dynamically assign a person to a communication group.

Thus at a determination is made concerning whether an update has been triggered. The determination can be based on the category and or monitor data for example. By way of illustration if the number type and or quality of communications with the recipient indicate that a new group should be formed e.g. dissimilarly quotient exceeds pre determined configurable threshold an update can be triggered. By way of further illustration if the presence of a number of communications from an entity that is not a group member exceeds a pre determined configurable threshold e.g. one percent of all communications then an update to add the member to a group can be triggered. By way of further illustration a paucity of communications e.g. less than one communication per month from an entity that is a group member can trigger an update to delete the group member. If the determination at is NO then processing proceeds to .

But if the determination at is YES then a determination is made at concerning whether a group should be created. If the determination at is YES then at a new group is created. Similarly at a determination is made concerning whether a member should be added to a group. If the determination at is YES then at the group member is added. By way of illustration of an interaction between and at a determination is made to create a new group e.g. people who have called on a new satellite telephone at such a group is created and at a determination is made that the monitored communication involved a satellite call and thus at the communicating party is added to the new satellite communication group.

At a determination is made concerning whether group information and or group member information should be updated. If the determination at is YES then at the update occurs. While illustrates three management decisions e.g. create new group add member to group update information it is to be appreciated that the present invention can perform a greater and or lesser number of group management functions that include but are not limited to creating a group deleting a group merging groups partitioning groups replicating groups adding a member removing a member updating a member migrating a member and replicating a member and that such management functions can be based on activities in which people are engaged.

At a determination is made concerning whether there is another communication to monitor. If the determination at is YES then processing returns to otherwise processing concludes.

In one example of the present invention a graphical user interface GUI is employed to select the group that will participate in the group communication with the greatest expected utility. Thus the example includes a computer system having a GUI that comprises a display and a selection device. The GUI is employed in a method of providing and selecting from a menu on the display where the method includes retrieving a set of menu entries for the menu where each of the menu entries represents a group selected for a group communication and where the group communication has a calculated expected utility. The method also includes displaying the set of menu entries on the display receiving a menu entry selection signal indicating which menu entry was selected from the set of menu entries and initiating a communication represented by the menu entry.

In order to provide additional context for various aspects of the present invention and the following discussion are intended to provide a brief general description of a suitable computing environment in which the various aspects of the present invention may be implemented. While the invention has been described above in the general context of computer executable components instructions and or operations that may run on one or more computers those skilled in the art will recognize that the invention also may be implemented in combination with other program modules and or as a combination of hardware and software. Generally program modules include routines programs components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the inventive methods may be practiced with computer system configurations including single processor or multiprocessor computer systems minicomputers mainframe computers personal computers hand held computing devices microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics and the like each of which may be operatively coupled to one or more associated devices. The illustrated aspects of the invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where certain tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary environment for implementing various aspects of the invention includes a computer the computer including a processing unit a system memory and a system bus . The system bus couples system components including but not limited to the system memory to the processing unit . The processing unit may be any of various processors. Dual microprocessors and other multi processor architectures also can be employed as the processing unit .

The system bus can be any of several types of bus structure including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. The system memory includes read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within the computer such as during start up is stored in ROM .

The computer further includes a hard disk drive a magnetic disk drive e.g. to read from or write to a removable disk and an optical disk drive e.g. for reading a CD ROM disk or to read from or write to other optical media . The hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive can be connected to the system bus by a hard disk drive interface a magnetic disk drive interface and an optical drive interface respectively. The drives and their associated computer readable media provide nonvolatile storage of data data structures computer components computer executable instructions etc. for the computer . Although the description of computer readable media above refers to a hard disk a removable magnetic disk and a CD it should be appreciated that other types of media that are readable by a computer such as zip drives magnetic cassettes flash memory cards digital video disks cartridges ASICs and the like may also be used in the exemplary operating environment and further that any such media may contain computer executable instructions for performing the methods of the present invention.

A number of program modules can be stored in the drives and RAM including an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . It is to be appreciated that the present invention can be implemented with various operating systems or combinations of operating systems.

A user can enter commands and information into the computer through a keyboard and a pointing device such as a mouse . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone an IR remote control a joystick a game pad a satellite dish a scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a serial port interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interfaces such as a parallel port a game port a universal serial bus USB an IR infrared interface etc. A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . In addition to the monitor a computer typically includes other peripheral output devices not shown such as speakers printers etc.

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer s . The remote computer s may be a workstation a server computer a router a personal computer microprocessor based entertainment appliance a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described relative to the computer although for purposes of brevity only a memory storage device is illustrated. The logical connections depicted include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN environment the computer is connected to the local network through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN environment the computer typically includes a modem or is connected to a communications server on the LAN or has other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external is connected to the system bus via the serial port interface . In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Referring now to a system that includes a channel manager is illustrated. The channel manager identifies communication channels that facilitate optimizing the utility of a communication between a contactor and a contactee . While one contactor and one contactee are illustrated it is to be appreciated that the system facilitates identifying optimal communication channels between two or more communicating parties e.g. communication groups . It is to be further appreciated that the parties to the communication may include human parties apparatus and or electronic processes. Thus as employed herein the terms contactee and contactor include groups of contactors and groups of contactees.

The communication may be carried over a variety of channels including but not limited to telephone channels computer channels fax channels paging channels and personal channels. The telephone channels include but are not limited to POTS telephony cellular telephony satellite telephony and Internet telephony. The computer channels can include but are not limited to email collaborative editing instant messaging network meetings calendaring and devices employed in home processing and or networking. The personal channels include but are not limited to videoconferencing messengering and face to face meeting. Data concerning a current channel e.g. a phone that is busy can be analyzed as can data concerning the likelihood that the channel may become available e.g. phone will no longer be busy .

Identifying the optimal communication channel can include considering the benefits of establishing the communication at a first point in time with the communication channels available at that point in time and considering the costs of delaying establishing the communication to a second point in time when other communication channels may be available.

The channel manager has access to a channel data store a contactor data store and a contactee data store . The contactor data store the channel data store and the contactee data store can store data in data structures including but not limited to one or more lists arrays tables databases stacks heaps linked lists and data cubes and can reside on one physical device and or can be distributed between two or more physical devices e.g. disk drives tape drives memory units . Furthermore the contactor data store the channel data store and the contactee data store can reside in one logical device and or data structure.

The channel manager can be a computer component as that term is defined herein and thus the channel manager can be distributed between two or more cooperating processes and or reside in one physical or logical device e.g. computer process .

In a general formulation of the problem addressed by the channel manager the present invention considers a communications value function f that returns a value for each communication channel or subset of channels under consideration or an ordering over communication channels in terms of acceptability of the channel or subset of channels. Value Channel preferences contactee contactor organization context contactee contactor where the context of contactee and contactor include group membership group context the devices that are available the time of day tasks and situation at hand for the contactor and contactee and the like. It is to be appreciated that the context of the contactee and contactor may be stored in one or more formats including but not limited to an XML schema. In one example of the present invention the channel manager initially orders the channels by assigned value and attempts to create a connection or to advise the contactor and or contactee concerning the best possible connection.

In general there may be uncertainty concerning preferences and one or more parameters employed to model a context. In this situation a probability distribution over the different states of variables can be inferred and expected values for channels can be computed. For example if there is uncertainty concerning aspects of the context of the contactee the probability distribution here represented abstractly given evidence E observed about the context and sum over the uncertainties can be represented Expected value Channel preferences contactee contactor organization context of contactee context of contactor 

While this expected value can be employed to initially identify the channel that is predicted to maximize the utility of the communication in one example of the present invention the contactee will be presented with options concerning the communication. The contactee reaction to the options will then determine the channel that is selected for the communication . The reactions to the options can be employed in machine learning that facilitates adapting the channel manager .

Considering now more specific examples of the use of expected utility a particular basic formulation of decision making under uncertainty in the context of the preferences of the contactee is captured by Equation 1.

Thus in an example aspect of the present invention the conditional probability p context E that the contactee has a certain context given the evidence E is employed in conjunction with the utility function u to determine the ideal communication actions that can be taken to maximize the utility of the communication between the contactor and the contactee .

The basic formulation for identifying optimal communication channels can be extended by introducing uncertainty about the context of the contactor which adds the summing noted in equation 2 to the uncertainty calculations of equation 1. The particular communication action and or channel selected for the initial contact by the contactor is represented as A.

The contactor and contactee contexts represent rich sets of deterministic or uncertain variables. Data associated with automated assessments and or directly marked indications of urgency or importance in the communications can also be evaluated in identifying optimal communication channels. The contextual variables can be treated as explicit deterministic or probabilistic factors in the optimization. For example mcan represent the channels available to the contactor and thus equation 3 considers combinations of channels available to the contactor .

The present invention can also compare the best communication option available now with the best communication option that will be available later and update the value of the communication for the losses based in delays in communication and potential gains or losses based on changes in disruptiveness if the communication should come at the later time t when the contactee is in a different state e.g. more available or less available . Such comparison can be captured by equation four 

Thus decision theoretic formulae like those described in equations 1 through 4 are employed to produce one or more expected utilities for one or more sets of contactors and or contactees that are established into one or more groups that are subsequently managed. In one example aspect of the present invention a communication is automatically initiated scheduled and or calendared based on such information. But in another aspect of the present invention information concerning those expected utilities is presented to one or more parties. By way of illustration a contactor is presented with a list of communications with high utilities determined in accordance with the preferences of the contactee. The contactor then selects from the list.

While one communication between one contactor and one contactee is illustrated it is to be appreciated that a greater number of communications between a similar or greater number of contactors and or contactees can be identified by the present invention. By way of illustration communications to facilitate group meetings can be identified by the system as can multiple communications between two communicating parties e.g. duplicate messages sent simultaneously by email and pager .

The communication that is identified by the channel manager may depend at least in part on one or more sets of data concerning communication channels contactors and or contactees for example. One possible data set the communication channel data set concerns the available communication channels. The available communication channels can include but are not limited to email of various priorities telephone POTS cellular satellite Internet paging runners couriers video conferencing face to face meeting instantaneous collaborative editing delayed posting collaborative editing picture in picture television home device activation e.g. turning on lights in the study ringing the telephone with a distinctive pattern and so on. A communication channel may not be a static entity and thus information concerning the state capacity availability cost etc. of the communication channels can change. Thus the communication channel data set can contain current state information and or data to facilitate making predictions concerning future state capacity availability cost etc. associated with one or more communication channels.

The channel manager can also have available the contactee data that includes information related to hardware software contactee task being performed contactee attention status contactee context data and contactee preference data for example. By way of illustration the hardware data can include information related to what hardware is available to the contactee what hardware is being employed by the contactee e.g. desktop laptop PDA the capabilities of that hardware e.g. enough memory and communication bandwidth for videoconferencing the cost of employing that hardware and the state s in which that hardware is currently functioning e.g. online offline . The hardware data can also include information concerning usage patterns that facilitate determining the likelihood that an unavailable piece of hardware will become available. The software data can include information related to what software is available to the contactee what software is currently being employed by the contactee e.g. word processor in use the capabilities of that software e.g. allows collaborative editing and the state s in which that software is currently functioning e.g. running and active running but inactive . The software data can also include information concerning usage patterns that facilitate determining the likelihood that an unavailable piece of software will become available.

The contactee data can also contain preference data concerning the preferences of the contactee . The preference data can include data concerning how the contactee prefers to be contacted with those preferences varying over time with respect to for example various contactors various times various channels and various topics of communication. The contactee preference data can include data concerning but not limited to preferences concerning the time of day for communicating e.g. early morning business hours evening late night sleeping hours the time of the week for communicating e.g. Monday through Friday Weekend Holiday Vacation identity of contactors e.g. employer employees critical colleague colleague peers nuclear family extended family close friends friends acquaintances others hardware currently available or available within a time horizon of a communication attempt e.g. desktop laptop home computer preferred software e.g. email word processing calendaring and preferred interruptability e.g. do not interrupt while focused on work only interrupt while not focused for example. While six preferences are identified in the preceding sentence it is to be appreciated that a greater or lesser number of preferences can be employed in accordance with the present invention.

The contactee data can also include a context data . The context data is generally related to observations about the contactee . For example observations concerning the type of activity in which the contactee is involved e.g. on task not on task location of the contactee e.g. office home car shower calendar e.g. appointment status appointment availability history of communications with other party e.g. have replied to email in the past have spoken to on the telephone recently the utility of the interaction the duration of the interaction background ambient noise at current location number of hours at work that day and attentional status e.g. high focus focus light focus conversation with another person light activity can be stored in the context data .

On some occasions the context data may be incomplete e.g. video analysis data unavailable because video camera broken . Thus the channel manager reasons concerning the optimal communication while relying on such incomplete data. Thus the contactee data can also include information to facilitate producing one or more probabilities associated with a missing data element. By way of illustration the contactee data can contain information operable to predict the likelihood that the contactee is in a high attentional state even though gaze tracking information is unavailable.

The contactee data can further include information concerning the long term and or acute dynamically changing communication needs of the contactee . By way of illustration the contactee may need to have no interruptions for the next hour e.g. hold everything unless high critical on this task or an hour from now . By way of further illustration to prevent a contactor from ducking the contactee by leaving an email or a voice mail when the contactee desires to speak with the contactor the contactee can require that contacts from the contactor be made in a certain way within X units of time of notification that the contactor desires communication.

the contactee data is seen to contribute to the utility function u through the contextcomponent which can include the contactee context data discussed above.

In addition to the contactee data employed in determining the optimal communication data concerning the contactor may also be employed. The contactor data can include hardware software context preference and communication needs data substantially similar to that available for the contactee but different in that it is prepared from the point of view of the contactor .

The present invention is not limited to communications between two parties or to a single communication channel between two parties. It is to be appreciated that multiple channels and or multiple communicating parties can be treated as increased sets of alternatives that complicate utility maximizing computations without changing the fundamental process of identifying and establishing one or more communication channels based on the preferences contexts and capabilities of the communicating parties.

The channel manager can include several computer components responsible for implementing portions of the functionality of the channel manager . For example the channel manager can include a preference resolver . The preference resolver examines the contactee preference data and the contactor preference data to find correlations between the two sets of data. In one example of the present invention information concerning the correlations is stored in a resolved preference data. For group communications the preference resolver examines multiple sets of preference data to find correlations between the preferences. By way of illustration for a communication between two parties the preference resolver can determine that both parties would prefer to communicate by high priority email for communications associated with a first task. Similarly the preference resolver can determine that the contactee would prefer to communicate by collaborative editing and phone for communications concerning a particular document while the contactor would prefer to communicate only by telephone. Thus the preference resolver produces data e.g. resolved preference data or initiates processing that assigns values to the correlations between the contactee preferences and the contactor preferences . In one example aspect of the present invention the preferences of the contactee are given more weight and thus if the contactor attempted a phone conversation concerning the document for which the contactee preferred both phone and collaborative editing then the preference resolver produces data or initiates processing that makes it more likely that the contactor communicates by both phone and collaborative editing. In another example aspect of the present invention the preferences of the contactor are given priority over the preferences of the contactee. By way of illustration when a human contactor is attempting to communicate with an electronic contactee the preferences of the contactor are considered more important and thus the preference resolver produces values or initiates processing that makes it more likely that the preferences of the contactor are observed. In another example aspect of the present invention the preference resolver produces a list of potential communication channels ranked on their responsiveness to the preferences.

The channel manager can also include a context analyzer . The context analyzer examines the contactee context data and the contactor context data to find correlations between the two sets of data. In one example of the present invention information concerning the correlations is stored in an analyzed context data. For group communications the context analyzer may examine multiple sets of context data to extract information concerning the contexts. By way of illustration for a communication between two parties the context analyzer may determine that the contactee context is such that real time communications are not immediately available but there is an X likelihood that such communications will be available at a point of time Tin the future and an X likelihood that such communications will be available at a point of time Tin the future. Further the context analyzer may determine that although the contactor has requested real time telephony that the context of the contactor is such that email communication may optimize utility. For example the context of the contactor may include information concerning the ambient noise at the location of the contactor . The context analyzer may determine that the noise level is not conducive to optimizing utility by real time telephony and thus may produce values and or initiate processing that will make it more likely that the contactor will communicate with the contactee via email. Similar to processing performed by the preference resolver the context analyzer may in different examples of the system weight the context of the contactee more than the context of the contactor or vice versa.

The channel manager can also include a channel analyzer . The channel analyzer analyzes the communication channel data set . The channel analyzer produces data concerning the current availability of a communication channel and or the likelihood of the channel becoming available. In one example of the present invention such data is stored in a communication channel data. The channel analyzer also examines one or more channels that the contactor specified for the communication and or one or more channels that the contactee listed as preferences in the contactee preference data for example. The channel analyzer also examines currently available channels as determined by location information associated with the contactee and channels that may become available based on the activity of the contactee . For example if the contactee is currently driving home as determined by GPS and schedule for example then the channel analyzer examines current cellular channels and additionally examines the channels available at the home of the contactee . Thus the channel analyzer facilitates producing data and or initiating processing that makes it more likely that a desired channel is employed when determining the optimal communication channel s for the communication between the contactor and the contactee . Thus examining equation 1 

The channel manager can also include a communication establisher . Once the ideal communication actions A have been identified the communication establisher undertakes processing to connect the contactor and the contactee through the identified optimal communication channel. Such connection can be based at least in part on the resolved preference data the analyzed context data and the communication channel data. For example if the optimal communication is identified as being email then the communication establisher can initiate an email composing process for the contactor e.g. email screen on computer voice to email converter on cell phone email composer on two way digital pager and forward the composed email to the most appropriate email application for the contactee based on the identified optimal communication . For example the communication establisher can forward the email to the pager of the contactee based on GPS data associated with the location of the contactee . In an alternative example of the present invention the system does not include a communication establisher relying instead on contactor and or contactee actions for example to establish the communication.

It is to be appreciated that the preference resolver the context analyzer the channel analyzer and the communication establisher are computer components as that term is defined herein.

Referring now to information can be transmitted between various computer components associated with the group managing and group communication functions described herein via a data packet . An exemplary data packet is shown. The data packet includes a synchronization field that includes synchronizing bits that allow a device receiving the packet an opportunity to lock on to the packet . A header field follows the synchronization field and includes information such as the length and type of packet. For example the header field can indicate whether the packet is a packet type that requires a response from the receiving device. A source address field follows the header field and includes the address of the device from which the packet originated. Following the source address field the packet includes a destination address field that holds the address of the device to which the packet is ultimately destined. A data field in the packet includes various information intended for the receiving device. The data packet ends with a cyclical redundancy check CRC field that serves as an error detecting field whereby a receiving device can determine if it has properly received a packet . While seven fields are illustrated in data packet it is to be appreciated that a greater and or lesser number of fields may be present in data packets employed by the present invention.

The data structure includes communication channel information communication time information communication subject matter information group membership information selected group membership identification information extrinsic information and a variety of other data fields. Thus in one example of the present invention a memory that stores data that can be accessed by a computer component can store a data structure that holds a first field that stores communication expected utility information associated with a communication based on group membership information a second field that stores information for identifying group members who will participate in the communication and a third field that stores group membership information for the group members identified in the second field.

Referring now to an application programming interface API is illustrated providing access to a system that includes a channel manager and a group communication system . The API may be employed for example by programmers and or processes to gain access to processing performed by the system . Similarly the API can be employed to provide data values to the system and or retrieve data values from the system . Thus in one example of the present invention a set of application program interfaces can be stored on a computer readable medium. The interfaces can be executed by a computer component to gain access to a group management program. Such interfaces can include but are not limited to a first interface that receives group membership information a second interface that receives communication channel information a third interface that receives communication information and a fourth interface that provides communication channel information and communication group membership information employed in maximizing the utility of a group communication.

Other dynamic assignments of people to groups can be performed based on factors like whether the user has met with the person within a pre determined configurable period of time e.g. check box whether the user has communicated with the person within a pre determined configurable period of time e.g. check box whether the person is on an active project in which the user is interested e.g. check box and whether the person is on an active project that is in a shared state e.g. check box . While six dynamic assignment criteria are illustrated in it is to be appreciated that a greater and or lesser number of such criteria can be employed with the present invention. Furthermore while check boxes are illustrated in it is to be appreciated that other user interface elements can be employed with the present invention.

What has been described above includes examples of the present invention. It is of course not possible to describe every conceivable combination of components or methodologies for purposes of describing the present invention but one of ordinary skill in the art may recognize that many further combinations and permutations of the present invention are possible. Accordingly the present invention is intended to embrace all such alterations modifications and variations that fall within the spirit and scope of the appended claims. Furthermore to the extent that the term includes is used in either the detailed description or the claims such term is intended to be inclusive in a manner similar to the term comprising as comprising is interpreted as a transitional word in a claim.

