---

title: Adapter for protective mask testing apparatus
abstract: An adapter for testing an outlet valve of a protective mask with a testing apparatus includes portions which oppose the valve and are configured to connect the valve to the tester in sufficient isolation for testing purposes. In one implementation, the valve has first and second notches configured to engage corresponding non-uniform geometries in an interference fit. In still further implementations, the adapter comprises an overmold with a resiliently compressible surface conformed to mate with the outlet valve and an insert at least partly encapsulated by the overmold and providing support to the resilient compression of the surface of the overmold. In use, the portions of the adapter engaging corresponding locations on the valve to be tested form an interference fit.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07584751&OS=07584751&RS=07584751
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07584751
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050811
---
There are a variety of protective masks or colloquially gas masks to prevent users from inhaling toxic substances of all sorts. Such masks include negative pressure chemical biological radiological and nuclear protective masks known as CBRN protective masks in military parlance. The M45 joint service protective mask part of the M40 series of masks is among those in use by various branches of the United States Armed Services.

It is of course desirable to assure that the M45 masks and other protective masks in use by the military function and fit properly in order to protect the users from exposure to various toxins. In particular the function of the outlet valve of the protective mask is often critical. Upon inhalation the outlet valve must close to a sufficient degree to channel inhalation through the mask s canister without drawing in toxins from outside the mask. Conversely upon exhalation the outlet valve must open sufficiently to expel the breath again without unacceptable leakage.

The outlet valve and other features of protective masks may be tested at the manufacturing facility. Factory tests of the outlet valves of protective masks often suffer from certain drawbacks and disadvantages. For example operation of the outlet valve is generally tested by applying positive or negative pressure to the valve from inside of the mask. Such test results are often not acceptable to the armed services or other users. Such inside tests differ from testing the function of the valve from outside of the mask and therefore such outside testing is generally preferred as an indication of serviceability and reliability.

The joint service mask leakage tester JSMLT in military parlance is a portable testing device that has been developed for testing certain protective masks. However the results obtained from the JSMLT are generally only as good as the connection between the JSMLT and the protective mask to be tested. In other words unless the mask to be tested is properly secured or connected to the JSMLT the test results related to function serviceability leakage and proper fit of the mask may be inaccurate producing either false positives or false negatives. In addition to the JSMLT other portable testers are available for use and also require a secure connection between the mask being tested and the test device. Some of these devices include the TDA 99M Protective Mask Leakage Tester which is the commercial equivalent of the JSMLT and the TDA 99B which are both available commercially from Air Techniques International ATI of Owings Mills Md.

The current connections between the JSMLT and masks to be tested suffer from various drawbacks and disadvantages especially with regard to masks having outlet valves of irregular geometry such as the M45. Current connections to the JSMLT sometimes may not create a sufficient seal with the outlet valve for accurate testing purposes. Establishing a suitable connection may be a cumbersome process at times the ability to achieve the suitable connection may be inconsistent at other times and the resulting connection may be unreliable at still other times.

There is thus a need to address the various drawbacks and disadvantages of the current apparatus for testing protective masks.

An adapter is provided for testing an outlet valve of a gas mask with a mask leakage testing apparatus. In one implementation part of the adapter is an overmold having a resiliently compressible surface which has been conformed so as to mate with the outlet valve. The adapter has an insert formed of a material which is more rigid than that of the overmold. The insert is secured to the overmold in such a way that a surface of the insert at least partly underlies the conformed surface of the overmold. In this way the insert surface provides support to the resilient compression of the conformed surface of the overmold. Certain portions of the conformed surface engage corresponding locations of the housing of the valve in an interference fit. As a result the valve portion is sufficiently isolated for testing purposes by the apparatus.

In certain implementations the adapter is part of a joint service mask leakage tester. The adapter in such implementations includes portions which oppose an M45 mask outlet valve to be tested. The portions which oppose the valve to be tested include first and second notches configured to engage respectively a drink tube and microphone connection port associated with the housing of the valve. Other portions of the adapter include multiple walls which engage corresponding locations on the valve in an interference fit.

The details of one or more embodiments of the invention are set forth in the accompanying drawings and the description below. Other features objects and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the description and drawings and from the claims.

Referring now to the drawings and in particular to one suitable apparatus for testing protective masks is as a joint service mask leakage tester JSMLT . The JSMLT tests a variety of functions and features of protective masks in order to determine mask serviceability identify defective components and perform quantitative factor tests. To test for outlet valve leakage and perform the other tests of interest the JSMLT includes an aerosol generator assembly control unit power unit head forms an interface hose a fit test module and other components. The JSMLT is a military version of ATI s model number TDA 99M which is described at ATI s website at www.atitest.com.

As seen in testing apparatus includes a testing port through which positive or negative air pressure is delivered for performing outlet valve leakage testing in a manner appreciated by those skilled in the art.

A protective mask here shown as the M45 negative pressure mask includes an outlet valve to be tested with testing apparatus . To accomplish such testing outlet valve must be operatively connected to testing port . Such operative connection means that valve is exposed to one or more tests through suitably isolated pneumatic communication with testing port .

Adapter facilitates the operative connection between outlet valve and testing apparatus . As seen in adapter includes a surface which opposes valve . Surface has been conformed or otherwise configured to connect valve to testing apparatus in sufficient isolation to test valve operation. Adapter also includes a suitable connector which secures adapter in pneumatic communication with testing port .

As seen by reference to outlet valve includes a valve housing . Valve housing has various non uniform geometries or portions which pose challenges to suitably connecting it to testing equipment. In this example and implementation the non uniform portions of housing include a drinking tube and associated fitting and a microphone connection port both of which extend radially outwardly from a cylindrical sidewall of housing . The uniformity of cylindrical sidewall itself is interrupted by two gaps or breaks which extend over an arc of about 30 each. Between the two breaks is an isolated section of sidewall and a tab for securing a mask cover not shown . Tab extends radially outwardly from section and cylindrical sidewall forming another non uniform portion of housing of valve . At the base of cylindrical sidewall is a cylindrical wall having a smaller diameter of curvature than that of cylindrical sidewall thereby forming a detent between walls .

Referring now again to adapter and in this implementation surface has been conformed to include various features or portions which engage corresponding locations on valve to form an interference fit sufficient to connect valve to testing apparatus . Surface includes notches configured to engage drink tube and microphone connection port respectively in an interference fit. Surface also includes multiple walls for engaging valve . For example two circumferential arcs are formed into surface to mate with breaks in housing of the outlet valve . The circumferential arcs terminate in wall ends which engage opposing portions of cylindrical sidewall of housing to form interference fits. A third notch is sized to receive tab therein in an interference fit.

Notches and are defined in surface of adapter . When adapter is installed on testing apparatus surface faces outwardly from testing apparatus and opposes mask to be tested. Surface thus is an upper or outer surface of adapter as shown in the drawings of this implementation. Upper surface is part of a generally cylindrical wall which extends circumferentially at the perimeter of adapter . Notches are positioned at angles around circumferential wall so as to correspond to angular locations of drinking tube microphone connection port and tab respectively in outlet valve .

Similarly circumferential arcs are disposed inwardly and near circumferential wall of adapter and at angular locations to mate with breaks or gaps in sidewall of valve housing .

Adapter has a circumferential lip extending inwardly at or near upper surface and a circumferential crevice at or near the base of cylindrical wall . Lip is sized to resiliently compress as cylindrical sidewall of outlet housing is inserted into adapter . As best visualized by reference to when housing has been sufficiently advanced lip decompresses to engage detent at the base of housing . Engagement of lip into detent provides the operator of testing apparatus with a snap in feel that outlet valve has been fully received onto adapter as well as providing a sealing function. Crevice receives therein an upper portion of cylindrical sidewall in an interference fit.

Referring now more particularly to in this implementation the various notches walls and other geometries of adapter are defined by conforming an outer surface corresponding to surface of an overmold . Overmold is formed of a resiliently compressible polymeric material preferably rubber SANTOPRENE or a soft elastomer although other materials are likewise suitable. The resilient compressibility of the material for overmold can vary in durometer from 20 to 80 such as between 20 and 50. A durometer of about 30 has been found well suited for this implementation. Overmold surrounds or encapsulates an insert . Insert is formed of a more rigid material than that used for overmold such as aluminum although other materials such as nylon or a more rigid polymeric material are also suitable. By virtue of the more rigid material used for insert it supports overmold and aids the various features of conformed surface in establishing the interference fit sufficient to isolate valve for testing purposes. Thus insert has its own circumferential insert wall with upper surface underlying upper surface formed in wall of overmold . Similarly insert has cut outs and extending into insert wall at angular locations corresponding to notches and respectively defined in overmold . Cut outs and are sized and dimensioned to underlie notches when insert has been encapsulated by overmold .

A plurality of pins extend upwardly or outwardly as shown in the drawings from surface of insert wall . Pins when surrounded or encapsulated by overmold aid in maintaining the angular registration between overmold and insert .

To encapsulate insert it is placed into a cavity of the mold corresponding to the overmold. The polymeric material for the overmold is then introduced into the cavity which is then filled so as to encapsulate the insert and create the overmold.

It will be appreciated that the interference fit around each of the non uniform portions of valve needs to be sufficient to seal valve to testing apparatus for testing purposes. In other words the interference fits created by the features of conformed surface must not leak during testing. The existence of multiple non uniform geometries in valve as well as the spacing of such non uniformities at different angular locations around the circumference of housing complicate the creation of a suitable interference fit for a variety of reasons. To address these complexities the durometer of surface must be sufficiently hard to remain sealed when exposed to positive and negative pressures of testing yet sufficiently soft to conform to the non uniform or irregular geometries of valve .

Once an appropriate durometer or range of durometer is selected the presence of angles and edges in the geometry of valve still may make the valve prone to leakage or other unsealing as such angles and edges may create sufficient stress concentrations to separate opposing portions of adapter from valve even when such opposing portions are made of resiliently compressible material. Furthermore the creation of suitable interference fits with resiliently compressible material is generally accompanied by a certain amount of push back force caused by its compression. While such push back force is desirable for the purposes of forming the interference fit if such forces are greater at one angular location around the circumference of adapter than at other such locations there is a possibility that adapter will rock in response to such unbalanced force causing a gap in certain interference fits and unacceptable leakage.

In view of the foregoing notches and the other features of adapter and the corresponding underlying portions of insert have dimensions selected for this implementation to achieve the desired interference fit. For example notch has a width of about 0.4 inches at upper surface a maximum depth of about 0.5 inches with a radius of about 0.2 inches at the bottommost extension of notch . The corresponding cut out has a width of about 0.6 inches at upper surface a maximum depth of about 0.4 inches and a radius of curvature of about 0.3 inches defining the bottom area of cut out . Upper surface of overmold is spaced from upper surface of insert by about 0.175 inches.

Notch comprises a five sided channel as best seen in with a width of about 0.47 inches at upper surface a maximum depth of about 0.54 inches a pair of vertically oriented sidewalls extending about 0.34 inches from upper surface and a pair of sidewalls angled inwardly from such vertical sidewalls by about 30 . Cut out in insert corresponds to notch and likewise has a five sided trough with a width of about 0.67 inches a maximum depth of about 0.42 inches a pair of vertically descending sidewalls of about 0.15 inches and a pair of sidewalls extending inwardly to the bottom of the trough from the vertical side walls at an angle of about 30 .

Referring now to notch comprises a T shaped trough with a width of about 0.122 inches at the outer edge of cylindrical wall depth of about 0.198 inches and two pairs of champhered surfaces restricting the width to about 0.12 inches near the inner edge of cylindrical wall . Cut out in insert corresponds to notch and comprises a channel having a similar or identical width and depth.

Of course while these particular dimensions have been found suitable of this application the invention is not limited to such dimensions nor this application and other sizes configurations and applications are clearly contemplated. Connector may assume any number of forms suitable to secure adapter to testing apparatus . In this implementation connector includes a disc of rigid material seated or otherwise received within the space defined by cylindrical wall . A threaded shank extends longitudinally outwardly from the disc sufficiently to be received in a complementarily threaded bore in testing apparatus .

Operation of testing apparatus and associated adapter is readily apparent from the foregoing description. Adapter is suitably secured to testing apparatus to be in operative association with test port . Outlet valve is positioned in front of adapter and at an angular orientation to match up the radially extending irregular geometries of valve with corresponding notches and in adapter . Mask is manipulated to insert outlet valve into adapter . Valve is advanced relative to cylindrical wall and into adapter until lip of adapter engages detent of housing such engagement being generally physically perceptible to the user of testing apparatus and overall seal. An interference fit is created by the engagement of valve against corresponding resiliently compressible portions of adapter . Outlet valve is then subjected to one or more tests which act on the valve portion of valve .

A number of embodiments of the invention have been described. Nevertheless it will be understood that various modifications may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. For example while the adapter in this implementation includes an overmold and an encapsulated insert use of two pieces is not required. Alternately the overmold and insert can be replaced with a single component either machined molded or otherwise formed to include portions for opposing and engaging corresponding locations on the valve to be tested.

As a related alternative there is no need for various portions of adapter to be defined integrally in or on a surface or for that matter to be defined by conforming a surface through molding or machining. In other words portions for mating or engaging corresponding locations on valve can be provided to adapter by fastening one or more pieces to adapter at the appropriate locations. Thus adapter can be provided with portions for engaging valve by affixing one or more discrete geometries relative to each other at suitable locations.

Similarly adapter can be equipped with adjustable or variable portions which move relative to each other to provide the necessary engagement with valve . It is likewise understood that the sizes and shapes of the portions of adapter which engage corresponding locations on valve can be varied to suit any number of outlet valves for any number of protective masks. Furthermore although the portions of adapter in the illustrated implementations include notches surfaces and walls still other geometries may be appropriate and suitable to provide the necessary engagement and interference fit with corresponding locations of certain outlet valves. So for example bores steps teeth tongues or other extensions depressions or geometries can be arranged on the adapter in a way to oppose corresponding locations on the outlet valve and achieve the desired seal with such valve.

It is understood that still further variations and modifications may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention and that the implementations and alternatives presented herein are not intended to limit the inventions the scope of which is set out in the following claims.

