---

title: Nonvolatile memory device storing data based on change in transistor characteristics
abstract: A nonvolatile memory device includes a pair of PMOS transistors, and a control circuit configured to operate in a store mode to apply to a first one of the PMOS transistors potentials that cause an NBTI degradation purposefully and to apply to a second one of the PMOS transistors potentials that cause no NBTI degradation while causing no current to flow between a source node and a drain node of the first one of the PMOS transistors, and to operate in a recall mode to set gate nodes of the PMOS transistors to a common potential to detect a difference in the NBTI degradation between said PMOS transistors.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07835196&OS=07835196&RS=07835196
owner: Nscore Inc.
number: 07835196
owner_city: Fukuoka-Shi, Fukuoka
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20051003
---
The present invention generally relates to a memory device and particularly relates to a nonvolatile memory device which is capable of retaining stored data in the absence of a power supply voltage.

Nonvolatile semiconductor memory devices which can retain stored data even when power is turned off include flash EEPROMs employing a floating gate structure FeRAMs employing a ferroelectric film MRAMs employing a ferromagnetic film etc.

In the case of EEPROMs there is a need to manufacture a transistor having a special structure comprised of a floating gate. In the case of FeRAMs and MRAMs which achieve nonvolatile storage by use of a ferroelectric material and a ferromagnetic material respectively there is a need to form and process a film made of these respective materials. The need for such transistor having a special structure and the need for such film made of a special material are one of the factors that result in an increase in the manufacturing costs.

PCT JP2003 014143 which was filed on Dec. 17 2003 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference discloses a memory cell i.e. a basic unit of data storage comprised of a pair of transistors which are configured to experience a hot carrier effect on purpose for storage of one bit data. A difference in the transistor characteristics caused by the hot carrier effect represents one bit data 0 or 1 .

Specifically when one of the two transistors is subjected to a hot carrier effect a difference in the ON current develops between the two transistors. The difference in the ON current may be detected by a one bit static memory circuit latch coupled to the transistor pair.

The hot carrier effect is created by high energy electrons that are generated when an electric current runs through a MOS transistor between the source node and the drain node. It thus follows that the current continuously flows through the MOS transistor at the time of write operation. In order to reduce the time required for write operation effectively it is preferable to perform write operations with respect to a plurality of bits simultaneously. As long as the hot carrier effect is used as a basis of write operation however the number of bits that can be written simultaneously is limited such that a total of the currents flowing through MOS transistors at the time of write operation does not exceed the capacity of power supply.

Accordingly there is a need for a nonvolatile memory device that can store data based on a change in the transistor characteristics caused by a phenomenon that does not require the flow of an electric current between a source node and a drain node at the time of write operation.

It is a general object of the present invention to provide a nonvolatile memory device that substantially obviates one or more problems caused by the limitations and disadvantages of the related art.

It is another and more specific object of the present invention to provide a nonvolatile memory device that can store data based on a change in the transistor characteristics caused by a phenomenon that does not require the flow of an electric current between a source node and a drain node at the time of write operation.

Features and advantages of the present invention will be presented in the description which follows and in part will become apparent from the description and the accompanying drawings or may be learned by practice of the invention according to the teachings provided in the description. Objects as well as other features and advantages of the present invention will be realized and attained by a nonvolatile memory circuit and nonvolatile memory device particularly pointed out in the specification in such full clear concise and exact terms as to enable a person having ordinary skill in the art to practice the invention.

To achieve these and other advantages in accordance with the purpose of the invention the invention provides a nonvolatile memory device which includes a pair of PMOS transistors and a control circuit configured to operate in a store mode to apply to a first one of the PMOS transistors potentials that cause an NBTI degradation purposefully and to apply to a second one of the PMOS transistors potentials that cause no NBTI degradation while causing no current to flow between a source node and a drain node of the first one of the PMOS transistors and to operate in a recall mode to set gate nodes of the PMOS transistors to a common potential to detect a difference in the NBTI degradation between the PMOS transistors.

According to another aspect of the present invention a nonvolatile memory device includes a pair of NMOS transistors and a control circuit configured to operate in a store mode to apply to a first one of the NMOS transistors potentials that cause an PBTI degradation purposefully and to apply to a second one of the NMOS transistors potentials that cause no PBTI degradation while causing no current to flow between a source node and a drain node of the first one of the NMOS transistors and to operate in a recall mode to set gate nodes of the NMOS transistors to a common potential to detect a difference in the PBTI degradation between the NMOS transistors.

According to another aspect of the present invention a nonvolatile memory device includes a plurality of word lines a plurality of bit line pairs a memory cell array including a plurality of memory cells arranged in a matrix one of the memory cells coupled to one of the bit line pairs that includes a first bit line and a second bit line the one of the memory cells including a latch having a first node and a second node configured such that a potential of the first node is inverse to a potential of the second node a first PMOS transistor having one of source drain nodes thereof coupled to the first node of the latch a second PMOS transistor having one of source drain nodes thereof coupled to the second node of the latch a third transistor having a gate thereof coupled to one of the word lines and source drain nodes thereof coupled to the first node and the first bit line respectively a fourth transistor having a gate thereof coupled to the one of the word lines and source drain nodes thereof coupled to the second node and the second bit line respectively and a control circuit configured to operate in a store mode to apply to the first PMOS transistor potentials that cause an NBTI degradation purposefully and to apply to the second PMOS transistor potentials that cause no NBTI degradation while causing no current to flow between a source node and a drain node of the first PMOS transistor and to operate in a recall mode to set gate nodes of the first and second PMOS transistors to a common potential such as to cause the latch to detect a difference in the NBTI degradation between the first PMOS transistor and the second PMOS transistor.

According to another aspect of the present invention a method of writing and reading data to and from a memory circuit includes applying to a PMOS transistor potentials that cause a NBTI degradation and detecting the NBTI degradation as data stored in the PMOS transistor.

According to another aspect of the present invention a method of writing and reading data to and from a memory circuit comprising applying to a NMOS transistor potentials that cause a PBTI degradation and detecting the PBTI degradation as data stored in the NMOS transistor.

Other objects and further features of the present invention will be apparent from the following detailed description when read in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

In the following embodiments of the present invention will be described with reference to the accompanying drawings.

When p channel MOS transistors are used a phenomenon known as NBTI Negative Bias Temperature Instability is used in place of the hot carrier effect used in the related art memory circuit. NBTI is a phenomenon which occurs when a negative voltage is applied to the gate node of a p type MOS transistor while the source and drain nodes are coupled to the ground potential thereby causing degradation in transistor characteristics such as a decrease in carrier mobility or a lowering in the threshold voltage i.e. an increase in the magnitude of threshold voltage since the threshold voltage is negative in the case of a PMOS transistor . When n channel MOS transistors are used a phenomenon known as PBTI Positive Bias Temperature Instability is used in place of the hot carrier effect used in the related art memory circuit. In the case of PBTI all the potentials applied to the memory circuit are reverse to the potentials applied to an NBTI based memory circuit.

The memory circuit of includes a PMOS transistor a PMOS transistor a PMOS transistor a word selecting line WLW and a pair of bit lines BL and BL. The PMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the bit line BL the source node thereof coupled to a power supply potential Vdd through the PMOS transistor and the drain node thereof coupled to the bit line BL. The PMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the bit line BL the source node thereof coupled to the power supply potential Vdd through the PMOS transistor and the drain node thereof coupled to the bit line BL. The PMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the word selecting line WLW the source node thereof coupled to the power supply potential Vdd and the drain node thereof coupled to the source nodes of the PMOS transistors and . This memory circuit is configured such that the potentials applied to the gate nodes of the PMOS transistors and serving as data storage can be controlled independently of each other.

With this provision the PMOS transistor has the gate node thereof set to the ground potential GND while the source node and drain node are set to the power supply potential Vdd. As for the PMOS transistor its gate node is set to the power supply potential Vdd. As a result only the PMOS transistor degrades through NBTI so as to have lower carrier mobility lower threshold voltage Vt while no current flows through either one of the transistors.

It is known that a rate of the degradation increases as the potential gap between the gate node and the source and drain nodes increases. In order to cause sufficient degradation in the transistor characteristics it is preferable to apply a voltage higher than the normal operating voltage of the transistors.

Which one of the PMOS transistors and has lower carrier mobility reflects which one of the bit lines BL and BL was HIGH at the time of the write operation. Accordingly which one of the PMOS transistors and has lower carrier mobility represents data 0 or 1 . A difference in carrier mobility between the PMOS transistor and the PMOS transistor can then be detected as data stored in the nonvolatile memory circuit of the present invention. Such detecting mechanism sensing mechanism will later be described.

The memory circuit of includes the PMOS transistor the PMOS transistor a PMOS transistor a PMOS transistor a word selecting line WLW a recall line RECALL and the bit lines BL and BL. The PMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the word selecting line WLW the source node thereof coupled to the power supply potential Vdd via the PMOS transistor and the drain node thereof coupled to the bit line BL. The PMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the word selecting line WLW the source node thereof coupled to the power supply potential Vdd via the PMOS transistor and the drain node thereof coupled to the bit line BL. The PMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the recall line RECALL the source node thereof coupled to the power supply potential Vdd and the drain node thereof coupled to the source node of the PMOS transistor . The PMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the recall line RECALL the source node thereof coupled to the power supply potential Vdd and the drain node thereof coupled to the source node of the PMOS transistor . This memory circuit is configured such that the potentials applied to the source nodes of the PMOS transistors and serving as data storage can be controlled independently of each other.

Since the gate node of the PMOS transistor is set to the ground potential the floating source node of the PMOS transistor is electrically coupled to the drain node that is set to the power supply potential Vdd. As for the PMOS transistor the gate node of the PMOS transistor is set to the ground potential but the drain node thereof is also set to the ground potential GND. As a result only the PMOS transistor degrades through NBTI while no current flows through either one of the transistors.

It should be noted that the recall line RECALL is used set to the ground potential when detecting a difference in carrier mobility between the PMOS transistor and the PMOS transistor as data stored in the nonvolatile memory circuit. Such detecting mechanism sensing mechanism will later be described.

A word line WL is coupled to the data transfer unit . When the word line WL is activated the data transfer unit establishes electrical couplings between the bit lines BL and BL and the volatile memory unit . Through these electrical couplings the data stored in the volatile memory unit may be read to the bit lines BL and BL or the data supplied through the bit lines BL and BL may be stored in the volatile memory unit .

The memory circuit as shown in is configured such that data is written from the volatile memory unit to the nonvolatile memory unit i.e. PMOS transistors and and read from the nonvolatile memory unit to the volatile memory unit as such need arises. This configuration allows routine read write operations to be performed with respect to the volatile memory unit . At the timing immediately prior to power off for example data is written to the nonvolatile memory portion thereby reducing the effect of the limited number of writings that can be performed with respect to the nonvolatile memory portion. Since the volatile memory unit takes care of all the read write requests while the power is on the use of the volatile memory unit that is superior in terms of read write speed can improve the performance of the memory circuit during routine operations.

In the nonvolatile memory circuits shown in and it is not preferable to have transistor characteristics changed with respect to the transistors constituting the volatile memory unit and the data transfer unit . Because of this provision may be made such that these transistors provided in the volatile memory unit and the data transfer unit operate with the routine operating voltages. For example the transistors of the volatile memory unit and the data transfer unit may be given a thicker gate oxide film than the PMOS transistors and . This successfully combines satisfactory nonvolatile storage performance with sufficient operation reliability.

This circuit configuration shown in is simply an SRAM cell on the surface. The present invention manipulates this SRAM cell differently from the conventional way. While desired data is stored in the SRAM cell a potential higher than the routine operating voltage is supplied to the plate line PLATE which causes deterioration in the transistor characteristics in the PMOS transistor or the PMOS transistor whichever is selected in response to the stored data.

If the bit lines BL and BL are set to the power supply voltage and the ground voltage respectively an activation of the word line WL results in data being stored such that the PMOS transistors and are on and off respectively. That is nodes C and C are set to HIGH and LOW respectively.

After the data is stored as described above the potential of the plate line PLATE is raised to Vpp above the normal operating voltage Vdd as shown in . This causes the potential of the node C to rise to Vpp above the normal operating voltage Vdd while the node C stays at the ground voltage GND. With this provision only the PMOS transistor deteriorates through NBTI while the PMOS transistor does not deteriorate.

Power is then turned off and subsequently turned on. The deterioration as described above creates an imbalance in the flip flop comprised of the PMOS transistors and and the NMOS transistors and so that the PMOS transistors and will be off and on respectively when the flip flop is fully activated.

In this configuration the data recovered after the power off is inverse to the data originally stored. When data is to be stored in the memory cell therefore a data inversion circuit or the like may be used to invert the data before it is stored in the memory cell.

The embodiments described above are directed to the configuration in which a pair of transistors is used as a memory cell. The present invention is not limited to such an example. By use of NBTI data can be stored in a single transistor. is a drawing showing a memory cell comprised of a single transistor. The memory cell of includes a PMOS transistor which has the gate node thereof coupled to a word line WL the source node thereof coupled to a bit line BL and the drain node thereof coupled to a bit line BL. As shown in the word line WL is set to the ground potential GND and the bit lines BL and BL are set to the power supply potential Vdd which causes the PMOS transistor to experience an NBTI degradation.

Further the present invention is not limited to a single memory cell but a plurality of memory cells may be arranged in a matrix. is s drawing showing a plurality of memory cells arranged in matrix form. PMOS transistors arranged in the same row share the same word line WL or WL and the PMOS transistors arranged in the same column share the same bit lines BL and BL or BL and BL.

As shown in the word line WL is changed to the ground potential while the word line WL stays at the power supply potential Vdd. Further the bit lines BL and BL are set to the power supply potential Vdd and the bit lines BL and BL are set to the ground potential GND. This causes only the PMOS transistor coupled to the word line WL and the bit lines BL and BL to degrade through NBTI so as to have lower carrier mobility lower threshold voltage Vt .

In the single transistor memory cell configuration as shown in and a circuit for sensing a change in the resistance or threshold voltage of transistors may be coupled to each bit line. Such a sense circuit may utilize a reference cell with which a memory cell storing data therein is compared.

The memory cell array includes a plurality of memory cells arranged in a matrix form each memory cell having a circuit configuration as will later be described. The memory cells arranged in the same column are connected to the same bit lines and the memory cells arranged in the same row are connected to the same word line.

The mode selector receives mode input signals from an exterior of the device and decodes the mode input signal to determine an operation mode e.g. a write operation mode or a read operation mode . Control signals responsive to the determined operation mode are supplied to the write amplifier the sense amplifier column selector the row signal driver etc. for control of the individual parts of the semiconductor memory device .

The column decoder receives a column address input from the exterior of the device and decodes the column address input to determine a selected column. The decode signals indicative of the selected column are supplied to the write amplifier and the sense amplifier column selector .

The row decoder receives a row address input from the exterior of the device and decodes the row address input to determine a selected row. The decode signals indicative of the selected row are supplied to the row signal driver .

In response to the control signals from the mode selector and the decode signals from the row decoder the row signal driver activates a selected word line among the word lines extending from the row signal driver . As a result of the activation of the selected word line a data transfer unit such as the data transfer unit of of each memory cell connected to the selected word line couples a volatile memory unit such as the volatile memory unit of to a corresponding bit line pair among a plurality of bit line pairs. Through this coupling the writing reading of data to from the volatile memory portion is performed.

In response to the control signals from the mode selector and the decode signals from the column decoder the sense amplifier column selector couples bit lines corresponding to the selected column to a data bus. Through this coupling data is transferred between the memory cell array and the data bus. The sense amplifier column selector amplifies the data read from the memory cell array for provision to the output buffer . The data is output from the output buffer to the exterior of the device as output data. Input data supplied to the input buffer is provided to the write amplifier . The write amplifier amplifies the input data to be written to the memory cell array .

It is preferable to manufacture the PMOS transistors and such that their gate oxide film is thinner than that of other transistors. In this manner the PMOS transistors and are designed to operate with a low operating voltage e.g. 1.0 V to 1.8 V and the other transistors are designed to operate with a higher operating voltage e.g. 3.3 V .

As shown in bit lines BL and BL extend from the write amplifier and the sense amplifier column selector and are coupled to the volatile memory unit via the NMOS transistors and serving as the data transfer unit. A word selecting line WLW extends from the row signal driver and is coupled to the gate nodes of the PMOS transistors and serving as the nonvolatile memory unit. A word line WL extends from the row signal driver to be connected to the gates of the NMOS transistors and . Further a restore line RESTORE recall line RECALL and equalize line EQ also extend from the row signal driver .

It should be noted that the configuration shown in is identical with respect to each and every one of the memory cells provided in the memory cell array . Namely multiple sets of the lines RESTORE RECALL WLW EQ and WL are provided in one to one correspondence to the rows of the memory cell array .

As shown in the mode selector supplies signals RESTORE RECALL WLW EQ and WL to the row signal driver . The signals RESTORE RECALL WLW and EQ are directly coupled to the corresponding lines of each row and are thus output from the row signal driver to the memory cell array as RESTORE RECALL WLW EQ and WL for a row address RA and RESTOREn RECALLn WLWn EQn and WLn for a row address RAn for example. The inverters and are used as output buffers for these signals.

The signal WL supplied from the mode selector and each row address signal are combined by a corresponding NAND gate an output of which is inverted by the inverter for provision to the memory cell array . Thus only one of the signals WL through WLn is supplied to the memory cell array so as to activate a selected row address.

In this configuration as described above the store operation and recall operation are performed with respect to the entirety of the memory cell array . Alternatively the store operation and recall operation may be performed separately for each row address. In such a case the signals RESTORE RECALL WLW and EQ supplied from the mode selector are combined with each row address signal in the row signal driver such as to achieve a proper row address specific store operation and recall operation.

The mode selector sets the control signals to signal levels signal states as shown in the table of in response to the mode input signals. Through such settings of the control signals the mode selector controls the write amplifier and the row signal driver to perform a requested operation with respect to the memory cell array .

Since the signal RECALL is set to 1 the PMOS transistors and shown in are made nonconductive. In the configuration of thus the PMOS transistor has the source node thereof coupled to a floating node and the drain node thereof coupled to a node C of the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistor has the source node thereof coupled to a floating node and the drain node thereof coupled to a node C of the volatile memory unit. Here the potentials of the node C and the node C are inverse to each other and the data stored in the latch PMOS transistors and and NMOS transistors and determines which one of the nodes C and C is HIGH.

In an example shown in the node C is HIGH Vdd 3.3 V and the node C is LOW GND . As a result only the PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in experiences a drop in the threshold voltage Vt. The PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in does not experience a change in the threshold voltage Vt. This achieves the storing of the data of the volatile memory unit in the nonvolatile memory unit.

At the first phase P the signal RESTORE is set to 1 and the signal EQ is set to 1. As a result the PMOS transistor in becomes nonconductive to deactivate the volatile memory unit and the NMOS transistor in becomes conductive to equalize the nodes C and C. The equalization of the nodes C and C is shown in as occurring at the first phase P.

At the second phase P the signal EQ is set to 0 and the word selecting line WLW is set to 0. As a result the NMOS transistor is turned off to separate the nodes C and C from each other and the PMOS transistors and are turned on. Assuming that the store operation as shown in has been performed prior to the recall operation the PMOS transistor has a lower threshold voltage and thus has a higher ON resistance. Accordingly the force that pulls up the node C is weaker than the force that pulls up the node C resulting in the nodes C and C changing to LOW and HIGH respectively as shown at the second phase P in .

The second phase may be set to a significantly shorter time length than the time length required for the store operation. Such provision makes it possible to suppress a change in the transistor characteristics through NBTI at the time of the recall operation. Alternatively or additionally the word selecting line WLW may be set to Vref rather than GND as shown in where Vref is an intermediate voltage between the power supply voltage Vdd and the ground voltage GND. Such provision reduces a voltage applied between the gate node and source drain nodes of the PMOS transistors and thereby suppressing a change in the transistor characteristics through NBTI at the time of the recall operation.

At the third phase the signal RESTORE is set to 0 and the word selecting line WLW is set to 1. As a result the PMOS transistor in becomes conductive to activate the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistors and are turned off. The activated volatile memory unit amplifies a potential difference appearing between the node C and the node C thereby sensing detecting the data stored in the nonvolatile memory unit. The amplification of the potential difference between the nodes C and C is shown at the third phase P in .

The memory cell includes PMOS transistors through in addition to the PMOS transistor the NMOS transistor the PMOS transistors and and the NMOS transistors through that are the same transistors as shown in . The PMOS transistors through correspond to the PMOS transistors through that serve as a nonvolatile memory unit of the memory circuit shown in .

As shown in a word selecting line WLW extends from the row signal driver and is coupled to the gate node of the PMOS transistor . A word line WL extends from the row signal driver to be connected to the gates of the NMOS transistors and . Further a restore line RESTORE and an equalize line EQ also extend from the row signal driver .

It should be noted that the configuration shown in is identical with respect to each and every one of the memory cells provided in the memory cell array . Namely multiple sets of the lines WLW RESTORE EQ and WL are provided in one to one correspondence to the rows of the memory cell array .

Since the word selecting line WLW is set to 0 the PMOS transistor shown in is made conductive. In the configuration of thus the PMOS transistor has the source node thereof coupled to the power supply voltage Vdd and the drain node thereof coupled to the node C of the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistor has the source node thereof coupled to the power supply voltage Vdd and the drain node thereof coupled to the node C of the volatile memory unit. Further the node C is coupled to the gate node of the PMOS transistor and the node C is coupled to the gate node of the PMOS transistor .

In an example shown in the node C is HIGH Vdd 3.3 V and the node C is LOW GND . As a result only the PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in experiences a drop in the threshold voltage Vt. The PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in does not experience a change in the threshold voltage Vt. This achieves the storing of the data of the volatile memory unit in the nonvolatile memory unit.

At the first phase P the signal RESTORE is set to 1 and the signal EQ is set to 1. As a result the PMOS transistor in becomes nonconductive to deactivate the volatile memory unit and the NMOS transistor in becomes conductive to equalize the nodes C and C. The equalization of the nodes C and C is shown in as occurring at the first phase P.

At the second phase P the signal EQ is set to 0 and the word selecting line WLW is set to 0. As a result the NMOS transistor is turned off to separate the nodes C and C from each other and the PMOS transistor is turned on. Assuming that the store operation as shown in has been performed prior to the recall operation the PMOS transistor has a lower threshold voltage and thus has a higher ON resistance. Accordingly the force that pulls up the node C is weaker than the force that pulls up the node C resulting in the nodes C and C changing to LOW and HIGH respectively as shown at the second phase P in .

At the third phase the signal RESTORE is set to 0 and the word selecting line WLW is set to 1. As a result the PMOS transistor in becomes conductive to activate the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistor is turned off. The activated volatile memory unit amplifies a potential difference appearing between the node C and the node C thereby sensing detecting the data stored in the nonvolatile memory unit. The amplification of the potential difference between the nodes C and C is shown at the third phase P in .

The memory cell includes NMOS transistors and in addition to the configuration of the memory cell shown in . The nonvolatile memory unit comprised of the PMOS transistors through is coupled to a power supply potential Vpp that is higher than Vdd. A recall line RECALL extending from the row signal driver is coupled to the gate nodes of the newly provided NMOS transistors and . The NMOS transistors and when turned off separate the nonvolatile memory unit i.e. the PMOS transistors and from the volatile memory unit i.e. from the nodes C and C .

Since the word selecting line WLW is set to 0 the PMOS transistor shown in is made conductive. Further the signal RECALL is set to 1 thereby turning on the NMOS transistors and to couple the nonvolatile memory unit to the volatile memory unit i.e. to couple nodes D and D see to the nodes C and C. In the configuration of thus the PMOS transistor has the source node thereof coupled to the power supply voltage Vpp and the drain node thereof coupled to the node C and the PMOS transistor has the source node thereof coupled to the power supply voltage Vpp and the drain node thereof coupled to the node C.

In an example shown in the node C is HIGH Vdd 1.8 V and the node C is LOW GND . Further the node D is HIGH Vpp 3.3 V and the node D is LOW GND . As a result only the PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in experiences a drop in the threshold voltage Vt. The PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in does not experience a change in the threshold voltage Vt. This achieves the storing of the data of the volatile memory unit in the nonvolatile memory unit.

It should be noted that the higher power supply potential Vpp is applied only to the nonvolatile memory unit. When the NMOS transistors and are turned on the potentials of the nodes C and C connected to the source nodes of the NMOS transistors and do not rise above the voltage that is the gate potential RECALL minus the threshold voltage. Accordingly the volatile memory unit always operates with the operating voltage from Vdd to GND.

It is preferable to manufacture the PMOS transistors and such that their gate oxide film is thinner than that of other transistors. In this manner the PMOS transistors and are designed to operate with a low operating voltage e.g. 1.0 V to 1.8 V and the other transistors are designed to operate with a higher operating voltage 3.3 V .

In the first through third embodiment of the nonvolatile memory device according to the present invention when data of the volatile memory unit is stored in the nonvolatile memory unit and is then recalled from the nonvolatile memory unit for storage in the volatile memory unit the recalled data is inverted from the original data. Embodiments which will be described in the following are designed to address this issue.

It is preferable to manufacture the PMOS transistors and such that their gate oxide film is thinner than that of other transistors. In this manner the PMOS transistors and are designed to operate with a low operating voltage e.g. 1.0 V to 1.8 V and the other transistors are designed to operate with a higher operating voltage 3.3 V .

As shown in bit lines BL and BL extend from the write amplifier and the sense amplifier column selector and are coupled to the volatile memory unit via the NMOS transistors and serving as the data transfer unit. A word selecting line WLW extends from the row signal driver and is coupled to the gate nodes of the PMOS transistors and serving as the nonvolatile memory unit. A word line WL extends from the row signal driver to be connected to the gates of the NMOS transistors and . Further a restore line RESTORE recall line RECALL and equalize line EQ also extend from the row signal driver .

It should be noted that the configuration shown in is identical with respect to each and every one of the memory cells provided in the memory cell array . Namely multiple sets of the lines RESTORE RECALL WLW EQ and WL are provided in one to one correspondence to the rows of the memory cell array .

Since the signal RECALL is set to 0 the NMOS transistors and shown in are made nonconductive. In the configuration of thus the PMOS transistor has the drain node thereof coupled to a floating node and the source node thereof coupled to the node C of the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistor has the drain node thereof coupled to a floating node and the source node thereof coupled to the node C of the volatile memory unit.

In an example shown in the node C is HIGH Vdd 3.3 V and the node C is LOW GND . As a result only the PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in experiences a drop in the threshold voltage Vt. The PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in does not experience a change in the threshold voltage Vt. This achieves the storing of the data of the volatile memory unit in the nonvolatile memory unit.

At the first phase P the signal RESTORE is set to 0 and the signal EQ is set to 0. As a result the NMOS transistor in becomes nonconductive to deactivate the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistor in becomes conductive to equalize the nodes C and C. The equalization of the nodes C and C is shown in as occurring at the first phase P.

At the second phase P the signal EQ is set to 1 and the word selecting line WLW is set to 0. As a result the PMOS transistor is turned off to separate the nodes C and C from each other and the PMOS transistors and are turned on. Assuming that the store operation as shown in has been performed prior to the recall operation the PMOS transistor has a lower threshold voltage and thus has a higher ON resistance. Accordingly the force that pulls down the node C is weaker than the force that pulls down the node C resulting in the nodes C and C changing to HIGH and LOW respectively as shown at the second phase P in .

The second phase may be set to a significantly shorter time length than the time length required for the store operation. Such provision makes it possible to suppress a change in the transistor characteristics through NBTI at the time of the recall operation. Alternatively or F additionally the word selecting line WLW may be set to Vref rather than GND where Vref is an intermediate voltage between the power supply voltage Vdd and the ground voltage GND. Such provision reduces a voltage applied between the gate node and source drain nodes of the PMOS transistors and thereby suppressing a change in the transistor characteristics through NBTI at the time of the recall operation.

At the third phase the signal RESTORE is set to 1 and the word selecting line WLW is set to 1. As a result the NMOS transistor in becomes conductive to activate the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistors and are turned off. The activated volatile memory unit amplifies a potential difference appearing between the node C and the node C thereby sensing detecting the data stored in the nonvolatile memory unit. The amplification of the potential difference between the nodes C and C is shown at the third phase P in .

Attention should be directed to the fact that the nodes C and C after the recall operation are set to HIGH and LOW respectively while the nodes C and C as appearing in the original data are also HIGH and LOW respectively. That is the recalled data is the same as the original data and no data inversion takes place through the store and recall operations. This is because the recall operation of the fourth embodiment detects data by pulling down the nodes C and C according to the forces responsive to the ON resistances threshold voltages . A transistor coupled to the higher of the nodes C and C experiences NBTI so as to have a drop in the threshold voltage i.e. an increase in the ON resistance . If the pull down forces are used during the recall operation the transistor that has experienced NBTI pulls down a corresponding node with a weaker force which means that this node will be the higher of the two nodes.

Since the signal RECALL is set to 0 the NMOS transistors and shown in are made nonconductive. In the configuration of thus the PMOS transistor has the drain node thereof coupled to a floating node and the source node thereof coupled to the node C of the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistor has the drain node thereof coupled to a floating node and the source node thereof coupled to the node C of the volatile memory unit.

Since the plate line signal PLATE is set to Vpp e.g. 3.3 V the volatile memory unit operates with the operating range from GND to Vpp. Thus the higher of the node C and the node C is set to Vpp. In an example shown in the node C is set to Vpp 3.3 V and the node C is LOW GND . As a result only the PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in experiences a drop in the threshold voltage Vt. The PMOS transistor denoted as MPM in does not experience a change in the threshold voltage Vt. This achieves the storing of the data of the volatile memory unit in the nonvolatile memory unit.

For the recall operation the plate line PLATE is set to Vdd as shown in . Accordingly the recall operation of the fifth embodiment of the nonvolatile memory device is the same as the recall operation of the fourth embodiment.

In the fifth embodiment of the nonvolatile memory device provision is made to control the power supply potential supplied to the memory cell. Specifically the power supply potential is set to the higher power supply potential Vpp e.g. 3.3 V during the store operation while it is set to the normal lower power supply potential Vdd e.g. 1.8 V during the other operations. In this manner the degradation of the transistors other than the PMOS transistors and can be avoided. Further it should be noted that the transistor degradation occurs only during the store operation and does not occur during the recall operation.

The embodiments described above have been directed to examples in which the NBTI degradation of PMOS transistors is used as a mechanism for data storage. As previously described the present invention can as well be implemented by use of PBTI Positive Bias Temperature Instability degradation.

The memory circuit of includes an NMOS transistor an NMOS transistor an NMOS transistor an NMOS transistor a word selecting line WLW a recall line RECALL and the bit lines BL and BL. The NMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the word selecting line WLW the source node thereof coupled to the ground potential GND via the NMOS transistor and the drain node thereof coupled to the bit line BL. The NMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the word selecting line WLW the source node thereof coupled to the ground potential GND via the NMOS transistor and the drain node thereof coupled to the bit line BL. The NMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the recall line RECALL the source node thereof coupled to the ground potential GND and the drain node thereof coupled to the source node of the NMOS transistor . The NMOS transistor has the gate node thereof coupled to the recall line RECALL the source node thereof coupled to the ground potential GND and the drain node thereof coupled to the source node of the NMOS transistor . This memory circuit is configured such that the potentials applied to the source nodes of the NMOS transistors and serving as data storage can be controlled independently of each other.

Since the gate node of the NMOS transistor is set to the power supply potential Vdd the floating source node of the NMOS transistor is electrically coupled to the drain node that is set to the ground potential GND. As for the NMOS transistor the gate node of the NMOS transistor is set to the power supply potential Vdd but the drain node thereof is also set to the power supply potential Vdd. As a result only the NMOS transistor degrades through PBTI while no current flows through either one of the transistors.

It should be noted that the recall line RECALL is used set to the ground potential when detecting a difference in carrier mobility between the NMOS transistor and the NMOS transistor as data stored in the nonvolatile memory circuit. Such detecting mechanism sensing mechanism will later be described.

It is preferable to manufacture the NMOS transistors and such that their gate oxide film is thinner than that of the other transistors. In this manner the NMOS transistors and are designed to operate with a low operating voltage e.g. 1.0 V to 1.8 V and the other transistors are designed to operate with a higher operating voltage e.g. 3.3 V .

As shown in bit lines BL and BL extend from the write amplifier and the sense amplifier column selector and are coupled to the volatile memory unit via the NMOS transistors and serving as a data transfer unit. A word selecting line WLW extends from the row signal driver and is coupled to the gate nodes of the NMOS transistors and serving as a nonvolatile memory unit. A word line WL extends from the row signal driver to be connected to the gates of the NMOS transistors and . Further a restore line RESTORE recall line RECALL and equalize line EQ also extend from the row signal driver .

It should be noted that the configuration shown in is identical with respect to each and every one of the memory cells provided in a memory cell array. Namely multiple sets of the lines RESTORE RECALL WLW EQ and WL are provided in one to one correspondence to the rows of the memory cell array.

The mode selector sets the control signals to signal levels signal states as shown in the table of in response to the mode input signals. Through such settings of the control signals the mode selector controls the write amplifier and the row signal driver to perform a requested operation with respect to the memory cell array.

Since the signal RECALL is set to 0 the NMOS transistors and shown in are made nonconductive. In the configuration of thus the NMOS transistor has the source node thereof coupled to a floating node and the drain node thereof coupled to a node C of the volatile memory unit and the NMOS transistor has the source node thereof coupled to a floating node and the drain node thereof coupled to a node C of the volatile memory unit. Here the potentials of the node C and the node C are inverse to each other and the data stored in the latch PMOS transistors and and NMOS transistors and determines which one of the nodes C and C is HIGH.

In an example shown in the node C is HIGH Vdd 3.3 V and the node C is LOW GND . As a result only the NMOS transistor denoted as MNM in experiences a rise in the threshold voltage Vt. The NMOS transistor denoted as MNM in does not experience a change in the threshold voltage Vt. This achieves the storing of the data of the volatile memory unit in the nonvolatile memory unit.

At the first phase P the signal RESTORE is set to 0 and the signal EQ is set to 0. As a result the NMOS transistor in becomes nonconductive to deactivate the volatile memory unit and the PMOS transistor in becomes conductive to equalize the nodes C and C. The equalization of the nodes C and C is shown in as occurring at the first phase P.

At the second phase P the signal EQ is set to 1 and the word selecting line WLW is set to 1. As a result the PMOS transistor is turned off to separate the nodes C and C from each other and the NMOS transistors and are turned on. Assuming that the store operation as shown in has been performed prior to the recall operation the NMOS transistor has a higher threshold voltage and thus has a higher ON resistance. Accordingly the force that pulls down the node C is weaker than the force that pulls down the node C resulting in the nodes C and C changing to HIGH and LOW respectively as shown at the second phase P in .

The second phase may be set to a significantly shorter time length than the time length required for the store operation. Such provision makes it possible to suppress a change in the transistor characteristics through PBTI at the time of the recall operation.

At the third phase the signal RESTORE is set to 1 and the word selecting line WLW is set to 0. As a result the NMOS transistor in becomes conductive to activate the volatile memory unit and the NMOS transistors and are turned off. The activated volatile memory unit amplifies a potential difference appearing between the node C and the node C thereby sensing detecting the data stored in the nonvolatile memory unit. The amplification of the potential difference between the nodes C and C is shown at the third phase P in .

The PBTI based configuration of corresponds to the NBTI based configuration shown in . Specifically the NBTI based configuration shown in is modified to the PBTI based configuration shown in by replacing the PMOS transistors with NMOS transistors. It should be noted that other NBTI based configurations such as those shown in and can also be modified to PBTI based configurations similarly to the manner described above by replacing the PMOS transistors with NMOS transistors. Such PBTI based configurations are intended to be within the scope of the present invention.

Further the present invention is not limited to these embodiments but various variations and modifications may be made without departing from the scope of the present invention.

