---

title: Grid automation bus to integrate management frameworks for dynamic grid management
abstract: Methods and apparatus that integrate management frameworks with an enterprise manager in a grid computing environment are disclosed. According to one aspect of the present invention, a grid computing system includes a management arrangement and at least a first management framework. The management arrangement includes an integration arrangement that brokers requests. The first management framework sends a first request to the integration arrangement which effectively allows the first management framework to communicate bi-directionally with the management arrangement.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07673029&OS=07673029&RS=07673029
owner: Oracle International Corporation
number: 07673029
owner_city: Redwood Shores
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051215
---
This patent application claims priority of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 595 485 filed Jul. 9 2005 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates to grid computing systems. More specifically the invention relates to allowing different management frameworks to be integrated for use with an enterprise management system.

Grid computing is a type of distributed computing that is becoming more prevalent as the use of shared resources in computing systems increases. In grid computing computing and information resources are shared substantially transparently in a secure highly efficient manner. In other words computing and information resources are provided using a plurality of computers or computing systems which function as an overall virtual computing system. Once a grid is in place a user may effectively have access to a virtual computing system that is adaptable and reliable. Such a virtual computing system generally includes a variety of different computing resources which are not individually visible to the user. A user is typically only aware that information or computation may be requested and delivered and is not aware of the source which processes and delivers on the request. That is while a user may not be aware which component of a grid processes and delivers on a request the user is aware that a request will be acted on by some component of the grid.

A collection of networked grid components e.g. different management frameworks and databases that are managed by a single enterprise is an enterprise grid. The single enterprise may be a business entity that is responsible for managing a pool of resources a set of services and the assignment of resources to services such that business goals may be accomplished. Within an enterprise grid networked resources may be pooled and shared and services may be substantially automatically provisioned. An enterprise may provision resources and services to efficiently respond to a request from a user or a client.

By distributing work across many computing systems enterprise grid computing enhances the availability and scalability of resources. Resources and services or more generally computing systems that are included in an enterprise grid are typically associated with management frameworks. Such management frameworks which may each include computers and databases are integrated such that they may function overall as a virtual computing system using an enterprise manager. The enterprise manager typically identifies a management system or framework i.e. a server that is most appropriate for providing a resource or a service requested by another management system or framework i.e. a client.

In some instances management frameworks created by different vendors or parties are used within an enterprise grid computing system. Unless the management frameworks are integrated the management of the enterprise grid is generally highly complex time consuming tedious and maybe even infeasible. It involves a lot of manual intervention at the best.

Interfaces between an enterprise manager and each management framework may be created to facilitate the integration of the management frameworks. With reference to the interfaces between management systems or management frameworks and an enterprise manager will be described. An enterprise grid computing system generally includes an enterprise manager that is in communication with a management repository and a plurality of management frameworks or third party management systems. Typically enterprise manager is in itself a management framework that is arranged to monitor or to manage applications and databases associated with a management framework not shown which was created such that it is compatible with enterprise manager . That is enterprise manager is typically configured to substantially automatically manage applications and databases that are created by the same party that created enterprise manager .

Management frameworks as shown are third party management systems with respect to enterprise manager . In other words management frameworks and enterprise manager are not created by the same party. Hence management frameworks generally must be integrated with enterprise manager if enterprise manager is to effectively manage monitor and troubleshoot within enterprise grid computing system . Integrations are typically created by management frameworks to enable management frameworks to interface with enterprise manager . By way of example management framework creates integration that allows enterprise manager to manage management framework as well as to enable enterprise manager to communicate bi directionally with management framework

To enable management frameworks to create integrations enterprise manager generally publishes data in the form of application programming interfaces APIs that may be accessed by management frameworks to determine how to create integrations . The same is also true for the integrating management frameworks. It should be appreciated that creating integrations is often time consuming. As APIs are not standardized the process of creating integrations is a tedious non scaleable process. Often any change to either a management framework or to enterprise manager may result in changes having to be made to a corresponding integration . Further as some enterprise managers do not actually publish APIs it may not always be possible to integrate a management framework with enterprise manager .

In general enterprise manager and management frameworks may communicate bi directionally through integrations that are point to point connections. In other words enterprise manager calls management frameworks substantially directly using integrations and management frameworks call enterprise manager substantially directly using integrations . In order to establish integrations as previously mentioned management frameworks typically access APIs associated with enterprise manager . With reference to the steps associated with a standard method of allowing an enterprise manager and a management framework to communicate substantially directly will be described. A method of allowing a management framework i.e. a third party management framework relative to an enterprise manager to communicate substantially directly with the enterprise manager begins at step in which APIs associated with the enterprise manager are exposed or otherwise obtained by the management framework. An integration is built in step by the management framework using the APIs. An integration is generally arranged to enable the management framework to be integrated with a management service associated with the enterprise manager. That is an integration is built that essentially allows the enterprise manager to communicate with the management framework bi directionally such that the enterprise manager may manage the management framework.

Once the integration is built the management framework is integrated with the management service associated with the enterprise manager using the integration in step . After the management framework is integrated with the enterprise manager the process of allowing an enterprise manager and the management framework to communicate substantially directly is completed.

If an enterprise manager does not publish APIs it may not be possible to integrate a third party management framework with the enterprise manager. Even when APIs are published creating an integration between the enterprise manager and the third party management framework may be time consuming. Further as previously mentioned creating a point to point connection or an integration between a third party management framework and an enterprise manager while effective is not scaleable. By way of example if there is a change to an API associated with the enterprise manager the integration may need to be updated. In addition each time a new different third party management framework is to be managed by the enterprise manager a new integration generally must be created.

As allowing management frameworks to be integrated and managed by an enterprise manager within an enterprise grid computing system is critical to the operation of the enterprise grid computing system what is desired is a method and an apparatus which allows management frameworks to be efficiently integrated with an enterprise manager. That is what is needed is an integration arrangement that effectively allows management frameworks to be integrated with an enterprise manager substantially without requiring the management frameworks to create individual integrations for use with the enterprise manager.

The present invention relates to integrating management frameworks with an enterprise manager in a grid computing environment using an integration arrangement. According to one aspect of the present invention a grid computing system includes a management arrangement and at least a first management framework. The management arrangement includes an integration arrangement that brokers requests. The first management framework sends a first request to the integration arrangement which effectively allows the first management framework to communicate bi directionally with the management arrangement.

In one embodiment the grid computing system includes a second management framework that is in communication with the integration arrangement. In such an embodiment the integration arrangement enables the first management framework to communicate bi directionally with the second management framework and also allows the second management framework to communicate bi directionally with the management arrangement.

An integration arrangement or a grid integration broker with which the enterprise manager and the management frameworks are each in communication allows requests to be brokered across the management frameworks substantially without requiring individual integrations to be created between each management framework and the enterprise manager. Providing an integration arrangement substantially eliminates the need to create customized integrations as the integration arrangement may be compatible with a common object or descriptive model or may accept transformers that convert otherwise proprietary model formats into a common object or descriptive model. The integration broker also bridges between different protocols that different management frameworks may use during the communication through transformers. Hence the use of an integration arrangement provides a scaleable efficient manner in which components may be incorporated into a grid computing system. In one embodiment the integration broker also controls concurrency and integrity of requests issued on the managed grid environment to make sure the management is undertaken in a coordinated manner.

According to another aspect of the present invention an integration arrangement that is in communication with a plurality of management frameworks and a manager in a grid computing system includes a grid integration broker that brokers a request across the plurality of management frameworks and the enterprise manager. The integration arrangement also includes a management service that interprets the request and provides the request to the manager. In one embodiment the grid integration broker is arranged to expose a web service to the plurality of management frameworks wherein the plurality management frameworks are arranged to invoke the web service. In another embodiment the grid integration broker includes a first transformer associated with a first management framework and when the request is initiated by the first management framework the first transformer is arranged to transform the request into a model in a format associated with the manager.

According to yet another aspect of the present invention a method of operating an integration arrangement that brokers requests within a grid computing system across management frameworks includes receiving a request from a first management framework and providing the request to the manager. The manager provides information associated with the request. The integration arrangement receives the information from the manager and provides the information to the first management framework. In one embodiment the method also includes registering the first management framework. In such an embodiment registering the first management framework may include receiving a transformer from the first management framework.

Other features and advantages of the invention will become readily available apparent upon review of the following description in association with the accompanying drawings where the same or similar structures are designated with the same reference numerals.

In the description that follows the present invention will be described in reference to embodiments that test subsystems on a platform for a software application such as a database application. However embodiments of the invention are not limited to any particular architecture environment application or implementation. For example although embodiments will be described in reference to network database applications the invention may be advantageously applied to any software application. Therefore the description of the embodiments that follows is for purposes of illustration and not limitation.

Within a grid computing system such as an enterprise grid computing system the ability to integrate management frameworks with a manager e.g. an enterprise manager regardless of the origins of the management frameworks is critical to enable the grid computing system to operate efficiently. The use of an integration arrangement or a grid integration broker to which the enterprise manager and the management frameworks are each connected allows requests to be brokered across the management frameworks substantially without requiring point to point connections between the management frameworks. Computational resources and data associated with each of the management frameworks may be shared between the management frameworks such that each management framework may effectively access and substantially manage computational resources and data associated with other management frameworks.

A standard model may be defined for requests and vendors of the management frameworks may either conform to the standard model or provide a transformer that allows specific as for example vendor proprietary models to be converted into a format that is consisted with the standard model. A management framework may effectively register itself with an integration arrangement and if appropriate would register its transformer with the integration arrangement. Once a management framework is registered with the integration arrangement the integration arrangement will enable bi directional communications between the management framework and other components that are registered with or otherwise connected to the integration arrangement substantially without establishing direct point to point connections between the management framework and other components. In addition the integration arrangement may broker requests e.g. dynamic provisioning requests across the management framework and other components and also allow for data aggregation e.g. the aggregation of monitoring metrics and alerts.

An integration arrangement is generally in communication with both an enterprise manager and a plurality of management frameworks. is a diagrammatic representation of a system in which an integration arrangement is incorporated between management frameworks and an enterprise manager in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. A system or managed environment which may generally be an enterprise grid computing system includes an enterprise manager and a plurality of management frameworks which may be from a variety of different vendors i.e. management frameworks may include various third party frameworks. Management frameworks may include but are not limited to computing systems clusters of networked computers databases and application servers.

Enterprise manager generally has an associated management repository that is arranged to store data e.g. monitoring data that is associated with management frameworks that are managed or otherwise controlled by enterprise manager . Enterprise manager may be substantially any enterprise manager as for example the Oracle Enterprise Manager available commercially from Oracle International Corporation of Redwood Shores Calif.

An integration arrangement is arranged between enterprise manager and management frameworks . Integration arrangement is effectively a transformer and coordination interface that allows management frameworks to be connected and allows requests to be brokered across management frameworks . That is integration arrangement allows substantially any management frameworks to be substantially registered or plugged in such that management frameworks may be managed by enterprise manager and such that management frameworks may effectively communicate with one another. In one embodiment integration arrangement includes translation logic associated with a common model that management frameworks conform to and enterprise manager substantially conforms to the common model such that enterprise manager is compatible with the translation logic within integration arrangement .

Integration arrangement is generally arranged to receive an object e.g. an object associated with a request created by a management framework and to create a model based on the object. Integration arrangement may then send the model to enterprise manager which then either creates a suitable representation of the model and stores the representation in management repository or updates a representation of the model in the management repository. To update a representation of the model enterprise manager may search other management frameworks in system for an appropriate management framework to for example service a received request. Once the representation of the model is either created or updated enterprise manager then sends an updated model to integration arrangement . In turn integration arrangement provides this model to the appropriate management framework i.e. the management framework that sent the object to integration arrangement . The interaction between enterprise manager integration arrangement and management frameworks will be described in more detail below with respect to .

With reference to components of integration arrangement will be described in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. Integration arrangement may include a grid integration broker and a management service . Grid integration broker and management service cooperate to allow enterprise manager and management frameworks to communicate bi directionally such that enterprise manager may effectively manage management frameworks and coordinate among management frameworks . Grid integration broker generally exposes web services that management frameworks may invoke and brokers requests from management frameworks . Management service generally interprets models and identifies component brokers associated with enterprise manager which may be invoked. In addition management service may construct models that are responses to brokered requests.

Management service may include a grid control management service interface and various brokers as will be described below with respect to . In one embodiment management service is arranged to translate a request received from a management framework which is generally in the form of a model embedded in a message into a service request that enterprise manager and further other management frameworks may understand. Grid integration broker is arranged to pass a service request to enterprise manager through management service and to effectively provide the service request to a receiver e.g. one of management frameworks that is specified by enterprise manager as being suitable for servicing the service request. If the request should be serviced by enterprise manager e.g. an Oracle Enterprise Manager available from Oracle Corporation of Redwood Shores Calif. as determined by grid integration broker the request is passed to enterprise manager i.e. enterprise manager is involved. Otherwise in some instances substantially only grid integration broker is involved in brokering the requests among two management frameworks . If substantially only grid integration broker is involved in brokering requests the associated activities may be recorded by grid integration broker in a repository for grid management.

Typically grid integration broker causes messages or service requests to be directed to the proper management framework for handling the messages or service requests as determined by enterprise manager . That is grid integration broker brokers request from different management frameworks. If a translation is needed to place the request in a format or a communication protocol that is compatible with the appropriate management framework grid integration broker instantiates an associated translator and maps the request into a suitable model or communication protocol for the appropriate management framework . In one embodiment if a standard format is used for requests grid integration broker will generally not need to instantiate an associated translator. Grid integration broker may also be arranged to expose web services which may be invoked by management frameworks 

The interactions between integration arrangement management frameworks and enterprise manager generally involve bidirectional communications. Referring next to interactions within a grid computing system or network will be described in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. A grid computing system includes management frameworks which are generally third party management frameworks relative to an enterprise manager . An integration arrangement or a broker and management service arrangement is arranged between management frameworks and enterprise manager . Management frameworks initialize or otherwise register requests with integration arrangement . After requests are initialized or registered integration arrangement may cause the requests to be looked up transformed if appropriate and analyzed. Looking up a request may involve identifying a service type or a system name for example. In one embodiment a management service arrangement of integration arrangement may perform runtime monitoring within system while a grid integration broker of integration arrangement may perform a model transformation. Integration arrangement may create models associated with requests.

Component brokering is performed between integration arrangement and enterprise manager . If it is appropriate to direct a request to enterprise manager as determined by integration arrangement the request is forwarded to the management services arrangement or interface. The services arrangement or interface will typically examine the request model and determine implied operations. Based on the operations derived through analysis a sequence of invocations may be passed to the necessary component broker in the right order i.e. the management services interface may control the order of component brokers to be invoked. A response to a request which may generally be in the form of a current state model and an identification of a suitable management framework for servicing or otherwise fulfilling a request are sent by enterprise manager to integration arrangement . If the grid integration broker determines that the request has been completed integration arrangement sends a completion response to the requesting management framework . Otherwise the grid integration may effectively repeat the same process to forward the request to the next appropriate management framework .

Messages that may be sent through web services are in one embodiment in the format of XML documents. Enterprise manager may expose a web services interface that is substantially directly accessible by third party management server . Integration arrangement may include an adapter e.g. a pluggable adapter that allows enterprise manager to communicate with integration arrangement . Similarly integration arrangement may include an adapter not shown e.g. a pluggable adapter that allows third party management server to communicate with integration arrangement .

A grid control management service interface effectively allows enterprise manager to substantially interface with an appropriate adapter within integration arrangement . In one embodiment grid control management service interface is part of integration arrangement . In general integration arrangement may serve as a communication bus for substantially all components that are plugged into or otherwise connected to integration arrangement . Enterprise manager may include various APIs and internal interfaces as will be discussed below with respect to that facilitate communications between integration arrangement and enterprise manager .

At times there may be rules violations associated with third party management server . Enterprise manager generally monitors rules within system . When there are rules violations enterprise manager may interact with integration arrangement to access third party management server to repair the rules violations.

With reference to APIs and internal interfaces which facilitate communications between an enterprise manager and an integration arrangement will be described in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. Within a grid computing system APIs and internal interfaces of an enterprise manager arrangement are arranged to facilitate the processing of requests sent from third party systems or management frameworks through an integration arrangement that includes in one embodiment an integration broker and a management service .

APIs and internal interfaces include but are not limited to a repository broker a root cause analysis RCA broker a provision broker a service level agreement broker and an event and notification broker . Repository broker is generally arranged to communicate with a repository as for example a management repository not shown to query existing objects to create objects or to update objects. RCA broker is arranged to pass a request to an RCA engine of an enterprise manager of enterprise manager arrangement or to receive results from the RCA engine. Provision broker is arranged to provision and to patch requests sent to enterprise manager . SLA broker is arranged to handle SLA and policy related requests associated with objects or models stored in a repository such as a management repository not shown . Event and notification broker analyzes events alerts and warnings to determine whether events are to be sent to external systems. In addition event and notification broker receives events and notifications from external systems and publishes such events and notifications to enterprise manager .

The steps associated with registering a management framework with an integration arrangement and then utilizing the integration arrangement to broker requests may vary widely. is a process flow diagram which illustrates one method of operating an enterprise grid computing system with an integration arrangement when a query is made in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. A process of operating an enterprise grid computing system with an integration arrangement begins at step in which a customer creates an infrastructure that interfaces with a third party management system or framework and interacts with the integration arrangement. The infrastructure may be used by the customer to register the third party management system with the integration arrangement e.g. an integration broker of the integration arrangement. That is a customer who obtains a third party management system creates a system which is arranged to utilize the third party management system to access an integration arrangement.

In step the third party management system sends a request model to the integration arrangement. The request model may express or otherwise include a state query. After receiving the request model the integration arrangement identifies an appropriate receiver for the query in step . The appropriate receiver may be substantially any receiver. In one embodiment the appropriate receiver may be the enterprise manager. Upon identifying an appropriate receiver the integration arrangement transforms the protocol i.e. the protocol associated with the request model and the request model into a format that is understandable to the appropriate receiver.

The integration arrangement forwards the transformed request model to the appropriate receiver in step which then updates the request model in response to the query included in the request model. To fulfill the query included in the request model the enterprise manager may access another management system or receiver in the enterprise grid computing system using the integration arrangement that actually services the request and returns information to the enterprise manager. It should be appreciated that when the appropriate receiver is an enterprise manager the enterprise manager may effectively serve the request model in a query to other receivers and then update the request model with the request to the query served to the other receivers. The updated request model may be considered to be a response model. In step the receiver sends the response model which typically includes an observed or updated state to the integration arrangement. Once the integration arrangement receives the response model the integration arrangement sends the response model to the customer through the third party management system that is interfaced with the customer. The process of operating an enterprise grid computing system to process a query is completed after the customer receives the response model.

Referring next to one method of operating an enterprise grid computing system with an integration arrangement when a state is to be updated e.g. in the course of a management operation will be described in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. A process of operating an enterprise grid computing system begins at step in which a customer creates an infrastructure that interfaces with a third party management system or framework and interacts with the integration arrangement. The third party management system then sends a request model to the integration arrangement in step . The request model which may be sent at the request of the customer expresses a desired state. The desired state in the request model expresses a future state that the customer or requester desires that the grid environment to be in.

Upon receiving the request model that expresses a desired state the integration arrangement identifies an appropriate receiver for the request model in step and transforms an associated protocol and the request model into a format that may be understood by the appropriate receiver. The appropriate receiver may be substantially any receiver within the same enterprise grid computing system as the integration arrangement e.g. the appropriate receiver may be an enterprise manager or a third party management system.

In step the integration arrangement forwards the transformed request model to the appropriate receiver which updates the model as appropriate given the desired state. The receiver then sends the updated or response model to the integration arrangement in step . After receiving the response model the integration arrangement interprets the response model in step . It is then determined in step whether the request model is to be further interpreted. That is it is determined whether it is necessary to further process the request model. If it is determined that the request model is not to be further interpreted process flow moves from step to step in which the integration arrangement sends the response model to the customer through the third party management system that the customer is interfaced with. Once the response model is sent to the customer the process of operating the enterprise grid computing system is completed.

Returning to step if the determination is that further interpretation of the request model is needed the integration arrangement forwards the response model to another receiver in step . Then process flow returns to step in which the receiver updates the response model as appropriate according to the desired state specified in the request model and sends the new updated response model to the integration arrangement.

A management system or framework may generally include a computing system as for example a server. illustrates a typical general purpose computing device or computer system. A computer system includes any number of central processing units CPUs that are coupled to memory devices including primary storage devices typically a random access memory or RAM and primary storage devices typically a read only memory or ROM . ROM acts to transfer data and instructions unidirectionally to the CPU while RAM is used typically to transfer data and instructions in a bidirectional manner.

CPU may generally include any number of processors. Both primary storage devices may include any suitable computer readable media. A secondary storage medium which is typically a mass memory device is also coupled bidirectionally to CPU and provides additional data storage capacity. Mass memory device is a computer readable medium that may be used to store programs including computer code devices data and the like. Typically mass memory device is a storage medium such as for example a hard disk which is generally slower than primary storage devices and . It should be appreciated that the information retained within mass memory device may in appropriate cases be incorporated in standard fashion as part of RAM as virtual memory. A specific primary storage device such as a CD ROM a DVD or a flash memory device may also pass data unidirectionally to the CPU .

CPU is also coupled to one or more input output devices that may include but are not limited to devices such as video monitors track balls mice keyboards microphones touch sensitive displays transducer card readers magnetic or paper tape readers tablets styluses voice or handwriting recognizers or other well known input devices such as of course other computers. Finally CPU may be coupled to a computer or telecommunications network e.g. a network that uses a grid automation bus or an integration arrangement an internet network or an intranet network using a network connection as shown generally at . With such a network connection it is contemplated that the CPU might receive information from the network or might output information to the network in the course of performing the above described method steps. Such information which is often represented as a sequence of instructions to be executed using CPU may be received from and outputted to the network for example in the form of a computer data signal embodied in a carrier wave. The above described devices and materials will be familiar to those of skill in the computer hardware and software arts.

Although only a few embodiments of the present invention have been described it should be understood that the present invention may be embodied in many other specific forms without departing from the spirit or the scope of the present invention. By way of example although a set of brokers has been described as being associated with an enterprise manager the enterprise manager may be associated with any number of the brokers including brokers which provide other services than those described above.

While a request has generally been described as being serviced or fulfilled by a single management framework or an enterprise manager it should be appreciated that a request is not necessarily atomic i.e. a request may not need to be fulfilled only by a single responding system. That is an integration arrangement may allow a request to be fulfilled by more than one component of a grid computing environment. Additionally an integration arrangement may be arranged to handle both concurrent and conflicting requests.

In one embodiment the functionality associated with an integration arrangement may be incorporated as part of an enterprise manager arrangement. That is an integration arrangement which serves as an extensible grid automation bus may effectively be included as a part of an overall enterprise manager arrangement. For example enterprise manager and integration arrangement of may be considered to be part of an overall enterprise manager arrangement rather than being substantially separate components.

One component or system that is plugged into an integration arrangement generally does not need to understand models associated with other components or systems. In an embodiment in which a common model format is not used translation logic may be included in the integration arrangement. Hence a model may be translated from a format associated with one component to a format associated with another component.

Grid computing systems may be substantially any computing system that effectively creates a dynamic computing environment that enables resources to be shared. While the present invention has been described in terms of grid computing systems it should be appreciated that an integration arrangement may be utilized in a wide variety of computing systems including but not limited to computing systems which utilize computing on demand adaptive computing N1 utility computing hosted computing organic computing and ubiquitous computing.

In general the steps associated with methods of the present invention may vary widely. Steps may be added removed altered and reordered without departing from the spirit or the scope of the present invention. Therefore the present examples are to be considered as illustrative and not restrictive and the invention is not to be limited to the details given herein but may be modified within the scope of the appended claims.

