---

title: Child restraint system and method for monitoring installation of the child restraint system
abstract: A child restraint system and a method for monitoring installation of the child restraint system are provided. The child restraint system includes a child seat configured to receive a child occupant. The child seat has at least a first seat belt guide member configured to engage a vehicle seat belt webbing for securing the child seat to a vehicle seat. The child restraint system further includes a first sensor coupled to the first seat belt guide member. The first sensor is configured to output a first signal indicative of an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing. The child restraint system further includes a controller coupled to the child seat configured to receive the first signal and to compute a first tension value based on the first signal. The controller further is configured to induce a first device disposed on the child seat to indicate when the first tension value is less than a predetermined tension value.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07422283&OS=07422283&RS=07422283
owner: Delphi Technologies, Inc.
number: 07422283
owner_city: Troy
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050606
---
The application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional application Ser. No. 60 577 546 filed Jun. 7 2004 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference thereto.

The application also claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional application Ser. No. 60 607 988 filed Sep. 8 2004 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference thereto.

This application is also related to the following United States Patent Applications filed contemporaneously herewith CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PCT US05 19872 CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM PCT US05 20050 CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM Ser. No. 11 146 928 CHILD SEAT MONITORING SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR DETERMINING A TYPE OF CHILD SEAT PCT US05 20046 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING WEIGHT SENSOR Ser. No. 11 146 921 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING CONTROL UNIT FOR EVALUATING HARNESS ADJUSTMENT Ser. No. 11 147 149. The contents of which are each incorporated herein by reference thereto.

This application relates to a child restraint system and a method for monitoring installation of the child restraint system.

Child restraint systems have been utilized to hold infants or children therein within vehicles. A first type of child restraint system includes a child seat and a base portion for holding the seat that are rearward facing with respect to a vehicle seat. In this type of child restraint system the child seat is secured in the base portion and a vehicle seat belt webbing is used to secure the base portion to the vehicle seat. A second type of child restraint system utilizes a rearward facing child seat that is secured via the vehicle seat belt webbing to the vehicle seat. A third type of child restraint system is a booster child seat that is frontward facing with respect to the vehicle seat and is secured via the vehicle seat belt webbing to the vehicle seat.

During installation of any of the foregoing types of child restraint systems in a vehicle if a sufficient amount of tension is applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing to secure the child seat rotation of the child seat with respect to a vehicle seat is restricted which assists in protecting a child disposed in the child seat. However if an insufficient amount of tension is applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing when securing the child seat the child seat may rotate more than desired.

Accordingly the inventors herein have recognized a need for a child restraint system that can notify a person when a desired amount of tension is being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing when securing a child restraint system on a vehicle seat.

A child restraint system adapted to be mounted within a vehicle in accordance with an exemplary embodiment is provided. The child restraint system includes a child seat configured to receive a child occupant. The child seat has at least a first seat belt guide member configured to engage a vehicle seat belt webbing for securing the child seat to a vehicle seat. The child restraint system further includes a first sensor coupled to the first seat belt guide member. The first sensor is configured to output a first signal indicative of an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing. The child restraint system further includes a controller coupled to the child seat configured to receive the first signal and to compute a first tension value based on the first signal. The controller further is configured to induce a first device disposed on the child seat to indicate when the first tension value is less than a predetermined tension value.

A method for monitoring installation of a child restraint system on a vehicle seat in accordance with another exemplary embodiment is provided. The child restraint system has a child seat configured to receive a child occupant. The child seat has at least a first seat belt guide member configured to engage a vehicle seat belt webbing for securing the child seat to the vehicle seat. The method includes outputting a first signal from a first sensor disposed on the first seat belt guide member of the child seat. The first signal is indicative of an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing. The method further includes computing a first tension value based on the first signal utilizing a controller. The method further includes inducing a first device disposed on the child seat to indicate when the first tension value is less than a predetermined tension value utilizing the controller.

Referring to and a child restraint system that can be secured to a vehicle seat in accordance with exemplary embodiment is provided. In particular the child restraint system is secured to the vehicle seat utilizing the vehicle seat belt webbing . The child restraint system includes a child seat a base portion and a seat belt tension monitoring system .

Referring to the child seat comprises a rearward facing child seat that is configured to accommodate a child therein for transporting the child both inside and outside of a vehicle. The child seat is configured to be fixedly secured to the base portion and the base portion is further secured via the vehicle seat belt webbing to the seat or to a frame of a vehicle. The child seat includes a shell the handle and a cushion .

The shell is constructed from a rigid polymeric material and defines a compartment for accommodating the child. The shell includes a back portion a seat portion and a pair of seat belt guide members . The back portion supports a back of the child and the seat portion supports the buttocks and legs of the child. A compartment defined by the shell is lined with the cushion . The pair of seat belt guide members one of which shown in are disposed on opposite sides of the shell and are configured to form an inner groove for receiving the vehicle seat belt webbing therethrough.

The handle is coupled to shell and is provided to allow a user to easily lift the child seat . The handle is constructed from a rigid polymeric material.

Referring to the base portion is provided to receive the child seat therein. The base portion has a shell constructed from a rigid polymeric material. The shell includes a bottom wall and sidewalls coupled to the bottom wall . The side walls include apertures respectively extending therethrough for receiving the vehicle seat belt webbing . The bottom wall includes a seat belt guide portion for guiding vehicle seat belt webbing from the aperture in the side wall to the aperture in the side wall .

Referring to the seat belt tension monitoring system is provided to monitor a tension of the vehicle seat belt webbing and to provide an indication to a user as to whether the tension is less than or greater than a predetermined tension value. The seat belt tension monitoring system includes a controller force sensors resistors capacitors light emitting diodes LEDs an annunciator a liquid crystal display LCD and a switch .

The controller is provided to monitor the output of the force sensors and to calculate a tension applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing . The controller is further provided to control operation of the indicator devices including the LEDs the annunciator and the LCD as will be described in greater detail below. The controller includes a central processing unit CPU a read only memory ROM a volatile memory such as a random access memory RAM and an input output I O interface . The CPU operably communicates with the ROM the RAM and the I O interface . The computer readable media including ROM and RAM may be implemented using any of a number of known memory devices such as PROMs EPROMs EEPROMS flash memory or any other electric magnetic optical or combination memory device capable of storing data some of which represent executable instructions used by the CPU .

Referring to the force sensors are provided to output signals V V V V respectively indicative of a tension be applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing . The force sensors comprise piezo resistive force sensors and have an identical construction with one another. Referring to a curve indicates an operational characteristics of each of the force sensors . In particular the curve indicates that as a force applied to a force sensor is increased a resistance of the force sensor is decreased. It should be noted that in an alternate embodiment the force sensors can comprise any other type of force sensor known to those skilled and the art that is capable of detecting a tension applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing . Referring to the force sensors are disposed proximate the pair of seat belt guide members respectively. Referring to the force sensors are disposed on the seat belt guide member between the seat belt guide member and the vehicle seat belt webbing . For purposes of simplicity only the structure of the force sensor will be explained.

Referring to the force sensor includes a frame portion a deflection member a force sensor strip and a contact . The frame portion includes slots disposed therethrough on opposite sides of the deflection member for receiving the vehicle seat belt webbing is therethrough. The frame portion can be either integrally molded within the shell of the child seat or fixedly attached to the shell . The frame portion is operably coupled to the deflection member at pivot points which are adjacent the slots respectively. The vehicle seat belt webbing routed over the surface and through the slot and further routed over the underside surface of the deflection member . Thereafter the vehicle seat belt webbing is routed through the slot and over the surface on an opposite side of the frame portion .

Referring to the force sensor strip is disposed on the surface of the deflection member a predetermined distance from the stationary contact . The force sensor strip includes a conductive ink layer that is disposed between polyester layers . When a tensional force is applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing the vehicle seat belt webbing applies a substantially perpendicular force against the deflection member that induces the member to move towards the stationary contact . The stationary contact is fixedly coupled to the shell . When the force sensor strip disposed on the deflection member is pushed against the contact a force applied to the force sensor strip reduces a resistance of the conductive ink layer that is proportional to the applied force. Accordingly the resistance of the conductive ink layer is proportional to the force being applied to the force sensor strip by the vehicle seat belt webbing that is further proportional to the tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing .

Referring again to the remainder of the seat belt tension monitoring system will now be explained. The resistor is electrically coupled between a node and the I O interface . The capacitor is electrically coupled between the node and electrical ground. The resistor is electrically coupled between a voltage source Vdd and the node . The force sensor is electrically coupled between the node and the electrical ground. In particular the conductive ink layer of the force sensor strip in the force sensor is electrically coupled between the node and the electrical ground. During operation when an increasing force is applied to the force sensor by the vehicle seat belt webbing a resistance of conductive ink layer is decreased which results in an amplitude of the voltage signal V being decreased. Alternately when the force applied to the force sensor is reduced a resistance of conductive ink layer is increased which results in an amplitude of the voltage signal V being increased.

The resistor is electrically coupled between a node and the I O interface . The capacitor is electrically coupled between the node and electrical ground. The resistor is electrically coupled between a voltage source Vdd and the node . The force sensor is electrically coupled between the node and the electrical ground. In particular a conductive ink layer of the force sensor strip in the force sensor is electrically coupled between the node and the electrical ground. During operation when an increasing force is applied to the force sensor by the vehicle seat belt webbing a resistance of conductive ink layer therein is decreased which results in an amplitude of the voltage signal V being decreased. Alternately when the force applied to the force sensor is reduced a resistance of conductive ink layer therein is increased which results in an amplitude of the voltage signal V being increased.

The resistor is electrically coupled between a node and the I O interface . The capacitor is electrically coupled between the node and electrical ground. The resistor is electrically coupled between a voltage source Vdd and the node . The force sensor is electrically coupled between the node and the electrical ground. In particular a conductive ink layer of the force sensor strip in the force sensor is electrically coupled between the node and the electrical ground. During operation when an increasing force is applied to the force sensor by the vehicle seat belt webbing a resistance of conductive ink layer therein is decreased which results in an amplitude of the voltage signal V being decreased. Alternately when the force applied to the force sensor is reduced a resistance of conductive ink layer therein is increased which results in an amplitude of the voltage signal V being increased.

The resistor is electrically coupled between a node and the I O interface . The capacitor is electrically coupled between the node and electrical ground. The resistor is electrically coupled between a voltage source Vdd and the node . The force sensor is electrically coupled between the node and the electrical ground. In particular a conductive ink layer of the force sensor strip in the force sensor is electrically coupled between the node and the electrical ground. During operation when an increasing force is applied to the force sensor by the vehicle seat belt webbing a resistance of conductive ink layer therein is decreased which results in an amplitude of the voltage signal V being decreased. Alternately when the force applied to the force sensor is reduced a resistance of conductive ink layer therein is increased which results in an amplitude of the voltage signal V being increased.

It should be noted that the force sensors are electrically coupled to the controller through an electrical wiring harness not shown using a plug and a socket to allow the child seat to be detached from the base portion . In another alternate embodiment the force sensors are operably coupled to one or more radio frequency RF transmitters that transmit RF signals having information indicative of the measured tension and the seat belt tension monitoring system includes an RF receiver operably coupled to the controller configured to receive the RF signals to allow wireless communication therebetween.

The LED is provided to emit light having a first color to indicate when a measured tension of the vehicle seat belt webbing is greater than or equal to the predetermined tension value. The LED is provided to emit light having a second color to indicate when a measured tension of the vehicle seat belt webbing is less than a predetermined tension value. As shown the LEDs are electrically coupled between the I O interface and electrical ground.

The electrical annunciator is provided to emit a first audible sound when a measured tension of the vehicle seat belt webbing is less than a predetermined tension value in response to a control signal from the controller . The electrical annunciator is further provided to emit a second audible sound when a measured tension of the vehicle seat belt webbing is greater than or equal to the predetermined tension value in response to another control signal from the controller . The annunciator is electrically coupled to the I O interface .

The LCD is provided to display a first message when a measured tension of the vehicle seat belt webbing is less than a predetermined tension value in response to a control signal from the controller . The LCD is further provided to display a second message when a measured tension of the vehicle seat belt webbing is greater than or equal to the predetermined tension value in response to a control signal from the controller . The LCD is electrically coupled to the I O interface . The switch is provided to induce the controller to monitor installation of the child restraint system in accordance with the method of . In particular when the switch is moved to a closed operational position the controller monitors installation of the child restraint system . The switch is electrically coupled to the I O interface .

It should be noted that in an alternate embodiment of the seat belt tension monitoring system a single force sensor could be utilized in the child seat and a single force sensor could be utilized in the base portion . Also another type of force sensor such as a piezo resistive sensor could be used in place of the conductive ink sensors and . Further one type of indicator e.g. LED or annunciator or LCD could be utilized to indicate whether the amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing is less than a predetermined tension value or greater than or equal to the predetermined tension value.

Referring to a method for monitoring installation of the child restraint system is illustrated. The method can be implemented utilizing software algorithms executed by the controller of the seat belt monitoring system .

At step the controller samples a signal V output from the force sensor disposed proximate a first seat belt guide member on the child seat and calculates a first tension value based on the signal V .

At step the controller samples a signal V output from a force sensor disposed proximate a second seat belt guide member on the child seat and calculates a second tension value based on the signal V .

At step the controller samples a signal V output from a force sensor disposed on a seat belt guide portion of a base portion and calculates a third tension value based on the signal V .

At step the controller samples a signal V output from a force sensor disposed on the seat belt guide portion of the base portion and calculates a fourth tension value based on the signal V .

At step the controller makes a determination as to whether i the first tension value is less than a predetermined tension value and ii the second tension value is less than a predetermined tension value. If the value of step equals yes the method advances to step . Otherwise the method advances to step .

At step the controller makes a determination as to whether i the third tension value is less than the predetermined tension value and ii the fourth tension value is less than in the predetermined tension value. If the value of step equals yes the method advances to step . Otherwise the method advances to step .

At step the controller makes a determination as to whether the child seat has LEDs . If the value of step equals yes the method advances to step . Otherwise the method advances to step .

At step the controller induces the LED to emit light having a first color indicating an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing is less than the predetermined tension value. After step the method advances to step .

At step the controller makes a determination as to whether the child seat has an annunciator . If the value of step equals yes the method advances step . Otherwise the method advances to step .

At step the controller induces the annunciator to emit a first audible sound indicating an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing is less than the predetermined tension value. After step method advances to step

At step the controller makes a determination as to whether the child seat has an LCD . If the value of step equals yes the method advances to step . Otherwise method advances to step .

At step the controller induces the LCD to display a first message indicating an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing is less than the predetermined tension value. After step the method advances to step .

At step the controller makes a determination as to whether the child seat has the LEDs . If the value of step equals yes the method advances to step . Otherwise the method advances to step .

At step the controller induces the LED to emit light having a second color indicating an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing is greater than or equal to the predetermined tension value. After step the method advances to step .

At step the controller makes a determination as to whether the child seat has the annunciator . If the value of step equals yes the method advances to step . Otherwise the method advances to step .

At step the controller induces the annunciator to emit a second audible sound indicating an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing is greater than or equal to the predetermined tension value. After step the method advances to step .

At step the controller makes a determination as to whether the child seat has the LCD . If the value of step equals yes the method advances to step . Otherwise the method advances to step .

At step the controller induces the LCD to display a second message indicating an amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing is greater than or equal to the predetermined tension value. After step method advances to step .

Referring to the a child restraint system that can be secured to a vehicle seat in accordance with another exemplary embodiment is provided. In particular the child restraint system is secured to the vehicle seat utilizing the vehicle seat belt webbing . The child restraint system includes a child seat and a portion of a seat belt tension monitoring system .

The child seat comprises a frontward facing child seat that is configured to accommodate a child therein for transporting the child inside of a vehicle. The child seat is configured to be fixedly secured via the vehicle seat belt webbing to the seat or to a frame of a vehicle. The child seat includes a shell and a cushion .

The shell is constructed from a rigid polymeric material and defines a compartment for accommodating the child. The shell includes a back portion a seat portion and a seat belt guide member not shown disposed in the back portion . The back portion supports a back of the child and the seat portion supports the buttocks and legs of the child. A compartment defined by the shell is lined with the cushion . The back portion includes an aperture extending therethrough for receiving the vehicle seat belt webbing therethrough.

The child restraint system can utilize substantially all of the component of the seat belt tension monitoring system except for the force sensors and the associated components provided to supply the voltage signals V V to the controller . It particular the force sensors can be disposed on the back portion proximate the aperture to contact the vehicle seat belt webbing for monitoring a seat belt tension applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing as described above with respect to the child restraint system .

The child restraint system and a method for monitoring installation of the child restraint system provides a substantial advantage over other systems and methods. In particular the child restraint system utilizes a controller to monitor the amount of tension being applied to the vehicle seat belt webbing when securing the child restraint system on a vehicle seat. Further the controller induces at least one indicator device to notify a person when a desired amount of tension is being applied to vehicle seat belt webbing.

As described above the method for monitoring installation of the child restraint system can be embodied in the form of computer implemented processes and apparatuses for practicing those processes. In an exemplary embodiment the method is embodied in computer program code executed by one or more elements. The present method may be embodied in the form of computer program code containing instructions embodied in tangible media such as floppy diskettes CD ROMs hard drives flash memory or any other computer readable storage medium wherein when the computer program code is loaded into and executed by a computer the computer becomes an apparatus for practicing the invention. The present method can also be embodied in the form of computer program code for example whether stored in a storage medium loaded into and or executed by a computer.

While the invention has been described with reference to exemplary embodiments it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes may be made and equivalents may be substituted for elements thereof without departing from the scope of the invention. In addition many modifications may be made to adapt a particular situation or material to the teachings of the invention without departing from the essential scope thereof. Therefore it is intended that the invention not be limited to the particular embodiment disclosed for carrying out this invention but that the invention will include all embodiments falling within the scope of the appended claims. Moreover the use of the terms first second etc. do not denote any order or importance but rather the terms first second etc. are used to distinguish one element from another. Furthermore the use of the terms a an etc. do not denote a limitation of quantity but rather denote the presence of at least one of the referenced item.

