---

title: Radio/telephony interoperability system
abstract: A radio/telephony interoperability architecture that facilitates intercommunications between a security services network, elected officials and/or emergency services network and a telephony management system for one-way and two-way security and/or emergency teleconferencing communications. The telephony system creates a session in which one or more session participants can communicate with front-line mobile radio operators (e.g., first responder personnel) and radio band components. Mobile radio systems can be accessed via circuit-switched and packet-switched networks with communications capable of existing between horizontal services entities (e.g., city fire and police) and vertical entities (e.g., city, state, and federal agencies and personnel). Furthermore, the presence of participants and potential participants is provided to authorized users to facilitate the establishment of such conferences. Notifications and alarms are used to alert participants and potential participants of important events.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07925246&OS=07925246&RS=07925246
owner: Leader Technologies, Inc.
number: 07925246
owner_city: Lewis Center
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051024
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 621 858 entitled RADIO TELEPHONY INTEROPERABILITY SYSTEM FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES and filed Oct. 25 2004. This application is also a Continuation in Part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 979 611 entitled COMMUNICATION SYSTEM AND METHOD filed Nov. 2 2004 which claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 516 307 entitled COMMUNICATION SYSTEM AND METHOD and filed Nov. 3 2003. The entireties of the above noted applications are incorporated by reference herein.

This invention is related to web supported teleconferencing systems and more specifically to interfacing such teleconferencing systems to mobile radio systems for communications with elected officials and first responder emergency communications for example.

The advent of global communications networks such as the Internet has facilitated numerous collaborative enterprises. In addition to basic e mail exchanges and intercommunications such communications networks offer the opportunities to provide communications arrangements e.g. voice conferencing video conferencing the combination of which plus multimedia that can be exchanged during a session are referred to herein as teleconferencing whereby many customers can be bridged together on a media connection. Individuals and business people seek to communicate with each other obtain useful information interact commercially and entertain themselves in an increasingly mobile society. In order to fulfill these needs one requires the capability to send and receive messages access information and entertainment content conduct business transactions organize daily schedules and generally stay in touch with homes and offices from almost anywhere at any time as easily as making a telephone call.

The challenge of communications interoperability has plagued public safety agencies. Such interoperability can give first responders elected officials and public safety agencies the capability to exchange voice and data on demand and in real time when needed and as authorized. However national security incidents e.g. terrorist attacks bombings . . . and natural disasters e.g. hurricanes earthquakes floods . . . have exposed that true interoperability requires first responders and elected officials to be able to communicate not just within their units but also across disciplines and jurisdictions. Additionally full communications interoperability is required at all levels for example at the local state and federal levels.

Conventional network availability has proven to be difficult to maintain in unpredictable environments such as firestorms natural disasters and terrorist situations. Too often communications depend on access to fixed or temporary infrastructure and are limited by range or line of sight constraints. Moreover radio interoperability between jurisdictions e.g. local state federal is always an issue for responders and has become a homeland security matter. Furthermore proprietary radios and multiple standards and their lack of interoperability with wired and wireless telephony also called telecommunications networks make it virtually impossible for different agencies to cooperate in a scaled response to a major disaster.

The ability to determine if a first responder is on the net or available i.e. presence is critical to the successful execution of any crises management situation. This concept is particularly difficult to implement enforce and manage for radio networks.

Accordingly reliable wireless and or wired communications that enable real time information sharing constant availability and interagency interoperability are imperative in emergency situations. Additionally greater situational awareness is an increasingly important requirement that enables emergency first responders to know each other s position in relation to the incident terrain neighborhood or perimeter being secured. Live video voice communication sensor and location data provide mission critical information but low speed data networks cannot meet the bandwidth requirements to support such critical real time information.

When catastrophic emergencies happen a comprehensive coordinated effort based on timely effective communications between fire police emergency services and or elected officials is necessary to cope with the situation. Therefore what is needed is an improved interoperable emergency and security communications architecture. In addition this architecture should embody services that support presence as well as notification and alarm transmission.

The following presents a simplified summary of the invention in order to provide a basic understanding of some aspects of the invention. This summary is not an extensive overview of the invention. It is not intended to identify key critical elements of the invention or to delineate the scope of the invention. Its sole purpose is to present some concepts of the invention in a simplified form as a prelude to the more detailed description that is presented later.

Disclosed herein is a radio telephony interoperability architecture that facilitates intercommunications between a security and or emergency services network and a telephony management component for one way and two way security and or emergency teleconferencing communications. The telephony management component creates a session in which one or more session participants can communicate with front line mobile radio operators e.g. first responder personnel and radio band components. Mobile radio systems can be accessed via circuit switched and or packet switched networks with communications capable of existing between horizontal services entities e.g. city fire and police and vertical entities e.g. city state and federal agencies and personnel .

Accordingly the invention disclosed and claimed herein in one aspect thereof comprises a system that facilitates security and or emergency services communications. The system can include an emergency communications network component that facilitates at least emergency mobile radio communications and an Internet based communications management component that interfaces to the emergency communication networks to facilitate intercommunications therebetween. Note that although called an Internet based component it is to be understood that the network can be any IP based network. The Internet based communications management component can communicate at least via VoIP Voice over Internet Protocol . The emergency communications network component facilitates communications to at least one of wired and wireless telephone communications systems. The Internet based communications management component can communicate emergency services information to a group of conference call participants via a single PIN Participant Identification Number .

In another aspect thereof the Internet based communications management component facilitates one way and two way communications where the one way communications can be for emergency alerts and the two way communications can be for teleconferencing for example.

In another aspect of the subject invention the system further comprises an artificial intelligence component that employs a probabilistic and or statistical based analysis to prognose or infer an action that a user desires to be automatically performed.

In yet another novel aspect presence data can be detected and processed to determine if a user e.g. mobile radio user is available and in a certain area.

In still another novel aspect Automatic Speech Recognition ASR can be employed in the dialog with participants on a mobile radio network who do not have handsets equipped with DTMF dual tone multi frequency keys.

To the accomplishment of the foregoing and related ends certain illustrative aspects of the invention are described herein in connection with the following description and the annexed drawings. These aspects are indicative however of but a few of the various ways in which the principles of the invention can be employed and the subject invention is intended to include all such aspects and their equivalents. Other advantages and novel features of the invention will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the drawings.

The invention is now described with reference to the drawings wherein like reference numerals are used to refer to like elements throughout. In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the subject invention. It may be evident however that the invention can be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to facilitate describing the invention.

As used in this application the terms component and system are intended to refer to a computer related entity either hardware a combination of hardware and software software or software in execution. For example a component can be but is not limited to being a process running on a processor a processor an object an executable a thread of execution a program and or a computer. By way of illustration both an application running on a server and the server can be a component. One or more components can reside within a process and or thread of execution and a component can be localized on one computer and or distributed between two or more computers.

As used herein the term to infer or inference refer generally to the process of reasoning about or inferring states of the system environment and or user from a set of observations as captured via events and or data. Inference can be employed to identify a specific context or action or can generate a probability distribution over states for example. The inference can be probabilistic that is the computation of a probability distribution over states of interest based on a consideration of data and events. Inference can also refer to techniques employed for composing higher level events from a set of events and or data. Such inference results in the construction of new events or actions from a set of observed events and or stored event data whether or not the events are correlated in close temporal proximity and whether the events and data come from one or several event and data sources.

Referring now to there is illustrated a call session system in accordance with the subject invention. The system includes one or more call processing components denoted CPC CPC . . . CPC that provide the capability to receive and transmit calls via call lines e.g. as provided by digital T1 and E1 communications architectures and process signals and data for at least the management of call conferencing. The one or more call processing components intercommunicate control signals and data across a non voice communications bus . In accordance with a novel aspect of the subject invention a session component resides on the bus in communication with the one or more call processing components to facilitate routing of one or more of the calls across the non voice communications bus which is a departure from the designed purpose of the bus .

The session component bridges the one or more call processing components across the bus in such a way that is significantly more efficient and allows for dynamic assignment of ports across the multiple cards at the time of receiving or initiating a call. Conventionally software is written to allocate an assigned port for a received call and use that port until the call is finished. In the system of the invention the system does not even consider which port to allocate until the call starts allocates the first available port and dynamically allocates more or less ports as the demand increases and decreases. During the session the system knows which ports are being used and at the end of the session releases the ports back into the pool of ports to be re utilized.

In support of call management the session component can manage a single call across processing resources e.g. DSP digital signal processor resources of at least two of the CPCs e.g. CPCand CPC . Additional features of echo cancellation noise reduction volume control etc. are facilitated by dedicating some of the DSP resources of the CPCs for these purposes. It is within contemplation of the subject invention that other functions can be dedicated to additional DSP resources where suitable code is provided.

The system also includes an access component that facilitates user interaction with features provided in code by the session component . The system exposes itself as a network based API application program interface that facilitates processing of general functions for example dial this number play this .wav file on this line bind this line into this conference call and create a new conference call. In contrast the session component manages the ports and DSP resources as one large entity of ports and resources.

The session component interfaces to a CTI computer telephony interface component that exposes itself as a remote Java API to which the access component interfaces. Thus the graphical user interface provided by a browser interfaces to the CTI component and not to the session component and underlying hardware and software. Note that although the CTI component is shown internal to the system it can be implemented as a separate entity external to the system as hosted on a personal computer for example.

The bus is a secondary bus that typically handles signals and data and which are non voice communications. One example of the communications architecture employed by the bus is an MVIP multi vendor integration protocol architecture. Another more recent enhancement to the MVIP architecture provides the basis for H.100 bus and H.110 bus architectures such as found on a model AG4000C board and other suitable boards manufactured by NMS Communications of Framingham Mass.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of call conferencing in accordance with the invention. While for purposes of simplicity of explanation the one or more methodologies shown herein e.g. in the form of a flow chart are shown and described as a series of acts it is to be understood and appreciated that the subject invention is not limited by the order of acts as some acts may in accordance with the invention occur in a different order and or concurrently with other acts from that shown and described herein. For example those skilled in the art will understand and appreciate that a methodology could alternatively be represented as a series of interrelated states or events such as in a state diagram. Moreover not all illustrated acts may be required to implement a methodology in accordance with the invention.

At a call is received at a CPC. The user in accordance with the invention also provides an ID as indicated at . This can be a participant ID that indicates the caller is a participant in a conference call session or a host ID that indicates the caller will be the host of the conference call. At the CPC that received the call signals the session component across the non voice communications bus. At the session component responds across the non voice communications bus by dynamically allocating ports and DSP resources across CPCs if necessary. If necessary at the call is routed over the non voice communications bus to be processed by the assigned resources on a different CPC than the one that received the call. At the call is bound to a conference call session. At the session component is signaled with respect to one or more recordings that can be played in association with the call. At the system checks if the call is over. If no flow loops back to keep checking. If yes at the session component disconnects the call and releases the associated port. If the call is the last of the session the associated DSP resources will also be released for reassignment to another call session.

Referring now to there is illustrated more detailed system diagram of the telephone call processing system of the subject invention. The system similar to system of receives incoming calls over voice lines such as T1 and E1 digital communications connections. One or more separate lines can be provided for each CPC card denoted here as CPC Card CPC Card and CPC Card . Each of the CPC cards includes DSP resources represented as DSP blocks DSP DSP . . . DSP to which an incoming call is assigned for processing. In accordance with the subject invention each of the DSP resources is allocated to perform same or different tasks. For example a first DSP resource DSP can be allocated for echo cancellation a second DSP resource DSP can be allocated for volume control and a third DSP not shown can be allocated for noise reduction all of which are associated with one or more calls.

The allocation of such DSP resources is accomplished by the session software component designated as the VRU voice response unit that communicates associated commands across the non voice communications bus to the respective CPC cards . Moreover a call received at a first CPC card can be routed across to a second CPC card via the non voice communications bus. Thus the burden of call processing can be scaled to another card. Ultimately all CPC processing cards and incoming voice lines appear to be one large bound conference calling platform.

The CTI component facilitates interfacing to the system such that high level commands can be processed and communicated to the session component for execution across the non voice communications bus to the CPC cards .

At a higher level the many call conferencing benefits and functions can be performed in accordance with the system of the subject invention. A user can interface to the system to facilitate a conference call by initiating contact with prospective participants binding callers to a specific conference call session muting disconnecting and performing many other functions in accordance with the subject invention.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of performing call conferencing in accordance with the invention. The system is capable of simultaneously dialing several participants at once and binding them to a conference call. Accordingly at a conference call session is initiated. At a list of participants is received. At the list is processed into electronic call instructions. At the call instructions are processed to initiate calls substantially simultaneously to all participants on the list.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of processing greetings in accordance with the invention. The software is also capable of calling a conference call host referred to herein as a hosted conference call session prompting the host for a custom greeting recording the custom greeting and replaying the custom greeting to other participants invited to the conference call. Accordingly at a conference call session is initiated. At a list of participants is received and processed. At a host is called and prompted to enter a custom greeting. At the custom greeting is input by the host and stored. At call instructions are initiated substantially simultaneously to all participants. At the custom greeting is played back to the session participants who are then logged in to the session. Where a host is not designated this is referred to herein as a non hosted conference call session.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of connecting a conference participant to the appropriate conference call session in accordance with the invention. At several conference call sessions have been initiated and or are in session. At the system receives an incoming call of a session participant. At the system prompts the caller to enter an ID code. At the system processes the ID code and binds the caller as a participant into the conference call session that corresponds to the ID code.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of creating a new conference call in accordance with the invention. At a conference call is initiated. At an incoming call is received. At the caller is prompted for an ID code. At the ID code is processed and a new conference call session created.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of processing a received facsimile in accordance with the invention. At the system receives an incoming call and analyzes the call signals. At if the incoming call is a fax transmission flow is to to convert the fax document to an image file format e.g. a TIFF file and store the converted document to a hard drive or other storage device. At the image file is processed by optical character recognition OCR into plain text data. At the plain text of the fax can be written to a file for indexing and insertion into a database. At if the call is not a fax flow is to to process the call normally as a voice call.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of capturing incoming information in accordance with the invention. At an incoming call is received. At the caller is prompted to enter an ID code. At the system processes the ID code and writes the telephone number and ID code of the prospective conference call participant in association therewith to a flat file. At the flat file is then stored for later processing.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of processing a list of names for a conference call in accordance with the invention. The list of names can be obtained from any data source. For example in one implementation a user may establish groups from an address book such as that found in Microsoft Outlook for example and the software is capable of allowing the conference manager to invite each member of the group to participate in the conference call via a graphical user interface GUI with a single input action mouse click . Accordingly at a data source e.g. an e mail application is accessed. At a list of names e.g. an address book is accessed therefrom. At grouping information e.g. from within the address book is detected if available. At a conference call session is initiated e.g. based on the grouping information and according to a single user click and or interaction with the GUI. At a database of telephone numbers is accessed from a database. At each member of the list e.g. the group is called using the corresponding member telephone number. As indicated supra the list of names and any associated grouping information can be obtained from any program and or data source such as a contacts file stored in an e mail program a contacts file stored in a PDA a cell phone address book and so on.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of managing a conference call session in accordance with the invention. The system of the subject invention permits callers to be added muted and or dropped at any time and allows callers to change phones in mid call. The system can call out to participants simultaneously eliminating the need to wait for everyone to get online or can let them call in adding them at any time. The system can send reminders using a variety of mechanisms with the agenda and minutes automatically prior to calls during calls and in written summaries of conference call sessions afterwards. In one implementation the system enables up to fifty five participants to be bound at one time into a conference call session. However this is not to be construed as limiting since additional capacity in terms of hardware and or software facilitates the addition of a greater number of session participants is within contemplation and scope of the invention.

Accordingly at the system can automatically send a reminder to each potential session participant via e mail or other messaging mechanisms e.g. SMS short message service MMS multimedia messaging service . . . and with an automatically attached session agenda and file attachments. At the conference call session is initiated. At a caller can be added to the session at anytime. At a session participant can be dropped from the session at anytime. At a session participant can be muted at anytime. At a session participant can be allowed to change telephones at anytime during the session. At the conference call session ends. At a session summary can be automatically sent to each participant and or to any non participant.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of managing a session by a host in accordance with the invention. Conference calls may be managed from virtually any computing device and or telephone e.g. a touch tone phone mobile telephone personal computer or a wireless PDA e.g. a Palm PDA . More particularly in keeping with a particularly preferred aspect of the invention users or participants can dial in using a Participant Identification Number PIN while the host dials in with another PIN called a host PIN that can be used to control when the conference starts for example. In this way only when the host dials in will the other callers be connected. This is a particularly effective method for a manager or other supervisor to maintain better control over their conference call session. Additionally it allows customers the opportunity to issue credit card size conference calling cards containing a permanent host PIN and participant PIN to each person who wishes to make conference calls without ever even having to use a browser interface.

At a participant host card is provided with corresponding PINs for each function. At the caller initiates a host sponsored or hosted conference call session. At invited participants log in using the participant PIN. At the system determines if the host has logged in to start the session. If so at flow is to to allow callers to check in to the session as participants. Alternatively if the host has not logged in to start the session no other participants will be allowed to log in as indicated by . Flow is then back to to continue checking for the host login.

The browser interface can be used when more console control is desired over the call such as viewing who is participating in the call and how each participant has been in the session and the how long the session has been in existence. A feature called Hosted Meet Me helps prevent potential overuse and misuse of single conferencing PINs. It also prevents the conference call from remaining open after the host hangs up. Hosted Meet Me is ideal for large companies that distribute thousands of conferencing PINs to managers and for university virtual classrooms where the call cannot start until the professor dials in.

Referring now to there is illustrated a methodology of managing a conference call session in a no host or non hosted manner in accordance with the invention. A single PIN Meet Me feature is also provided via the subject invention. This feature issues an active PIN number that can be distributed to any person desired to be in a conference. No Host PIN is created so whenever any one of these participants calls in a conference call session can begin with any of the other people who received that PIN. This single PIN Meet Me feature is desirable in many situations where a group of people need equal ability for any of them to start a conference call such as among an engineering team.

Accordingly at a single PIN session number is provided in the form of for example a card. At the PIN is distributed to potential conference participants. It is to be appreciated that the PIN can be provided by many other conventional means for example e mail telephone call messaging to a messaging device and so on. At any person who has the PIN can dial in to start the conference call session. At the remaining participants can call to connect to the session at any time.

Referring now to there is illustrated a general system configuration of the invention. The system includes a platform that hosts at least the data management tool here called a web application server . The server provides a common layer to underlying services that include a database server a VRU voice response unit also called an interactive VRU or IVRU and similar to the system of and system of and mass storage system . The VRU facilitates interactive calling features for a user via remote touchtone signals and or speech recognition facilities and to voice data to the caller such that the caller can make choices in response to predetermined options presented by the system.

The platform can utilize at least one multi channel data communication connection e.g. T1 DS3 into the VRU subsystem for communicating voice information and interacting with features of the platform . As indicated previously the invention can accommodate user communication from virtually any accessible network node. To facilitate such an interface the platform can include a processor suitable for XML eXtensible Markup Language XSLT XML Stylesheet Language Transformations and SSL processing. The processor can also access web based services utilizing SOAP Simple Object Access Protocol . SOAP employs XML syntax to send text commands across the network using HTTP HyperText Transport Protocol . Thus there is a high speed connection e.g. broadband that interfaces to the processor layer for use with multiple communication exchanges with remote users disposed on a global communication network . The remote users can access the platform system via a SSL or other secure connection using portable wired wireless devices and by way of the associated browsers .

The VRU subsystem also facilitates the recording of voice messages e.g. voice mail for access and retrieval at a later time. Additionally the message is not restricted to access by a single user but can be accessed by multiples users who are given the access authority e.g. a PIN for a conference call session . The voice messages can be retrieved and presented via any number of different methods. For example a user can access the voice message via a cell phone VoIP phone IP phone a computer or computing device e.g. desktop laptop tablet PC PDA and so on by connecting to the system and providing sufficient credentials to access the message s .

Communications between the CTI and the session component of which together can be considered the VRU of can be accomplished using many different programming codes. The code can facilitate a typical dial in process entering of a PIN number putting oneself on mute and adding a participant using a DTMF dual tone multi frequency response of 1 for example. Both people then hang up.

In one implementation the SCP service control point detects and receives an incoming call and then sends a message to the VRU. An SCP is an SS7 Signaling System 7 signaling point with access to a centralized database or enhanced service Intelligent Networking IN application. SS7 is an out of band signaling system that provides fast call setup using circuit switched connections and transaction capabilities for remote database interactions such as for example toll free number translation databases a HLR home location register and or VLR visitor location register databases in wireless networks. The SCP handles all signaling while all audio is handled by the VRU. In the case of an SS7 SCP both the conference sentinel 1 and the PIN a number string are detected by the switch and sent to the SCP as a dialed digit string. The SCP will make a data query to validate the PIN. Once the PIN has been validated the SCP accepts the connection and turns control of the call over to the VRU. A conference call session is created a voice file can be played and a participant added to the conference call session.

Alternatively within the scope of the design is a configuration whereby no SCP is provided and all circuits terminate at the VRU. In this case the call is connected and the user is requested to enter their PIN using the DTMF keys or alternatively through the mechanism of the ASR. The PIN is then interpreted and validated by the VRU. Subsequent processing of the call and conference is the same for both cases of SCP VRU as the primary end point. DSP resources are also managed to allocate ports for the calls. The conference call session can be configured by the session host. A session participant can be called in preparation for entry into the conference call session then a caller can be added to the conference call session a session participant removed from the current conference call session and the conference call session terminated. In another implementation the VRU does not send messaging via an SCP unit but utilizes other means.

Referring now to there is illustrated a radio telephony interoperability architecture in accordance with the subject invention. The architecture facilitates interoperability communications of first responders and responder radios such as push to talk radios for example with circuit switched and or packet switched communications entities through the utilization of reliable wireless and or wired communications that enable real time information sharing constant availability and interagency interoperability during emergency and or security situations. Additionally the architecture provides greater situational awareness that enables emergency first responders to know each other s position in relation to the incident terrain neighborhood or perimeter being secured for example. The architecture facilitates the communication of live video and or voice communication sensing and location data for mission critical information for example when catastrophic emergencies and or security needs arise and affords a effective communications between fire police and emergency services on a horizontal level and jurisdictional communications on a vertical level between local state and or federal entities.

The architecture includes an emergency security communications system that provides communications for related entities e.g. fire police medical and governmental agencies . The architecture also includes an Internet based communications component that can be disposed on an IP network. The Internet based communications component interfaces to the emergency security communications system to facilitate at least cellular and or IP communications to and from the emergency security communications system . Note that although the component is referred to as Internet based it is to be understood that the component can be disposed on any IP network e.g. a LAN . As depicted the Internet based communications component can also include and or facilitate access to Web based services and or Internet telephony e.g. VoIP . Accordingly the Internet based communications component is shown as including a Web based service component and an Internet telephony component . It is to be appreciated that either or both of the components or and can be external to the Internet based communications component .

The interoperability between the radio band management component and the telephony management component facilitates single or multiple conference type sessions to be operable and any given time. In one implementation all that is required is a unique PIN personal identification number that a user needs to initiate a session or access an ongoing session. A user can initiate or access a multi user session using wired and or wireless communications devices. For example where the emergency entity e.g. police are engaged in an ongoing situation using push to talk radios a user of a cell phone given proper access can dial in to an ongoing session that was initiated via the telephony management system . The user can be restricted to listen only access e.g. one way communications and or listen speak access two way communications . This can be initiated based on the type of PIN code provided.

In another example alerting can be provided via a one way communication e.g. listen only and full teleconferencing by way of two way communications e.g. for a first responder participant . As indicated supra the telephony management system is capable of processing multiple simultaneous one or many PIN single or multiple user sessions. That is a first session can require that each participant utilize a different PIN when entering a single session. This provides control over who is a listen only participant and who is a full participant e.g. speak and listen . A second session ongoing at the same time can require that all participants use the same PIN to enter the second session. Accordingly it can be appreciated that the telephony management system provides substantial flexibility and control over sessions single user and multi user .

The first session can be police first responders communicating in a first session and the soon to arrive EMS emergency medical services personnel communicating in a second session. Although the sessions initially can be operational as separate sessions depending on the changing circumstances of the situation the sessions can be automatically combined thereby providing merged access for all participants based on the pre existing session rights. Thus a listen only participant of the first session is only granted listen only rights when the sessions are merged.

For all sessions the notion of presence of the participants can be recorded and rendered usable by participants and hosts alike.

The radio management component can manage multiple radio networks each having the same or different frequency bands denoted RADIO NETWORK . . . RADIO NETWORK where N is an integer . Thus a first radio network can be associated with radio traffic of a first responder police unit and a second radio network can be associated with radio traffic a first responder fire unit for example. As indicated supra the telephony management system can facilitate the merger of separate conferencing sessions currently underway by the first radio network and the second radio network . Additionally other management controls and restrictions can be applied for the merger.

The previously applied merger can also be automatically un merged or segregated as desired. For example as the number of personnel assigned to the situation begins to respond or enter a conference session the amount of chatter or traffic may become confusing counterproductive and inefficient such that segregation of the sessions is more desirable. Accordingly those session participants who entered the session under a first PIN can automatically be reassigned to another session associated with the first radio network and the session participants who entered the session under a second PIN can automatically remain in the current session or be reassigned to a new session that is associated with the second radio network. As can be understood the capability to manage sessions and session participants in accordance with the subject telephony management system can provide significant advantages and improvements over conventional architectures.

Depicted are two sessions a first session and a second session which are being managed by the telephony management system . The first session includes the following participants a caller of phone denoted PH a first radio operator R of the first radio network a second radio operator R of the first radio network a computer user C in wireless communications with the IP network and a sixth radio operator R of the second radio network . The second session includes the following participants a caller of cell phone denoted PH a fourth radio operator R of the second radio network a fifth radio operator R of the second radio network the sixth radio operator R of the second radio network and a caller using the IP phone denoted PH . Note that a radio operator can be a participant in more than one session simultaneously see R various types of telephones e.g. and or and other computing devices e.g. computer C can access the system and sessions e.g. and or and over various types of networks e.g. and or . Session participants can drop in and out of sessions at any time be moved from one session to another at any time be restricted or limited in the type of session access communicate with selected radio networks and radio operators access recorded messages leave recorded messages and so on.

The presence of attendees and the status of their participation in any specific session are maintained by the presence service that is an element in the framework. The presence status may also be used by an authorized user to request how and where a particular person who is not a current participant may be contacted.

The system can include a communications framework via which the files conference manager QoS component and an alerting component can interface to external networks e.g. the Internet a Wi Fi network a radio network and or a PSTN network . The files can be communicated directly through the framework to the Internet using an appropriate data transmission or sharing protocol. The conference manager can interface to the Internet and other networks via a SIP session initiation protocol component of the framework and therefrom via an H.323 protocol to the Internet or other protocols to exchange signaling information.

H.323 is an international standard for multimedia communications over packet switched networks including LANs WANs and the Internet. H.323 is an umbrella specification that includes the standards H.323 H.225.0 H.245 the H.450 series documents and the H.460 series. H.323 allows for the use of T.120 protocols for data collaboration and file transfer. T.120 is data conferencing standard that provides real time communication between two or more entities in a conference. Applications specified as part of the T.120 family can include application sharing electronic white boarding file exchange and chat. T.120 may be used stand alone or in conjunction with other protocols such as H.323 and SIP.

SIP is an IETF Internet Engineering Task Force standard for the establishment of multimedia sessions which can be used for audio video messaging e.g. instant messaging and or other real time data communication sessions. The scope of SIP is relatively broad including the establishment of virtually any kind of session between two parties.

The scope of H.323 can cover real time voice e.g. VoIP video and data communications over packet switched networks. H.323 is designed to operate over IP networks primarily though H.323 can also operate over other packet switched networks. H.323 includes multipoint voice and video conferencing capabilities.

The conference manager can also interface to internal components of the framework . For example signaling information can also be communicated to a voice controller component e.g. an NMS natural access card by NMS Communications of Framingham Mass. . Natural Access is a modular runtime and development environment for creating voice fax and call processing applications using NMS media processing platforms and can provide a consistent application programming interface API for integrating and presenting media and telecommunication capabilities to an application. Standard features include telephony call control voice record and playback tone detection and generation and industry standard H.100 H.110 switching support.

The conference manager can also interface to an internal media gateway component e.g fusion an IP telephony API programming environment by NMS Communications of the framework . The conference manager can communicate at least media control information to the media gateway . The QoS component can also interface to the media gateway to communicate measure and determine QoS information. The alerting component can interface to the framework for the communication of alerts and notifications for example.

The communications framework can also include one or more voice cards e.g. a model CG6565 card by NMS Communications or other similar vendor models having similar capabilities that facilitate the conversion of voice signals into voice data for transmission to the Internet via RTP real time transport protocol technology. RTP can be employed to support streaming real time multimedia over IP in packets e.g. voice and video over packet switched networks .

The framework can also provide other types of packet communications channels such as T 1.54 Mbps and or E 2.048 Mbps to the PSTN . Thus the system can facilitate communications to an IP phone for VoIP a PDA in communications with the Wi Fi network push to talk devices e.g. handheld radios that communicate via the radio network e.g. mesh radio networks for emergency and or security services and conventional telephones that connect to the PSTN system for example.

The band management component can also include a band controller that facilitates control and or selection of one or more of the radio subcomponents for intercommunications access. For example if the telephony management component initiates a conference session for country and medical personnel this can be communicated to the band controller to select the county and medical radio subcomponents for binding and interaction into the session.

The band management component can also include a first responder controller that facilitates control and or selection of one or more of the first responder radio subcomponents for intercommunications access. For example if the telephony management component initiates a conference session for police and EMS personnel this can be communicated to the first responder controller to select the police and EMS radio subcomponents for binding and interaction into the session.

The band management component can also include a network interface component that facilitates communications over one or more different networks. For example the interface component can facilitate communications over the PSTN Internet and or cellular networks e.g. GSM UMTS CDMA . . . for access to the telephony management system and or other access mechanisms e.g. callers computer access and so on .

It is to be understood that many of the band management components can be networked together e.g. via an IP network utilizing the network interface component . For example a local implementation can include a first band management component for police a second band management component for EMS a third band management component for fire and so on. Accordingly each band management component can be controlled to select the desired radio subcomponents to bind into a conference session.

Accordingly the architecture includes a presence layer that facilitates monitoring and detecting the presence of a mobile radio user. Presence includes a database indicating participants potential participants and their contact information.

Furthermore an Automatic Speech Recognition ASR capability is provided that facilitates signaling by participants who are not equipped with a DTMF generating device.

Alerts notifications alarms provide the capability to send a message to interested parties about an event such as arrival of a participant departure scheduled activities etc. An alarm is the assured delivery of a special notification indicating a state of heightened emergency. The architecture attempts to deliver an alarm through any and all possible channels and networks. For example first responder alarms are never discarded until some delivery notification has been received.

The mechanism used to deliver a notification or alarm may ultimately involve any of the following SMS message MMS message fax message WAP push web page recorded voice video clip and e mail for example. In most cases the business logic preparing an alarm or nonfiction will be unaware of the final physical channel used to deliver the end result. Rendering of the message for each of these channels can require special processing. As indicated architecture provides a confirmed delivery receipt that may be used to notify the sender or as an audit trail for example.

Each of the various networks associated with the architecture have a different convention for addressing participants engaged in a conference using this network or medium. The address abstraction is an object that can be used by any of the services to indicate the destination for delivery of a notification alarm or to manage the participation in a conference. As a participant moves from one network to another the address object will modify its behavior to fit the requirements of the current network. Additionally authentication provides a variety of mechanisms for use by services to authenticate participants.

The architecture also illustrates the use of an alerts layer a mail layer and a news layer each of which facilitate access to the corresponding information. The remaining aspects of the architecture have been described with respect to the telephony management communications system of .

A classifier is a function that maps an input attribute vector x x x x x xn to a class label class x . The classifier can also output a confidence that the input belongs to a class that is f x confidence class x . Such classification can employ a probabilistic and or statistical based analysis e.g. factoring into the analysis utilities and costs to prognose or infer an action that a user desires to be automatically performed.

A support vector machine SVM is an example of a classifier that can be employed. The SVM operates by finding a hypersurface in the space of possible inputs that splits the triggering input events from the non triggering events in an optimal way. Intuitively this makes the classification correct for testing data that is near but not identical to training data. Other directed and undirected model classification approaches include e.g. na ve Bayes Bayesian networks decision trees neural networks fuzzy logic models and probabilistic classification models providing different patterns of independence can be employed. Classification as used herein also is inclusive of statistical regression that is utilized to develop models of priority.

As will be readily appreciated from the subject specification the subject invention can employ classifiers that are explicitly trained e.g. via a generic training data as well as implicitly trained e.g. via observing user behavior receiving extrinsic information . For example SVM s are configured via learning or training phase within a classifier constructor and feature selection module. Thus the classifier s can be employed to automatically learn and perform a number of functions.

In one implementation the MLR component can monitor channel selection and session aspects and automate such aspects when similar events occur in the future. For example if it is determined that although a list of participants has been pre specified for such events yet after repeated occurrence of the event or similar events that certain mobile radio channels are inactive or not bound into a session the MLR can automate this to not include these channels and or participants when a similar future event occurs.

In another example the MLR component can be configured to search other data sources for phone numbers and or other related information when an expected participant cannot be reached. This can occur after repeated attempts to call and bind a participant into a session for example. The MLR component of the AI component can also be employed to determine at what times data synchronization searching and other related system processing can occur this in view of an event that just occurred. Thus such processing should not be performed when an event is occurring in order to reserve system resources rather than deplete such resources for overhead type operations for example. These are only but a few examples of the flexibility that can be employed by the MLR component. The MLR component can also be applied to other aspects of the radio telephony interoperability architecture such as related to selecting a network or networks over which to communicate with session participants and or radio networks e.g. cellular versus IP choosing IP routes to take in case of network failures during a disaster or event e.g. satellite versus land based and so on.

Referring now to there is illustrated a block diagram of a computer operable to execute aspects of the disclosed architecture. In order to provide additional context for various aspects of the subject invention and the following discussion are intended to provide a brief general description of a suitable computing environment in which the various aspects of the invention can be implemented. While the invention has been described above in the general context of computer executable instructions that may run on one or more computers those skilled in the art will recognize that the invention also can be implemented in combination with other program modules and or as a combination of hardware and software.

Generally program modules include routines programs components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the inventive methods can be practiced with other computer system configurations including single processor or multiprocessor computer systems minicomputers mainframe computers as well as personal computers hand held computing devices microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics and the like each of which can be operatively coupled to one or more associated devices.

The illustrated aspects of the invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where certain tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules can be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

A computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by the computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media can comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital video disk DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by the computer.

Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of the any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

With reference again to there is illustrated an exemplary environment for implementing various aspects of the invention that includes a computer the computer including a processing unit a system memory and a system bus . The system bus couples system components including but not limited to the system memory to the processing unit . The processing unit can be any of various commercially available processors. Dual microprocessors and other multi processor architectures may also be employed as the processing unit .

The system bus can be any of several types of bus structure that may further interconnect to a memory bus with or without a memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of commercially available bus architectures. The system memory includes read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS is stored in a non volatile memory such as ROM EPROM EEPROM which BIOS contains the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within the computer such as during start up. The RAM can also include a high speed RAM such as static RAM for caching data.

The computer further includes an internal hard disk drive HDD e.g. EIDE SATA which internal hard disk drive may also be configured for external use in a suitable chassis not shown a magnetic floppy disk drive FDD e.g. to read from or write to a removable diskette and an optical disk drive e.g. reading a CD ROM disk or to read from or write to other high capacity optical media such as the DVD . The hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive can be connected to the system bus by a hard disk drive interface a magnetic disk drive interface and an optical drive interface respectively. The interface for external drive implementations includes at least one or both of Universal Serial Bus USB and IEEE 1394 interface technologies.

The drives and their associated computer readable media provide nonvolatile storage of data data structures computer executable instructions and so forth. For the computer the drives and media accommodate the storage of any data in a suitable digital format. Although the description of computer readable media above refers to a HDD a removable magnetic diskette and a removable optical media such as a CD or DVD it should be appreciated by those skilled in the art that other types of media which are readable by a computer such as zip drives magnetic cassettes flash memory cards cartridges and the like may also be used in the exemplary operating environment and further that any such media may contain computer executable instructions for performing the methods of the invention.

A number of program modules can be stored in the drives and RAM including an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . All or portions of the operating system applications modules and or data can also be cached in the RAM . It is appreciated that the invention can be implemented with various commercially available operating systems or combinations of operating systems.

A user can enter commands and information into the computer through one or more wired wireless input devices e.g. a keyboard and a pointing device such as a mouse . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone an IR remote control a joystick a game pad a stylus pen touch screen or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through an input device interface that is coupled to the system bus but can be connected by other interfaces such as a parallel port an IEEE 1394 serial port a game port a USB port an IR interface etc.

A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . In addition to the monitor a computer typically includes other peripheral output devices not shown such as speakers printers etc.

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections via wired and or wireless communications to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer s . The remote computer s can be a workstation a server computer a router a personal computer portable computer microprocessor based entertainment appliance a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described relative to the computer although for purposes of brevity only a memory storage device is illustrated. The logical connections depicted include wired wireless connectivity to a local area network LAN and or larger networks e.g. a wide area network WAN . Such LAN and WAN networking environments are commonplace in offices and companies and facilitate enterprise wide computer networks such as intranets all of which may connect to a global communication network e.g. the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the local network through a wired and or wireless communication network interface or adapter . The adaptor may facilitate wired or wireless communication to the LAN which may also include a wireless access point disposed thereon for communicating with the wireless adaptor .

When used in a WAN networking environment the computer can include a modem or is connected to a communications server on the WAN or has other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as by way of the Internet. The modem which can be internal or external and a wired or wireless device is connected to the system bus via the serial port interface . In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof can be stored in the remote memory storage device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers can be used.

The computer is operable to communicate with any wireless devices or entities operatively disposed in wireless communication e.g. a printer scanner desktop and or portable computer portable data assistant communications satellite any piece of equipment or location associated with a wirelessly detectable tag e.g. a kiosk news stand restroom and telephone. This includes at least Wi Fi and Bluetooth wireless technologies. Thus the communication can be a predefined structure as with a conventional network or simply an ad hoc communication between at least two devices.

Wi Fi or Wireless Fidelity allows connection to the Internet from a couch at home a bed in a hotel room or a conference room at work without wires. Wi Fi is a wireless technology similar to that used in a cell phone that enables such devices e.g. computers to send and receive data indoors and out anywhere within the range of a base station. Wi Fi networks use radio technologies called IEEE 802.11x a b g etc. to provide secure reliable fast wireless connectivity. A Wi Fi network can be used to connect computers to each other to the Internet and to wired networks which use IEEE 802.3 or Ethernet .

Wi Fi networks can operate in the unlicensed 2.4 and 5 GHz radio bands. IEEE 802.11 applies to generally to wireless LANs and provides 1 or 2 Mbps transmission in the 2.4 GHz band using either frequency hopping spread spectrum FHSS or direct sequence spread spectrum DSSS . IEEE 802.11a is an extension to IEEE 802.11 that applies to wireless LANs and provides up to 54 Mbps in the 5 GHz band. IEEE 802.11a uses an orthogonal frequency division multiplexing OFDM encoding scheme rather than FHSS or DSSS. IEEE 802.11b also referred to as 802.11 High Rate DSSS or Wi Fi is an extension to 802.11 that applies to wireless LANs and provides 11 Mbps transmission with a fallback to 5.5 2 and 1 Mbps in the 2.4 GHz band. IEEE 802.11g applies to wireless LANs and provides 20 Mbps in the 2.4 GHz band. Products can contain more than one band e.g. dual band so the networks can provide real world performance similar to the basic 10BaseT wired Ethernet networks used in many offices.

Referring now to there is illustrated a schematic block diagram of an exemplary computing environment in accordance with the subject invention. The system includes one or more client s . The client s can be hardware and or software e.g. threads processes computing devices . The client s can house cookie s and or associated contextual information by employing the invention for example.

The system also includes one or more server s . The server s can also be hardware and or software e.g. threads processes computing devices . The servers can house threads to perform transformations by employing the invention for example. One possible communication between a client and a server can be in the form of a data packet adapted to be transmitted between two or more computer processes. The data packet may include a cookie and or associated contextual information for example. The system includes a communication framework e.g. a global communication network such as the Internet that can be employed to facilitate communications between the client s and the server s .

Communications can be facilitated via a wired including optical fiber and or wireless technology. The client s are operatively connected to one or more client data store s that can be employed to store information local to the client s e.g. cookie s and or associated contextual information . Similarly the server s are operatively connected to one or more server data store s that can be employed to store information local to the servers .

What has been described above includes examples of the invention. It is of course not possible to describe every conceivable combination of components or methodologies for purposes of describing the subject invention but one of ordinary skill in the art may recognize that many further combinations and permutations of the invention are possible. Accordingly the invention is intended to embrace all such alterations modifications and variations that fall within the spirit and scope of the appended claims. Furthermore to the extent that the term includes is used in either the detailed description or the claims such term is intended to be inclusive in a manner similar to the term comprising as comprising is interpreted when employed as a transitional word in a claim.

