---

title: System and method for managing a conference call
abstract: A system, method, and computer program product for initiating a conference call are disclosed. The method includes running a conference call managing application. The method also includes receiving at least one participant-defined condition. The participant-defined condition is associated with at least one conference call defining a status of a participant's communication device to connect the participant to the conference call. At least one alert is sent out to at least all required participants of the conference call, in response to the participant-defined condition being satisfied to start the conference call.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08160223&OS=08160223&RS=08160223
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 08160223
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051102
---
The present invention generally relates to the field of telecommunications and more particularly relates to managing teleconferencing communications.

Conference calls are becoming an increasingly popular way to conduct business and are becoming a necessary part of every working day for corporate employees. Conference calls improve productivity by allowing people who are not co located to work together. While the number of conference calls that corporate employees attend increases the amount of time wasted on starting those conferences also increases. An attendant productivity loss accompanies conference calls for example the means of entering the call. Most of the wasted time occurs while the meeting attendees trickle into the conference call or waiting for one or more key people to join the call. Conference call systems of today lack the ability to manage conference calls based on the availability of the participants.

For example typically a first participant connects into the conference call waiting for another participant to join. After time passes another participant joins and this process continues until all participants are connected to the conference call. However in many situations one or more of the participants have not called in causing the other participants to have to wait to start the meeting thereby wasting valuable time. The unavailable participant may not have called into the conference because they were unavailable forgot about the meeting misplaced the call in information or the like. The conference call is in a started state even though all of the participants are not available. The available participants do not know when the unavailable participant will join or if they should start the meeting without them.

Briefly in accordance with the present invention disclosed are a system method and computer program product for initiating a conference call. The method includes running a conference call managing application. The method also includes receiving at least one participant defined condition. The participant defined condition is associated with at least one conference call defining a status of a participant s communication device to connect the participant to the conference call. At least one alert is sent out to at least all required participants of the conference call in response to the participant defined condition being satisfied to start the conference call.

In another embodiment of the present invention a teleconferencing system for managing and initiating at least one teleconference call is disclosed. The system comprises a conference call managing application. The system also includes a receiver for receiving at least one participant defined condition. The participant defined condition is associated with at least one conference call defining a status of a participant s communication device to connect the participant to the conference call. A transmitter is also included for sending out at least one alert to at least all required participants of the conference call in response to the participant defined condition being satisfied to start the conference call.

In yet another embodiment of the present invention a computer program product for initiating a conference call is disclosed. The computer program product includes running a conference call managing application. The method also includes receiving at least one participant defined condition. The participant defined condition is associated with at least one conference call defining a status of a participant s communication device to connect the participant to the conference call. At least one alert is sent out to at least all required participants of the conference call in response to the participant defined condition being satisfied to start the conference call.

An advantage of the foregoing embodiments of the present invention is that participants of a teleconference call are able to visually see the status of the teleconference. Another advantage of the present invention is that participants can define status conditions and connection parameters for being connected to the teleconference. A conference call is not started if the required participants are not available thereby saving valuable time.

As required detailed embodiments of the present invention are disclosed herein however it is to be understood that the disclosed embodiments are merely exemplary of the invention which can be embodied in various forms. Therefore specific structural and functional details disclosed herein are not to be interpreted as limiting but merely as a basis for the claims and as a representative basis for teaching one skilled in the art to variously employ the present invention in virtually any appropriately detailed structure. Further the terms and phrases used herein are not intended to be limiting but rather to provide an understandable description of the invention.

The terms a or an as used herein are defined as one or more than one. The term plurality as used herein is defined as two or more than two. The term another as used herein is defined as at least a second or more. The terms including and or having as used herein are defined as comprising i.e. open language . The term coupled as used herein is defined as connected although not necessarily directly and not necessarily mechanically. The terms program software application and the like as used herein are defined as a sequence of instructions designed for execution on a computer system. A program computer program or software application may include a subroutine a function a procedure an object method an object implementation an executable application an applet a servlet a source code an object code a shared library dynamic load library and or other sequence of instructions designed for execution on a computer system.

According to an embodiment of the present invention as shown in an exemplary telephony system is illustrated. shows a system comprising user systems . Although three user systems are shown any number of user systems can be included in the telephony system . User system user system and user system communicate with an email server and a telephony server through a network . The network according to one embodiment is a LAN WAN World Wide Web wired wireless network or the like. Communication devices such as a telephone are communicatively coupled to user system and user system respectively. The communication devices interface with the user systems to make calls through the telephony server . In another embodiment a communication device is directly connected to the network for making calls through the telephony server .

Each user system includes among other things software a telephony application programming interface TAPI and an email client . The software for example is telephony software allowing a user to interact with the telecommunication system associated with the business or home. For example in one embodiment the software has a user interface for dialing setting conference calls and monitoring the status of a conference call checking voicemail and the like. The TAPI client interfaces with the email client and for allowing a user to make telephone calls through the user system . For example using Microsoft Outlook as the email client a contact s phone number can be dialed by the user system .

The email server includes email server software such as Microsoft Exchange Server for interfacing with the email client on the user systems . The telephony server is communicatively coupled to the email server user systems and the communication devices through the network . The telephony server controls and manages all telephony communications made directly by the communication devices or through the user systems .

The telephony server includes telephony software and telephony hardware . The telephony software in one embodiment provides an interface to the user systems for interacting with the telephony server. For example a user can make a call pick up a call transfer a call and the like using the interface provided by the telephony software . The telephony software also manages all of the calls placed and received through the telephony server . The telephony software also notifies the participants of a teleconference with information regarding the teleconference. In another embodiment the telephony software includes speech recognition software for providing voice prompts and responses to a user. The telephony hardware includes telecom cards VoIP modems and the like.

The main memory contains an application such as the telephony software . For example the application in one embodiment is a telephony program for managing incoming and outgoing calls to from the user systems . The application in one embodiment also provides an interface to a user of the user systems for interacting with a telephony program. An additional teleconference interface is also provided in one embodiment that displays the status of a particular teleconference. The teleconference interface also provides a user with various options that can be performed with respect to the teleconference. The application for example is running or waiting to be executed. Although illustrated as concurrently resident in the main memory it is clear that respective components of the main memory are not required to be completely resident in the main memory at all times or even at the same time. In one embodiment the telephony server utilizes conventional virtual addressing mechanisms to allow programs to behave as if they have access to a large single storage entity referred to herein as a computer system memory instead of access to multiple smaller storage entities such as the main memory and data storage device . Note that the term computer system memory is used herein to generically refer to the entire virtual memory of the server .

Although only one CPU is illustrated for computer computer systems with multiple CPUs can be used equally effectively. Embodiments of the present invention further incorporate interfaces that each includes separate fully programmed microprocessors that are used to off load processing from the CPU . Terminal interface is used to directly connect one or more terminals to computer to provide a user interface to the server . These terminals which are able to be non intelligent or fully programmable workstations are used to allow system administrators and users to communicate with the server . The terminal is also able to consist of user interface and peripheral devices that are connected to computer and controlled by terminal interface hardware included in the terminal I F that includes video adapters and interfaces for keyboards pointing devices and the like.

An operating system not shown included in the main memory is a suitable multitasking operating system such as the Linux UNIX Windows XP and Windows Server operating system. Embodiments of the present invention are able to use any other suitable operating system. Some embodiments of the present invention utilize architectures such as an object oriented framework mechanism that allows instructions of the components of operating system not shown to be executed on any processor located within the telephony server .

The network adapter hardware is used to provide an interface to the network . Embodiments of the present invention are able to be adapted to work with any data communications connections including present day analog and or digital techniques or via a future networking mechanism. Telephony hardware is also included as discussed above with reference to and comprises telecom cards VoIP modems voice switches and the like.

Although the exemplary embodiments of the present invention are described in the context of a fully functional computer system those skilled in the art will appreciate that embodiments are capable of being distributed as a program product via floppy disk e.g. floppy disk CD ROM or other form of recordable media or via any type of electronic transmission mechanism.

The user interface also displays a participant information window . The participant information window provides the user with information regarding who the participants are which participants are currently participating and not participating and the like. For example current attendance information displays the number of participants currently attending the teleconference and their name . An icon may also be provided to uniquely identify a participant or group of participants.

Clickable options allow a user to perform various actions associated with the teleconference. For example a first clickable option causes the user s communication device to be called as soon as the button is pressed. A second clickable option causes the user s communication device to be automatically called when the teleconference is about to start is starting or at any time defined by the user. A third clickable option causes the teleconference to be start when the user clicks the button . The user interface in one embodiment comprises one or more different clickable options and the present invention is not limited to the foregoing description of the user interface .

If Participant A forgets the communication device in the office thereby causing the location of the device to be identified as being in the office even though the Participant is away from the device and unable to participate in the teleconference using the device Participant A can remotely update the condition to a default condition or another participant defined condition. The device status condition for Participant B dictates that the communication device be on and in the home office of Participant B. In another embodiment if the communication device that is to be used to connect Participant B to the conference call is a wired phone an on hook condition can be used. When using a wired device Participant B can be identified as being in a home office by logging into a particular program. The IP address of the home office computer can be used to signify that Participant B is at the home office.

Participant C has a device status condition of subscriber ID . Subscriber ID conditions specify a specific telephone number that the participant has to be called on or call in from. If the participant calls into the teleconference from a different number than what is specified by the subscriber ID condition the participant will not be connected into the teleconference.

The Required condition field includes entries that identify whether or not the participant is required to start the teleconference. For example Participant A is not required to start the teleconference. So if participant A is not connected to the teleconference the teleconference can still be started. Participants can be either required individually or as a group. In the case of a group of participants required to start the conference call each participant in that group must be available to start the conference call. Availability in one embodiment is determined by the ability to satisfy the participant defined conditions or if the participant has already called into the teleconference. If the participant status conditions are satisfied but a participant is not connected to the teleconference because for example the participant walked away from the communication device the teleconference will not be started.

Additionally participants in one embodiment enter the participant defined conditions through the teleconference user interface . In another embodiment a different program is used to set the participant defined conditions. If a user enters a user defined condition that conflicts with other conditions entered by the participant or other participants the user is notified of the conflict and is prompted to enter a new condition. This ensures that a deadlock does not occur where no participants will be connected to the teleconference.

The participant defined condition table is not limited to the foregoing entries and fields and can include a variety of different entries and fields.

The telephony server at step determines whether the entered conditions conflict with any other conditions associated with the teleconference call. For example if conditions can cause a situation to occur where no participants will be connected to the conference call the condition is not allowed. If the result of this step is negative the control flows to step . If the result of this determination is positive the control flows to step where the participant is prompted to enter a new condition.

The starting time for the conference call occurs at step . The telephony server at step determines if all the participant defined conditions have been satisfied for all of the required participants. For example if a condition for a first required participant is that the participant must be in the office this condition must be satisfied along with the conditions for any other required participant before the conference call is started. If the result of this determination is negative the conference call at step is not started until all conditions for the required participants are satisfied. The telephony server in one embodiment notifies all of the participants by email text message or the like that the conference call is postponed.

If the result of this determination is positive the telephony server at step sends an alert to at least all of the required participants. For example an instant message telephone call text message or the like is sent out to at least all of the required participants to either connect the participant to the conference call or notify the participant that the conference call is starting. These alerts can be sent through a web page a conference call managing application on a device of the participant or the like. The control flow then exits at step .

The telephony server or an application residing on a device of the participant at step determines whether the entered parameters conflict with other parameters associated with the teleconference. For example if a parameter can cause a situation to occur where no participants will be connected to the conference call the parameter is not allowed and the participant is prompted to enter a new parameter. If the result of this step is negative the control flows to step . If the result of this determination is positive the control flows to step where the participant is prompted to enter a new condition.

The starting time for the conference call occurs at step . The telephony server determines at step if device status conditions for all required participants been satisfied. If the result of this determination is negative the conference call is not started until the conditions for all required participants have been satisfied. If the result of this determination is positive the telephony server at step determines if the participant has defined a connection parameter. If the result of this determination is negative the telephony sever at step uses default connection parameters. The participant at step is connected to the conference call according to the default parameters. For example the participant can be called at a phone number registered with the teleconferencing software. Also the participant can be called automatically as soon as the conference call is started. The control flow then exits at step . If the result of the determination at step is positive the participant at step is connected to the conference call according to the participant defined connection parameter. The control flow then exits at step .

One advantage of the present invention is that participants of a teleconference call are able to visually see the status of the teleconference. Another advantage of the present invention is that participants can define status conditions and connection parameters for being connected to the teleconference. A conference call is not started if the required participants are not available thereby saving valuable time.

Options associated with the conference call at step are also displayed to the participants. The participant can select one or more of these options to be performed. For example the participant can select to be called automatically when the conference is scheduled to begin after a certain amount of time has passed at the instant the option is selected and the like. Also the user can choose to start the conference at the instant the option is selected or define further actions to be taken. The options selected by the user at step are performed or scheduled to be performed. The control flow then exits at step .

The foregoing embodiments of the present invention are advantageous because that participants of a teleconference call no longer have to wait connect into the conference call and wait for others to join. Another advantage of the present invention is that the participants are able to visually see the status of the teleconference. Another advantage of the present invention is that participants can define status conditions and connection parameters for being connected to the teleconference. A conference call is not started if the required participants are not available thereby saving valuable time.

The present invention can be realized in hardware software or a combination of hardware and software. A system according to a preferred embodiment of the present invention can be realized in a centralized fashion in one computer system or in a distributed fashion where different elements are spread across several interconnected computer systems. Any kind of computer system or other apparatus adapted for carrying out the methods described herein is suited. A typical combination of hardware and software could be a general purpose computer system with a computer program that when being loaded and executed controls the computer system such that it carries out the methods described herein.

Embodiments of the invention can be implemented as a program product for use with a computer system such as for example the computing environment shown in and described herein. The program s of the program product defines functions of the embodiments including the methods described herein and can be contained on a variety of computer readable media. Illustrative computer readable medium include but are not limited to i information permanently stored on non writable storage medium e.g. read only memory devices within a computer such as CD ROM disk readable by a CD ROM drive ii alterable information stored on writable storage medium e.g. floppy disks within a diskette drive or hard disk drive or iii information conveyed to a computer by a communications medium such as through a computer or telephone network including wireless communications. The latter embodiment specifically includes information downloaded from the Internet and other networks. Such computer readable media when carrying computer readable instructions that direct the functions of the present invention represent embodiments of the present invention.

In general the routines executed to implement the embodiments of the present invention whether implemented as part of an operating system or a specific application component program module object or sequence of instructions may be referred to herein as a program. The computer program typically is comprised of a multitude of instructions that will be translated by the native computer into a machine readable format and hence executable instructions. Also programs are comprised of variables and data structures that either reside locally to the program or are found in memory or on storage devices. In addition various programs described herein may be identified based upon the application for which they are implemented in a specific embodiment of the invention. However it should be appreciated that any particular program nomenclature that follows is used merely for convenience and thus the invention should not be limited to use solely in any specific application identified and or implied by such nomenclature.

It is also clear that given the typically endless number of manners in which computer programs may be organized into routines procedures methods modules objects and the like as well as the various manners in which program functionality may be allocated among various software layers that are resident within a typical computer e.g. operating systems libraries API s applications applets etc. It should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to the specific organization and allocation or program functionality described herein.

Each computer system may include inter alia one or more computers and at least a computer readable medium allowing a computer to read data instructions messages or message packets and other computer readable information from the computer readable medium. The computer readable medium may include non volatile memory such as ROM Flash memory Disk drive memory CD ROM and other permanent storage. Additionally a computer medium may include for example volatile storage such as RAM buffers cache memory and network circuits. Furthermore the computer readable medium may comprise computer readable information in a transitory state medium such as a network link and or a network interface including a wired network or a wireless network that allow a computer to read such computer readable information.

Although specific embodiments of the invention have been disclosed those having ordinary skill in the art will understand that changes can be made to the specific embodiments without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. The scope of the invention is not to be restricted therefore to the specific embodiments and it is intended that the appended claims cover any and all such applications modifications and embodiments within the scope of the present invention.

