---

title: Method, system and program for enabling resonance in communications
abstract: A method, computer program product, and system for collecting and processing feedback information in organizational communications. The system includes an information processing apparatus, a communications mechanism, a database, and a mechanism for collecting data. The communications mechanism operates with the information processing apparatus for providing communications to a user of the information processing apparatus. The database operates in conjunction with the information processing apparatus and the communications mechanism. The database stores data. The mechanism for collecting the data operates in response to the communications related to the user by the communications mechanism.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08112433&OS=08112433&RS=08112433
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 08112433
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051201
---
The present invention relates to database and information technology systems and more particularly to a system and method for enabling resonance in communications.

Databases are useful tools for storing organizing and accessing data and information. A database stores data in data containers including records having one or more data fields. DataBase Management Systems DBMSs are often used by database users to control the storage organization and retrieval of data fields records and files in a database.

Typically organizations create value through models that are organized into processes which involve people automated systems and interactions. Due to the complexity and intricacy of the network that manages these processes it is a significant challenge for organizations to achieve high levels of efficiency. Since databases typically play an integral role in the automated systems that facilitate the interactions which organizations employ much room exists for improvement in database technology and implementation.

As organizational practices advanced in the information age organizations began to depend on increased information flow across the organizational structure and through the value chain to create value. The creation of value is an inevitable consequence of the efficient flow of information across an organization. Increasingly organizations rely on automated systems to support a complex web of organizational processes including E mail workflow management collaboration data access and application systems. Information Technology IT has evolved over the years to integrate innovative organizational administration techniques and provide for collaboration through workflow systems and organizational integration software thus improving organizational efficiency. However the conventional tools developed thus far fail to provide the level of efficiency demanded by organizations.

Another problem related to conventional technical solutions to organizational communications and management is a lack of feedback. Typically the IT infrastructure adopted by organizations provides tools that deliver information to people. However the conventional infrastructure does not offer tools that properly collect feedback and gather information from people about the information they receive or use. In other words the conventional IT infrastructure sufficiently provides for the delivery of information to people but not the collection of information from people. There exists no set of IT tools that allows people to react to the information they receive and share useful information related to their reaction in a way that adds value to an organization.

The perception that people have about the information they receive is in itself valuable information that can be used in shaping the culture efficiency and effectiveness of an organization. If employees are provided with timely feedback about their actions they can react quickly to solve unperceived or unanticipated problems that result from their actions. This allows functional processes within an organization to rapidly adjust to new and changing conditions. Under conventional IT infrastructure this sort of real time feedback could only occur through informal and uncontrolled avenues.

In view of the short comings in information exchange and communication associated with conventional IT infrastructure and database systems there remains a need for an improved system for providing employees with more effective communication tools that provide timely feedback about the information that permeates an organization.

Embodiments of the present invention provide a method a computer program product and a system for providing for feedback in organizational communications. In one aspect the system provides members of an organization with more effective communication tools that provide timely feedback about the information in an organization.

In accordance with one aspect of an embodiment of the present invention a system providing for data in organizational communications is provided. The system comprises an information processing apparatus a communications mechanism a database and a mechanism for collecting data. The communications mechanism operates with the information processing apparatus for providing communications to a user of the information processing apparatus. The database operates in conjunction with the information processing apparatus and the communications mechanism. The database stores data. The mechanism for collecting the data operates in response to the communications related to the user by the communications mechanism. The mechanism for collecting data may be responsive to agents installed in existing applications for automatically collecting the data. Alternatively the system further includes a user interface for receiving data entered by the user with the collection mechanism being responsive to the data received by the user interface.

In accordance with another aspect of an embodiment of the present invention there is provided a method for providing for data relating to organizational communications. The method comprises a number of steps including providing communications to users of an information processing system through the information processing system utilizing the information processing system for collecting the data from the users on the communications the users received saving the data in a data file in the information processing system and allowing the users of the information processing system to use the information processing system to perform functions on the data in the data file. The functions performed on the data file may include displaying statistics to the users about the data in the data file creating new data in the data file deleting some of the data in the data file providing the users with parameters and charts associated with the data in the data file updating parameters associated with the data in the data file and voting on the data in the data file. The data collected from the users of the information processing system may comprise feedback about the communications the users received. The functions performed on the data file by the users of the information processing system may be performed if the user requesting to perform one of the functions has authorization to perform the function. The method may further comprise the steps of allowing the users of the information processing system to organize the data in the data file into categories and allowing the users of the processing system to use the information processing system to perform functions on the categories of the data. The functions performed on the categories of the data may include displaying statistics to the users about the data in one of the categories creating a new category deleting one of the categories updating a parameter relating to one of the categories searching the data in the categories displaying the results of searching the data in the categories to the users of the information processing system browsing the data in the categories and displaying the results of browsing the data in the categories. The data collected from the users of the information processing system may comprise feedback about the communications the users received. The functions performed on the categories of the data by the users of the information processing system may be performed if the user requesting to perform one of the functions has authorization to perform the function. The method may further comprise the step of allowing an administrator of the information processing system to give one of the users authority to set a control parameter where the control parameter controls a rate of absorption of the data by the users of the information processing system. The method may further provide for tacit communications by allowing the users of the information processing system to provide the data anonymously. The method may also eliminate barriers in organizational communications by increasing the frequency and efficiency of communications within an organization both horizontally and vertically across an organizational structure.

In accordance with another aspect of an embodiment of the present invention there is provided a computer program product having a computer readable medium tangibly embodying computer executable instructions for providing for data relating to organizational communications. The computer program product comprises computer executable instructions for providing communications to users of an information processing system through the information processing system computer executable instructions for utilizing the information processing system for collecting the data from the users on the communications the users received computer executable instructions for saving the data in a data file in the information processing system and computer executable instructions for allowing the users of the information processing system to use the information processing system to perform functions on the data in the data file. The functions performed on the data file include displaying statistics to the users about the data in the data file creating new data in the data file deleting some of the data in the data file providing the users with parameters and charts associated with the data in the data file updating parameters associated with the data in the data file and voting on the data in the data file. The computer program product may further comprise computer executable instructions for allowing the users of the information processing system to organize the data in the data file into categories and computer executable instructions for allowing the users of the information processing system to use the information processing system to perform functions on the categories of the data if the user trying to perform one of the functions has authorization to perform the function. The functions performed on the categories of the data may include displaying statistics to the users about the data in one of the categories creating a new category deleting one of the categories updating a parameter relating to one of the categories searching the data in the categories displaying the results of searching the data in the categories to the users of the information processing system browsing the data in one of the categories and displaying the results of browsing the data in one of the categories to the users of the information processing system. The computer program product may further comprise computer executable instructions for allowing an administrator of the information processing system to give one of the users authority to set a control parameter the control parameter controlling a rate of absorption of the data by the users of the information processing system. The computer program product may eliminate barriers in organizational communications by increasing the frequency and efficiency of communications within an organization both horizontally and vertically across an organizational structure.

Other aspects and features of the embodiments of the present invention will become apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art upon review of the following description of specific embodiments of the invention in conjunction with the accompanying figures.

The following detailed description of the embodiments of the present invention does not limit the implementation of the embodiments to any particular computer programming language hardware architecture or database system. The computer program may be implemented in executable instructions in any computer programming language. One embodiment may be implemented in the C C or J J computer programming languages or may be implemented in other computer programming languages in conjunction with C C or J J . While particular examples are described within the context of a database system any software or hardware solution may be used to implement the present invention. Any limitations presented would be a result of a particular type of operating system computer programming language or data processing system and would not be a limitation of the embodiments described herein.

Static information does not create value. In contrast useful information that effectively flows through organizational processes that are designed to implement an appropriate organizational model may create tremendous value. As organizations use information to create value operational efficiency generally increases. However the reaction of people to the information they receive is equally important as the information itself.

Information flows across an organization and through a value chain in waves. According to the wave theory in physics a wave system reaches its maximum state of efficiency when it achieves a resonant state. In this resonant state weaker waves present in the system cumulatively add in an ordered structure to build a stronger single wave that is the sum of the weaker waves. One aspect of the present invention provides a system that achieves the physical equivalent of resonance in the realm of organizational communications. These communications may be external business communications between different organizations internal corporate or partnership communications or any other type of communication. In this resonant state the efficiency of the business model that the organization is implementing achieves new benchmarks.

Resonance is defined in physics as the increase in amplitude of oscillation of an electric or mechanical system exposed to a periodic force whose frequency is equal to or very close to the natural undampened frequency of the system. There are several powerful examples of resonance in nature. Light waves that are combined to be spatially unidirectional and in phase with each other combine to create laser beams that are applied in unique applications involving medicine scientific research and communications. Musical instruments are designed to take advantage of sound resonance to improve the quality and intensity of the sound produced by the instruments. The basic condition for the phenomenon of resonance to occur is the movement of matter in waves. Generally the result of resonance is an optimized energy flow. In a resonant state the flow of energy continuously feeds itself producing the highest levels of power and efficiency from a system.

One aspect of the present invention involves the application of the basic physical concept of resonance to the realm of organizational communications. Another aspect of the present invention contemplates a combination of hardware software and a method e.g. processes that allow for the efficient flow of information across an organization such that the informational dimension of the organization reaches a resonant state.

Resonance is a powerful physical phenomenon. However resonant systems should also be carefully controlled. A classic example of a system that was designed without proper consideration for resonant behaviour e.g. the natural frequency of the structure is the Tacoma Narrows Bridge that collapsed in 1940 due to wind induced oscillation. Another aspect of the present invention provides for control mechanisms to ensure that resonance is properly applied in the field of communications such that information is not carelessly shared in inappropriate ways.

Referring to a computer system is shown. The computer system generally comprises a server and clients indicated individually by . . . interconnected by a network . The server is modeled as a number of server components including a database server or database management system e.g. a relational database management system such as the DB2 product from IBM . The clients may comprise single or multiprocessor computers data processing systems workstations handheld portable information devices or computer networks. The clients may be similar or different. In one example the network comprises the Internet the World Wide Web WWW a wireless link a telecommunications system a radio communications system a computer network e.g. a Local Area Network LAN or a Wide Area Network WAN or combinations thereof.

The computer system further includes a database and resources connected to the network . The resources comprise storage media additional databases a set of eXtensible Markup Language XML documents a directory service such as a Lightweight Directory Access Protocol LDAP server and or backend systems. In one example data is stored across multiple databases. The interface connecting the server the database and the resources comprises a LAN the Internet or a proprietary interface or combinations of the foregoing. The database and the resources are accessible by the server and or the clients . Any of the server the clients the database and the resources may be located remotely from one another or may share a single location. The configuration of the computer system as shown in is not intended to be a limitation of the present invention as will be understood by those of ordinary skill in the art from a review of the following detailed description.

Referring now to a computer system that could be used to implement the present invention is shown. The computer system generally comprises a Database Management System DBMS that resides on the server and is generally connected via the network to the clients and to permanent or mass storage e.g. a hard or fixed disk removable or floppy disk optical disk magneto optical disk and or flash memory . In one example the DBMS comprises a Relational Database Management System RDBMS such as the DB2 product from IBM . The DBMS includes an SQL compiler that receives and processes user requests and a logger module that maintains and manages a log comprising a plurality of log records for recording changes made to the database .

Referring to a data processing system is shown of the computer system or the computer system . The data processing system generally comprises a bus a processor a memory a display user input devices and a communication interface which may all be coupled to the bus . In one example the user input devices are a keyboard or pointing device such as a mouse. The communication interface provides an interface for communicating with the network . An operating system a database application or other application programs run on the processor . The memory includes Random Access Memory RAM Read Only Memory ROM and a hard disk . In one example the data processing system comprises either a client or a server.

By way of example only and not limitation the present invention will be described as implemented within the context of communications operating within an organization. In order to present an example embodiment of the present invention within the context of communications systems operating within an organization it is beneficial to introduce the organizational structure and the value chain model.

Referring to a block diagram is shown illustrating an example of a typical organizational structure . The organizational structure generally has a top level of management e.g. directors a number of middle level management groups indicated individually as . . . e.g. often organized into functional departments or groups and a number of low level e.g. first line managers and or employees indicated individually as . . . . Information typically flows vertically across organizational levels from the first line managers or employees to the middle managers and from the middle managers to the top level of management and vice versa. Information may also flow horizontally e.g. across a level through the rows between a n or diagonally e.g. from the employees to the middle managers . Typically the number of possible unique information flows in an organization is enormous. Additionally communication occurs through countless media such as by phone e mail personal meetings broadcasts office gossip or face to face conversations. Information flow is not only facilitated by people but also occurs through software applications. The complex web of information flow within an organization also directly affects organizational culture. Some organizations intentionally erect barriers to the efficient flow of communication e.g. the employees may not be permitted to directly communicate with the directors . However one constant can be discerned from the seemingly chaotic flow of information in an organization. From source to destination no matter which communications medium is used information flow can be modeled as occurring in waves.

Information generated at the top management levels e.g. the directors usually flows through middle management until it reaches the employees . In some cases information from the directors will not reach the employees or is distorted by the time it reaches the employees . In contrast some broadcasts from the directors immediately reach the entire company. This inconsistency is often unintentional.

Referring to an example of a value chain is shown. To put communication and information flow into context with the specific activities through which organizations create a competitive advantage it is useful to model the organization as a chain of value creating activities. This approach is based on the work of Michael Porter who identified a set of interrelated generic activities common to a wide range of organizations. The example value chain shown in generally comprises a set of core value creating activities such as a sales activity a manufacturing activity a quality control activity and a customer delivery activity . The actual components of the value chain are dependent upon the particular organization under consideration. The specific value chain is used for illustrative purposes only. Additionally depending on the particular organization some functions are integral to all activities in the value chain such as a financing activity a marketing activity and a research and development activity . The activities and are generally referred to as support activities. Further some external interactions are integral to the functioning of various aspects of the value chain such as interactions with business partners and customers .

According to Newton s Third Law for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. Seemingly this also applies to communications as information flows generate other information flows as a result of the beliefs of the participants in the information chain. People react and respond to the information they receive. For a physical system to be successfully designed all such reactive forces must be accounted for and taken into consideration during the design stage. Similarly many organizational failures can be attributed to the one way flow of information with little or no provision or consideration for feedback how it should occur and how it should be considered. One aspect of the present invention provides for the availability of a medium for information to propagate in both directions thus enabling the effective control and management of feedback.

Resonance in communications occurs naturally in nature. The human body provides feedback mechanisms that provide for information to flow from cell to cell and through tissues and organs using electrochemical media. As such organic entities may be viewed as a result of informational resonance in a live system. This represents a state of efficiency that is common in nature and is needed for a species to function in a way that allows the species to survive.

Effective use of resonance also involves removing barriers that block the free flow of information. Resonance can still occur in the face of barriers that block the free flow of information but the resonant state may become unpredictable or difficult to control. Generally for an organization to reach a resonant state of information exchange efficient and effective communication across all organizational levels and through all elements of the value chain is needed. To achieve such a state an organization might even need to include external participants such as suppliers business partners customers or even competitors or the government.

Unobstructed feedback is a highly desirable element in achieving resonance in the exchange of information in an organization. Information flows should reach all branches of the organizational structure propagate through the entire length of the value chain and echo back to the initiator e.g. the source of the information . This may necessitate changes to how information flows in a particular organization. Organizations typically have more communication channels dedicated to top down information dissemination e.g. from the top management to the middle management and from the middle management to the employees or first line management to accommodate typical daily functions such as communicating goals set by management or distributing product information from sales departments. Substantially less communication channels collect feedback from the employees or from the customers or the business partners . In many organizations formal employee feedback is obtained only once or twice per year and customer satisfaction surveys are performed even less frequently. If an organization wishes to achieve a resonant state of information exchange the organization generally needs to build more feedback channels and also develop its culture to promote feedback. In one aspect the present invention provides the feedback channels needed to achieve unobstructed feedback in an organization.

One special type of information that flows across organizations is tacit communication. Often in organizations that suffer from problems related to organizational culture tacit communications account for a significant amount of organizational communication. Tacit communications may have direct consequences to corporate culture team morale customer expectations or trust. If a resonant state in the exchange of information is to be achieved within an organization tacit communications should also be accommodated. Since feedback that is unfavourable often occurs in the form of tacit communication one way to accommodate tacit communication in a feedback system is to provide for anonymous feedback. One aspect of the present invention provides for tacit communications through anonymous feedback.

The more efficient the value chain becomes the higher level of productivity is obtained. In theory the level of maximum efficiency that can be obtained from the value chain is achieved when communications within the value chain reach a resonant state in the resonant state all feasible cost reduction opportunities are exercised and all value creating business opportunities are realized. These opportunities can only be exercised within the value chain when sufficient information about the opportunities is known. This all encompassing informational permeation generally occurs when the flow of information through the value chain reaches a state of resonance such that there is no loss of information.

Communications across departments tend to be less frequent than communications within a department. Communications between separate organizations tend to be even less frequent due to a reduced number of communications channels. One aspect of the present invention stimulates communications across organizational departments and across separate organizations by creating more communications channels.

According to physical wave theory the resonance of a wave is easily achieved when the absorption of the propagation medium is the smallest. If this rule is applied to the flow of information across an organizational structure or through a value chain the less barriers to the free flow of information that exist in an organization the more powerful its resonant state will be. Secondly according to the physical wave theory resonant states are achieved when the frequency of the oscillating medium is the same as the frequency of the source of excitation. If this rule is applied to the flow of information across an organizational structure or through a value chain an organization that adopts a system that aims to achieve a resonant state can control the intensity of the resonance by controlling the main source of information in the organization e.g. the top management . This allows for the top management to control the level of communication within an organization.

Reference is made to which shows a system according to one aspect of the present invention. The system comprises a software layer and a database . The software layer provides a wide number of functions as will be described in more detail below. The database stores data provided to the database by the software layer . In one example the database stores one or more resonant quotes . The database is implemented using any database system known by those skilled in the art. Conventional computer infrastructure discussed with references to and facilitates the functions denoted by the arrows in and the functions of the database and or the software layer . Specifically users of the system within the organizational structure input data into the software layer or vote on data existing within the software layer as indicated by arrows . Users within the organizational structure also query the resonant quotes stored in the database and provided by the software layer as indicated by arrows . Users of the system within the value chain input resonant quotes using the software layer or vote on existing resonant quotes within the database as indicated by arrows . Users within the value chain also query resonant quotes stored within the database and provided by the software layer as indicated by arrows . It will be understood by those skilled in the art that there may be some overlap between the users within the organizational structure and the value chain as both the organizational structure and the value chain are models used to represent elements and or people within an organization.

One aspect of the present invention may provide the central actor that allows an organization to achieve resonance with respect to the flow of information within the organization. Examples of the present invention provides a software and hardware solution that achieves a resonant state of information exchange within the organization by providing one or more of a multitude of features.

According to an aspect of the invention barriers to the free flow of communication across the organizational structure or through the value chain are removed by a centralizing all feedback and data on tacit communication that flows through the organization b providing for a user interface that allows users to input receive or manage the flow of information and c providing an Application Programming Interface API to all applications that process information in the organization. The API allows the users to influence the flow of information in the organization by dealing with the resonant quotes .

The present invention provides a feedback mechanism for the members of the organization. The feedback mechanism allows a member to obtain and provide feedback about the organization. The feedback mechanism includes a user interface and an API to update and query feedback in the feedback database . The feedback is stored in the database in the form of the resonant quotes . The feedback database allows members of the organization e.g. both people and systems to add update and or delete the resonant quotes update the resonant quotes with data e.g. vote or provide additional feedback in relation to the resonant quotes stored in the database and or query the data e.g. read feedback . The system may be as live as the organization wishes or allows it to be by operating with any delay up to and including real time operation. Users add new resonant quotes to the feedback database as new information becomes critical to the organization. Users can also delete the quotes from the feedback database as some of the quotes become out of date. The API is provided to enable user applications to update and query feedback in the feedback database . In one example E mail and workflow systems are good sources of feedback. Users use the API within their E mail or workflow applications to manipulate the data maintained by the feedback database . In one example whenever a user replies to or forwards an E mail the user may choose to add an opinion about the email to the feedback database at the same time.

According to another aspect the present invention also provides an organizational tuning interface to allow organizational administrators e.g. the top management to change the pace of the organization. The organizational tuning interface provides for tuning of the resonant frequency of the system e.g. by controlling the pace of the organization or activity within the value chain . By setting up a business resonance framework e.g. a set of resonant quotes that match for example a balanced score card in a particular department the organization is able to build a basic framework to enable for resonance in the flow of information. The organizational tuning interface also sets an absorption parameter in order to control the sharpness of the resonant state. High level management provides a power input e.g. a weighting value for the exciting source provided by the present invention . In one example the frequency of the resonant state to be achieved by the organization is the frequency of the input of information into the system. Therefore the top management can establish and adapt the pace of the organization depending on the frequency of updates of the resonant quotes in the business resonance framework.

The system provides APIs that allow other software applications or systems to interact with the system to perform some of the operations that are directly available to users through the user interface of the system . This allows commonly used software applications or automatic agents within the organization to interact with the software layer and perform functions including 

Other software applications or systems that interact with the system include E mail workflow order entry CRM ERP and or supply chain management applications or systems. Information is collected from the other applications or systems through agents that perform this task. The combination of the user interface and the systems interface provides for control of the system .

The system may include security functions related to access authorization to the resonant quotes or categories of the resonant quotes . The system uses a directory server to provide authentication functions user management functions and or user group management functions. The system maintains an authorization database stored in the database or elsewhere that is updated with information about which of the resonant quotes can be accessed by users or groups of users and the level of access granted to each user or group of users. The access levels assigned to each user or group of users allows the user or group of users to perform any one of the following functions 

Information flows naturally across an organizational structure or through a value chain as a result of the dynamics of the processes of the organization. The transparent communication of information to all levels of the organizational structure or all stages of the value chain is performed by the system . The system collects this information using two approaches 

Implementing a passive feedback collection strategy with the system may necessitate instituting changes in the way people work within an organization. As users complete tasks they must provide feedback by voting on the resonant quotes in the system . The organization may have to promote the benefits of reading the resonant quotes or creating personal resonant quotes to motivate users to use the system. Generally anonymous voting results in a more effective system.

The present invention may promote change in organizational processes to create the necessary conditions to achieve a resonant state of information exchange and make the organization more transparent. The people that work in a resonant environment may find that it promotes the exercise of honesty and self development both personal and professional.

Referring to a flow diagram is shown illustrating a process in accordance with another aspect of the present invention. The process generally comprises a beginning stage an input stage a decision stage a decision stage an action stage an action stage an action stage an action stage an action stage a decision stage an action stage an action stage and an end stage . At the beginning stage a user decides to make use of the system proceeding to the stage where the user uses the interface of the software layer to request to perform an action with respect to information in the database . From here the process proceeds to the stage to determine if the action that the user is requesting to perform is authorized. If the action that the user is requesting to perform is authorized the process proceeds to the stage . Otherwise the process terminates at the end stage . At the stage the process determines the appropriate action to take based on the request of the user and proceeds to the appropriate stage to execute the appropriate action. At the stage the process presents the user with statistics related to one or more of the resonant quotes in the database . At the stage the process allows the user to create new data in the database e.g. a new resonant quote . At the stage the process allows the user to delete data in the database e.g. delete a resonant quote . At the stage the process provides the user with parameters charts volume and or other information with respect to data in the database e.g. one or more of the resonant quotes . At the stage the process allows the user to update one or more parameters with respect to data in the database e.g. update parameters with respect to one or more of the resonant quotes . If the user elected to vote on one or more of the resonant quotes in the database after the stage the process proceeds to the stage to determine if the user had already voted on one of the one or more resonant quotes that the user has requested to vote on. If the user had already voted the process proceeds to the end stage . If the user had not already voted on any of the one or more resonant quotes that the user requested to vote on the process proceeds to the stage where the user votes on one or more of the resonant quotes . After the stage the process proceeds to the stage where the process collects and stores statistics related to the votes performed by the user in the database . The stages and proceed to the end stage . The process then begins again or repeats.

Referring to a flow diagram is shown illustrating a process in accordance with another aspect of the present invention. The process may be similar to the process except that the process operates on categories of the resonant quotes . The process generally comprises a beginning stage an input stage a decision stage a decision stage an action stage an action stage an action stage an action stage an action stage an action stage an action stage an action stage and an end stage . At the beginning stage a user decides to make use of the system proceeding to the stage where the user uses the interface of the software layer to request to perform an action with respect to categories of the information stored in the database . From here the process proceeds to the stage to determine if the action that the user is requesting to perform is authorized. If the action that the user is requesting to perform is authorized the process proceeds to the stage . Otherwise the process terminates at the end stage . At the stage the process determines the appropriate action to take based on the request of the user and proceeds to the appropriate stage to execute the appropriate action. At the stage the process presents the user with statistics related to one or more categories of the resonant quotes in the database . At the stage the process allows the user to create new categories in the database e.g. a new category of the resonant quotes . The new category created by the user either comprises preexisting resonant quotes or new resonant quotes to be entered by users of the system at a future time. At the stage the process allows a user to delete a category in the database e.g. delete a category of the resonant quotes . At the stage the process provides the user with the ability to search through categories of data in the database e.g. search through categories of the resonant quotes . After the stage the process proceeds to the stage where the process displays results of the search performed at the stage . At the stage the process allows the user to update one or more parameters with respect to categories of the data in the database e.g. update parameters with respect to one or more categories of the resonant quotes . At the stage the process allows the user to browse through categories of the data stored in the database e.g. categories of the resonant quotes . After the stage the process proceeds to the stage where the process displays the results of the browse performed at the stage . The stages and proceed to the end stage . The process then begins again or repeats.

Referring to a flow diagram is shown illustrating a process in accordance with another aspect of the present invention. The process allows a member of upper management at a firm e.g. a member of the top management to set one or more control data parameters with respect to the system . The process generally comprises a beginning stage an input stage an action stage and an end stage . At the beginning stage the process waits for an authorized user to want to change one or more of the parameters controlling the operation of the system . When a user wishes to change a parameter the process proceeds to the stage where the user inputs control data relating to the operating of the system . The process then proceeds to the stage where the one or more control data parameters set by the user at the stage are stored in the system e.g. in the database by the software layer . Finally the process proceeds to the end stage where the process begins again. In one example the control data parameter set by the process comprises an absorption parameter defining a sharpness value of the resonant condition e.g. how well defined the resonant state is that occurs within the organization .

The present invention may be embodied in other specific forms without departing from the spirit or characteristics thereof. Certain adaptations and modifications of the invention will be obvious to those skilled in the art. Therefore the presently discussed embodiments are considered to be illustrative and not restrictive the scope of the invention being indicated by the appended claims rather than the foregoing description and all changes which come within the meaning and range of equivalency of the claims are therefore intended to be embraced therein.

