---

title: Consolidated body fluid testing device and method
abstract: A body fluid testing device includes a body member and a tissue penetrator carried by the body member. A test strip holder is carried by the body member, and a test strip is carried by the test strip holder. The test strip is capable of receiving a body fluid thereon and processing the body fluid into a form suitable for yielding test results relating to the content of the body fluid. The body member, tissue penetrator, test strip holder and test strip are designed for a single use and for disposal as a unit without disassembly.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07901364&OS=07901364&RS=07901364
owner: Micronix, Inc
number: 07901364
owner_city: Carmel
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050105
---
The instant application is a continuation of Kloepfer et al U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 313 331 filed on 6 Dec. 2002 which on 11 Jan. 2005 issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 840 912 and claims priority to Kloepfer Kloepfer and Roach U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 340 442 filed 7 Dec. 2001 both of which are hereby expressly incorporated by reference.

This invention was made with Government support under grant number R44 DK59219 from the National Institutes of Health. The Government has certain rights to this invention.

The present invention relates to methods and devices for testing analysis fluids and more particularly to a consolidated testing apparatus for use in performing analyses of one or more components of a fluid. Significant contemplated applications of the invention are in the biological sciences especially diagnostic medicine. In this field analysis fluids would primarily be bodily fluids notably whole blood.

Diabetes has been referred to as the undiagnosed epidemic of the third millennium . Some experts predict the number of diabetics world wide to triple over the next 15 years to about 320 million. Self monitoring of blood glucose SMBG is considered the quintessential prerequisite for diabetes management and treatment. As will be explained in more detail most current SMBG systems whether designed for patient or professional use still have significant limitations.

Diabetes has reached alarming proportions in the western world and is growing at epidemic rates in countries other than the western world. Strategies for diagnosis and care are well developed though still sub optimal in the western world but marginal in developing countries.

The three major types of diabetes are type 1 formerly insulin dependent diabetes mellitus IDDM juvenile onset type 2 formerly non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus NIDDM adult onset and gestational diabetes. About 130 000 children in the US have type 1 diabetes. Treatment for type 1 consists of insulin injections diet and exercise.

In type 2 diabetes treatment may include insulin but preferably oral glucose lowering agents diet weight reduction and exercise. Approximately ninety percent 90 of diabetics are type 2.

Powerful drivers for rising prevalence of diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance IGT in the US are growing minority populations along with the graying and the fattening of America. The yearly death toll from diabetes is one half million. Diabetics are predisposed to heart disease peripheral vascular disease stroke retinopathy kidney disease and neuropathy. The latter is associated with amputations silent myocardial infarction and sudden death and it accounts for over 300 000 hospitalizations each year. The number of annual hospital days is 6 million and emergency room visits close to 600 000.

Direct costs in 1992 were estimated at 39.1 billion for institutional and 6.2 billion for outpatient care. Today s total diabetes related toll to the US economy direct and indirect costs combined is estimated to approach 150 billion.

As a true cure for diabetes remains elusive tight glucose control will continue to be the sine qua non of diabetes combat strategies. The benefits of tight glucose control in curbing diabetes related complications are now authoritatively documented. This evidence also suggests that a large portion of type 2 diabetics may benefit from tight glucose control and insulin. As worldwide knowledge about diabetes will be nurtured by the information age and media assisted education masses of undiagnosed diabetics who would benefit from tight glucose control will eventually be brought into the system. Since testing technology will also further mature these megatrends will co functionally establish an enormous market for SMBG in the future.

The mainstay of treatment for type 1 and many type 2 diabetics is SMBG in concert with responding self administration of insulin to harmonize glucose levels. Current SMBG systems are typically comprised of a test strip type dry chemistry device The test strip is insertable into a hand held meter that contains a display that gives the user a read out of results. Alternately results can be obtained by comparing reaction colors to printed color charts. The combined 1998 world market for teststrips meters and auxiliary products lancets sticking devices swabs etc. was 3 billion and is now in excess of 4 billion with 2 billion in the US alone. Long term growth projections for the market are 12 15 per annum.

Approximately two thirds of the market is in teststrips. Examples of known test strip and meter systems are those sold by Beyer Diagnostics Cascade Medical LXN Corporation LifeScan MediSense ReliOn Roche Diagnostics Terumo Corporation and TheraSense.

From a provider perspective the main shortfall is that current systems are generally limited to the measurement of glucose. This is in drastic discord with the concept of diabetes as a multi factorial metabolic syndrome. From a user point of view there are still limitations in those features that consumers and users believe to be important such as 1 minimal invasiveness 2 speed of analysis and 3 ease of performance and minimal complexity inconvenience from primary and auxiliary product mixes.

The vast majority of current SMBG systems utilize more or less invasive technology as they require that finger tips be lanced to cause bleeding which is the source of blood used in the test. Most current devices require the finger to be lanced to obtain blood samples in a range between 2 and 30 ml. Non invasive and minimally invasive technologies such as the one of the instant invention have been under active development for years but made it to market only on a very limited scale due to technical difficulties.

1. Invasive Systems. Several dry chemistry technologies exist for testing of whole blood specimens. In most devices liquid reagents are applied onto solid support substrates by some impregnation or coating method. After solvent evaporation the dry and therefore stable reagent is contained within a reactive zone or signal member test field . As the blood sample makes contact with the reagents on a test strip a chemical reaction is initiated with the analyte to be measured.

Both photometric and electro sensimetric detection principles are in use for measuring compounds of interest in the reagent reacted analyte on the test strip. Most systems employ reflectance photometry. In these meters light of a wavelength absorbed by the colored reaction product is shined onto the surface of the test field and the reflected portion of the light is monitored. In contrast to conventional photometry where absorbance is measured from reduced light transmittance in the direction of the incident beam reflectance is measured at locations angled away from incident light. As light of varying wavelengths is reflected in different directions an informed choice must be made as to which incident and reflective angles to select for obtaining a signal that is most sensitively and most specifically related to concentration.

Preferably the photocurrent detector photodiode of the metering device is positioned at a location where unspecific scattering is minimal and specific reflectance is maximized. However since the two can usually not be completely spatially separated pure signals are by definition unobtainable.

An advantage of photometric systems is that they measure color. Potentially this enables both visual and instrumented signal recognition. Visual interpretation can serve as a confidence check for quantitative results provided by the meter. Importantly in markets where meters are not readily available glucose concentration can still be determined semi quantitatively by a visual comparison of reaction colors on the test strip to standardized color charts.

Unfortunately the important feature of visual backup is realized only in a minority of present systems. This limitation resides in the method by which cellular component of blood is separated from plasma. In older products plasma was separated by soak through methods into coated bibulous materials or reagent films. Cells were then manually removed from the site of blood application by either washing or wiping them away potentially giving rise to significant operator induced errors.

Several newer methods permit separation by means other than washing or wiping. The most frequently used methods are separation by porous glass fiber fleeces or membranes. In these matrices pore sizes are chosen so that cellular component is held back within the matrix whereas plasma diffuses through the separating and into the detection layer.

2. Non Invasive NI and Semi Invasive Technology. The dream goal for the SMBG market of a completely non invasive glucose monitoring technology although pursued for over a decade has so far proven elusive despite perennial promises from companies in the industry. These failures have led to predictions that completely non invasive optical technology infrared or other may not make it to market in any significant way for both cost and technical reasons. It is also argued that this lack of success was predictable from early theoretical considerations of signal engineering. These considerations include the numerous and variable challenges of isolating a meaningful signal against a background of overpowering non specific noise such as noise from water. An authoritative recent review of NI glucose testing technology concludes that . . . none of the NI experiments reviewed provides proof that the signal is related to actual blood glucose concentration. Clark error grid presentation shows performance that is not acceptable for home glucose meters. 

A promising alternative to non invasive is semi invasive or minimally invasive testing using interstitial fluid IF . The only product currently marketed that employs this technology is Glucowatch from Cygnus Inc. It uses electrically stimulated reverse iontophoresis glucose extraction from IF into a sensor equipped sample pad. The product was recently approved by the FDA but only for supplementary trend testing. Reported problems with IF sampling are variations in skin thickness and permeability changes in blood IF equilibration sweating signal instability and skin irritation. Furthermore the watch must be recalibrated every 12 hrs. which is done by invasive finger stick measurements.

In the future the SMBG market will increasingly be driven by consumer demand managed care and cost pressures from third party reimbursement companies. In this environment a market conversion from established and affordable invasive whole blood technology to unproven and costly non invasive systems appears unlikely. However it is expected that the market will migrate to invasive systems which minimize invasiveness and its associated pain. As such the Applicant s minimally invasive and relatively less painful technology is believed by Applicants to better achieve the goals sought by the industry and be well placed in the direction in which the market is heading.

One development goal is to remove or at least decrease the pain associated with finger sticks and reduce the complexity of test performance by reducing the number of separate components required to perform a blood test.

An inventive feature of the Applicant s invention is the consolidation of the test procedure components with the exception of the meter into one single disposable test strip device. The product clutter of the prior art non meter components including test strips meters lancets lancet shooting devices alcohol bottles or sealed swabs multiple vials and bags requires the user to assemble and spread out a multitude of separate components on a flat surface such as a table or counter top before testing can even begin. It is a perceived burden by users and a deterrent for many diabetics to perform SMBG at all. The Applicants innovative concept of sweeping consolidation of a multitude of components into one single disposable of lancing site preparation painless lancing tiny sample e.g. forearm dosing and non instrumented monitoring should reduce perceived inconvenience to the absolute minimum making testing easier and widely accessible to the public. In instrument monitored versions the monitor meter will comprise a second component.

The technology has four 4 contributive components 1 unitization of lancing site preparation lancing dosing and testing 2 direct filter less absorption of blood plasma into polymer based reagent films 3 removal of cellular component by capillary force and 4 visual recognition of designated glucose cut points by the novel threshold assay redox titration on a test strip principle in non instrumented versions . In this mode of operation only a single polymeric film with a thickness in the micrometer range 

Elements of the consolidated testing device of the present invention are 1 incorporation of a lancet into a test strip containing device at a side opposite to blood entry capillary with that side becoming the currently separated lancet plastic support unit 2 incorporation of an antiseptic cleaning swab into the lancet cap and 3 incorporation of a pressure cup into the lancet cap lid for focused acquisition of miniature blood specimens by enhancing blood flow from tissue site that under normal conditions do not yield sufficient blood for testing purposes.

These steps eliminate product clutter by obviating separate vials swabs lancets and lancing gun. Additionally these steps help to synchronize purchasing of disposables which reduces frequent trips to a pharmacy. The consolidation of the testing components will also make testing faster and less dependent on finding a suitable environment such as a washroom test surface and or disposal bin. As such the Applicants consolidated device should be safer and more user friendly.

A third developmental goal of the consolidated testing apparatus of the present invention is the ultra miniaturization of the sample size required to be taken from a patient in order to perform the test. Ultra miniaturization of sample size is enabled by a proprietary thin film capillary augmented sample acquisition process which is described in more detail in Kloepfer et al. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 696 156 which was filed on 25 Oct. 2000 and contains a disclosure which is incorporated herein by reference.

In accordance with the present invention a body fluid testing device includes a body member and a tissue penetrator carried by the body member. A test strip holder is carried by the body member and a test strip is carried by the test strip holder. The test strip is capable of receiving a body fluid thereon and processing the body fluid into a form suitable for yielding test results relating to the content of the body fluid.

In the preferred embodiment of the present invention the device also includes a cleansing member with a pressure inducing member. The cleansing member is carried by the body member for cleansing the tissue area to be penetrated by the tissues penetrator. The cleansing member includes an aperture and along with the penetrator is disposed adjacent to the first end of the body portion. The penetrator is extendable through the aperture of the cleansing member as the penetrator moves from its retracted position to its axially extended position. Preferably tissue penetrator includes an actuator for retaining the tissue penetrator in the retracted position releasing the tissue penetrator upon activation by the user to move into the extended position. The tissue penetrator can include a depth adjustor for permitting the user to adjust the axial distance traveled by the tissue penetrator between its retracted and its extended position.

The pressure inducing member preferably comprises a cap member disposed adjacent to the first end of the body member. The cap member is hingedly coupled to the body member and is movable between a closed position wherein the cleansing member and the penetrator are covered by the cap member in an open position. When the cap member is closed it is disposed generally co axially with the body member. The cap member includes a tissue engaging rim that defines an axially inwardly extending cavity.

One feature of the present invention is testing consolidation i.e. unification of the various components needed to test blood into a single testing device. The Applicants believe that it is advantageous to keep the testing meter as a separate component because to incorporate a testing meter into the remainder of the components lancet lancet gun test strip and cleansing swab would make the device too expensive to be disposable. Rather the Applicants believe that cost efficiencies and sanitary concerns are best addressed with a removable meter that is employed with a disposable testing device that includes the lancet lancet gun test strip and cleansing swab.

The Applicants believe that the consolidated testing device of the present invention will greatly reduce apprehension inconvenience and fear and should receive a warm welcome from diabetics. A reduction in the fear factor is achieved by employing a retractable lancet which is not seen by the user thus lessening the needle fear caused by the sight of a traditional exposed lancet.

In one embodiment the testing device has a removable and replaceable swab cap holding the cleaning fluid swab. Upon removal of the peel off lid the swab cellulose or polypropylene sponge protrudes outward because of interior pressure from material elasticity. The user cleans the intended lancing site removes the lancet cap and lances the site by applying perpendicular pressure against the skin. He then recaps the lancet unit and turns the device 180 degrees draws the sample into the reaction capillary waits for removal of excess blood and monitors the result.

In another embodiment the removable lancet cap has been replaced with a living hinge snap cap. In this embodiment the cleaning swab is enclosed within the snap cap. The exterior side of the snap cap features a dome shaped pressure cup for sample enlargement when necessary activated by pressing the cup against the lanced site. This pressure against the lanced site helps to enhance the flow of blood from the lanced site thus ensuring a sufficient supply of blood to meet the quantity needs of the test strip and meter.

Another aspect of the consolidated testing device feature of the present invention is that it reduces the number of separate items that the user must handle from about six items to a single item. Current SMBG systems require at least half a dozen items to enable a user to perform a blood test. In addition to the meter these items include a test strip lancet lancet shooting device calibration strips alcohol swab bags vials and caps. These items must be removed from a common pouch assembled and handled to perform a single sterile test and then repackaged. The proposed consolidated technology would require a person to handle only a single disposable the test strip lancet swab pressure cup unit along with a meter thereby reducing product clutter. Besides greatly facilitating ease and speed of performance this unitization concept has the potential to streamline parts inventory control and save diabetics intermittent trips to the pharmacy every time they run out of a particular item.

The consolidation concept is particularly suited for alternate site testing AST such as by withdrawing blood from the forearm rather than a finger tip. AST is becoming increasingly popular because 1 pain from finger sticks is eliminated and 2 available lancing surfaces are significantly increased. The amount of blood obtainable from a forearm stick is one magnitude less than what can be acquired from a finger stick. Because of this many prior art blood test systems were unable to utilize AST as insufficient amount of blood were obtained from these AST sites to satisfy the requirements of either or both of the test strip and meter.

Although Bayer and MediSense have introduced vacuum assisted devices that are useful for obtaining greater blood flow quantities from alternative sites the Applicants have found that the application of a vacuum is unnecessary. Surprisingly the Applicants have found that pressure applied around the lancing site will cause increased blood flows. One feature of the present invention is that a pressure inducing component such as a pressure cup is provided that increases blood flow at alternative stick sites without the need for a vacuum assist

Through repeated experiments at two different body sites the Applicants have demonstrated that sample volumes can be increased 5 10 times when a pressure cup is applied as opposed to unassisted blood acquisition. In these studies we used one of the smallest lancets currently marketed the Roche Softclix at the lowest of its 11 depth settings 0.5 . With unassisted lancing blood volumes obtained were between 0 and 200 nanoliter.

In some sticks no blood was obtained at all. However even in most of those no blood obtained cases sufficient blood could be extracted when a cup was pressured against the sticking site. Such a pressure cup can be incorporated into the consolidated test device.

Several advanced designs of consolidated teststrips enhancing functionality and ergonomics are part of the present invention. Advantages of the advanced designs are 1 elimination of one part separate swab cap streamlining production 2 continuously adjustable depth penetration of lancet owing to a co molded eccentric cam lancet cap stop wall 3 capacity for repeat lancing in the event of an insufficient sample volume 4 provision of a pressure cup to enlarge sample volumes obtained from sticks 

The entire consolidated test strip can be manufactured from three 3 injection molded parts joined together by two 2 snap in connections assembled with the punched foils that contain the test chemistry.

Additional objects advantages and novel features of the invention are set forth in the description that follows and will become apparent to those skilled in the art upon their viewing the drawings in connection with the following description.

The first embodiment of the testing device of the present invention is shown in as including a body that includes a first end body portion that is attachable to and joinable with a second body portion to form the assembled testing device as shown in . The testing device is generally pen shaped and includes a longitudinally extending axis A which will be used as a reference point to describe the various surfaces and directional extent of the components of the testing device . The first end body portion includes a radially outwardly facing cylindrical surface having a knurled or otherwise roughened gripping surface for enhancing the user s ability to grip and control the device . The first end body portion also includes an arbitrarily designated proximal end and a distal end . A reduced diameter portion is disposed adjacent the distal end . The reduced diameter portion is sized for interiorly receiving the proximal end of the second end body portion within the generally hollow interior passageway of the distal end . The generally hollow interior passageway is defined by a generally cylindrical interior surface .

A bundt cake pan shaped cleansing member receiver not shown is disposed within the interior of the proximal end of the first end body portion and is sized and configured for receiving a toroidal shaped absorbent cleansing member that preferably comprises an absorbent pad that absorbantly holds a disinfecting agent such as a relatively non volatile alcohol or other disinfectant such as those containing anti microbial and anti germ agents such as Nonoxyl 9. The cleansing member has a radially extending axially outwardly facing surface and a radially extending axially inwardly facing surface .

An axially extending central aperture extends through the cleansing member between the inwardly and outwardly facing surfaces and is sized to be received by the axially extending hollow central finger not shown of the cleansing member receiver. As will be described in more detail below the central aperture and hollow finger of the cleansing member receiver are sized and positioned to permit lancet to pass therethrough so that when lancet is in its fully extended position the penetrating tip of the lancet will extend axially outwardly beyond the axially extending outwardly facing surface of the cleansing member . Of course when the lancet is in its retracted position the penetrating tip is disposed axially inwardly of the axially outwardly facing surface of the cleansing member so that a person using the cleansing member to disinfect and clean a body tissue area prior to penetration does not stick himself with the lancet .

Cap member is hingedly coupled to the first end body portion by a snap type living hinge member . The cap member is movable between an open position as shown in the figures wherein the longitudinal axis of the cap member is generally parallel to the longitudinal axis A of the testing device and a closed position. In the closed position the cap member rotates 180 degrees about the pivot formed by hinge member and is disposed in a generally co axial relationship with the proximal end of the first end body portion . When in a closed position end of the cap member that is shown as being a proximal end in becomes the distal end of the cap member and the other end of the cap member that is shown in in the open position as being the distal end becomes the proximal end of the cap member .

The distal end of cap is designed to mate with the proximal end of the first body portion when the snap type living hinge moves the cap member to its closed position. Although ideally the mating between the distal end of the cap member and the proximal end is a sealing relationship of the type that prevents any disinfecting agent within the cleansing member from evaporating it is possible that some sort of covering will need to be placed over the axially outwardly facing surface of the cleansing member to prevent any volatile disinfectant absorbed within the cleansing member from evaporating during the time period between when the device is manufactured and when the device is finally used by a patient.

As stated above the living hinge members are snap type living hinge members that are designed to be spring tensioned so that the cap only finds a rest position when the cap is either in its open position as shown in or in its closed position wherein the cap is disposed co axially with the second body portion . This snap type spring arrangement of the living hinge facilitates manipulation of the device by the user because the opening of the cap will cause it to snap into its fully open position rather than to flop around within an arc of open positions.

The proximal end of the cap member includes a pressure cup that is defined by a circumferential pressure inducing lip and a cup shaped interior . As will be described in more detail below placement of the circumferential pressure exerting lip on a tissue area that surrounds a tissue site that has been penetrated by the tissue penetrator along with the application of a moderate amount of axially directed force has been surprisingly found by the Applicants to induce a flow of blood out of the penetrated site to enhance the volume of blood that is obtained from the penetrated site. This feature has the advantage of enabling the testing device to obtain a sufficient quantity of blood from testing sites such as the forearm that formerly were unuseable by blood test strips because they normally did not bleed sufficiently to yield enough blood to enable the user to perform a blood test. In the prior art this inability to obtain a sufficient quantity of blood required the user to obtain blood samples from sticks made on the user s fingertips as the finger tips yielded sufficient blood.

An axially movable tissue penetrator that is movable between the retracted position and an extended position includes a needle like tissue penetrating lancet that is fixedly coupled to an axially movable mounting carriage . It will be noted that the mounting carriage and the lancet are coupled to the first end of a portion . However when the device is assembled as shown in the carriage and lancet are interiorly received within the hollow interior of the first end portion so that the penetrating tip of the lancet is disposed adjacent to the proximal end of the first end body portion .

As alluded to above the lancet normally resides in its retracted position where the penetrating tip is disposed axially inwardly of the axially outer facing surface of the cleansing member so that when the user employs the cleansing member to cleans his finger he does not stick himself with the tip of the lancet . The lancet is also movable into an extended position wherein it is moved axially outwardly under the force of a biasing member such as spring so that the penetrating tip extends axially outwardly beyond the axially outer facing surface of the cleansing member to prick the tissue site to cause bleeding therefrom.

One end of the lancet is coupled to a mounting collar on the carriage that couples the lancet to the carriage . Lancet can be fixedly coupled to the movable carriage and the carriage can be designed to move axially to cause the axial movement of the lancet . Alternatively the carriage can be fixedly positioned and the lancet be designed to be axially moveable relative to the carriage .

Spring is provided for biasing the lancet to move in an axially outward direction to engage tissue. A trigger member is provided for maintaining the lancet in its retracted position until the user actuates the trigger that permits the spring to move the lancet to move axially outwardly to thereby prick a tissue surface. Although a single spring is shown in the figures for biasing the lancet to move axially outwardly a dual acting spring arrangement can be designed that enables the lancet upon actuation of trigger to move axially outwardly to engage a tissue surface with a second spring being provided to move the lancet axially inwardly to retract it after the tissue poke is made.

A depth gauge including a camming surface for facilitating axial movement not shown is provided for enabling the user to adjust the extent of axial movement of the lancet that permits the user to adjust the depth to which the penetrating tip of the lancet penetrates the tissue surface of the user. As will be appreciated some users would prefer that the lancet penetrate more deeply to ensure a better blood flow and supply whereas others would prefer that the lancet make a more shallow penetration of the tissue that would likely be less painful. The depth gauge includes pointer that is reconcilable with a gauging surface surface for maintaining one or more numerical indicators such as numerical indicator that provides an indication to the user of the relative depth to which the lancet will penetrate. A gripping surface is provided for permitting the user to rotate the cylindrical gauging wheel that contains gripping surface on pointer or alternately to rotate first end body portion to permit the user to vary the insertion depth of the lancet .

The second end body portion also includes a test strip component that is disposed generally at the distal end of the second end body portion.

The test strip component is disposed at the distal end of the second end body portion and includes four primary components a test strip a test strip holder a test strip retainer and a living hinge mechanism for hingedly coupling the test strip holder to the retainer . Test strip retainer is movable between an open position as shown in the figures and a closed position see e.g. . When the test strip retainer is in its closed position the test strip is sandwiched between the test strip retainer and the test strip holder to maintain the test strip in its appropriate position on the device .

The test strip is preferably a capillary containing test strip of the type described in Kloepfer Kloepfer and Roach patent application Ser. No. 09 696 156 that is also assigned to the Assignee of the instant invention. Although the disclosure relating to the test strip of the 156 application is incorporated herein by reference and need not be repeated further here the test strip is designed to separate the colored primarily hemoglobin components of the blood from the clear primarily plain components of the blood to provide a generally clear analyte fluid that can then be reacted with reagents contained on the test strip to form either a calorimetric or non colorimetric reaction product that can then be analyzed either visually or through the use of a meter not shown .

The test strip includes a collection component that comprises an inlet a collection capillary structure to draw the fluid of interest into the collection component via the inlet exerting capillary forces upon the fluid applied to the inlet. The device also includes a film that is operable to collect the correct analyte from the fluid as the fluid is drawn over the film. A wicking component is provided that is coupled to the collection component and is structured to draw the fluid over the film and into the wicking component. The wicking component exerts sufficient capillary force on the analyte fluid to effectively sweep the film free of particulate matter e.g. hemoglobin of the fluid without filtration or other mechanical removal devices. The functional components described above of the test strip are incorporated into test strip .

The shape of test strip is dictated largely by its need to incorporate the above discussed functional components while fitting into the test strip holder and test strip retainer while still being insertable into an appropriate glucose meter so that the glucose meter can read the reaction product analyte that is drawn from the body fluid e.g. blood that is placed on the collection component of the test strip . The test strip includes a proximal end and a fluid sample receiving distal end . Generally blood placed on a test strip flows from the distal end toward the proximal end .

Test strip includes finger receiving apertures that are designed for receiving an upstanding finger whose purpose is to fixedly position the test strip on the test strip holder and receiver . A pair of radially extending tabs are formed on the test strip to also help to fixedly position the test strip on the test strip holder and receiver .

The test strip includes a body fluid receiving upper surface having a separating portion and a capillary containing portion a wicking component portion and a reagent impregnated portion as taught by the above Kloepfer Kloepfer and Roach patents. Generally only one side of the test strip needs to be treated with the functional components as blood is generally only placed one side of the test strip .

The test strip holder includes a generally planar base for receiving test strip and a set of upstanding perimetral side walls for capturing the test strip and maintaining it on the holder in a snug relationship. The test strip holder also includes a concave distal surface that facilitates the introduction of blood to the test strip and a strip retaining upstanding finger that may be movable between a strip engaging position and strip releasing position. A pair of ramping surfaces are formed on the frontal distal surface of the upstanding side walls to facilitate the lifting of the test strip by an appropriately designed glucose meter not shown .

The test strip retainer is designed to matingly engage with the test strip holder for retaining the test strip by securing the test strip on the test strip component of the blood testing device . The test strip retainer is movable between an open position such as shown in and that permits the test strip to be inserted onto and or removed from its engagement with the test strip holder and a closed position see e.g. wherein the test strip retainer frictionally engages the test strip holder so that the test strip retainer is positionaly secured onto the test strip holder to positionaly secure and retain the test strip onto the test strip component . When so engaged the test strip is sandwiched between the planar base of the test strip holder and test strip retainer .

The test strip retainer includes upstanding walls for engaging the upper surface of the test strip . The test strip retainer is hingedly coupled to the test strip holder by a living hinge and includes a generally perimetral strip engaging retaining wall set that is designed to be disposed above the upper surface of the test strip .

The distal portion of the test strip retainer includes a concave cut out portion for facilitating the introduction of blood onto the test strip of the upper surface of the test strip . A pair of complimentary ramping surfaces are formed on the distal end of the retainer and are provided for facilitating engagement of the testing strip component with an appropriate glucose meter. The primary purpose of the ramping strip surfaces is to permit a mechanism not shown within the glucose meter to lift the strip as it is inserted into the meter for better fitting of the strip by the meter.

Another feature of the strip is the sufficient sample indication window . This allows the meter to interrogate the strip in the reservoir to insure sufficient sample has been applied prior to giving a test result.

As is best shown in the retainer includes four upstanding studs that are sized and positioned for being received into four complimentary apertures that are formed on the test strip holder . When the studs are inserted into the apertures the studs fixedly engage the apertures to maintain the retainer in a secure frictional engagement with the holder .

Your attention is now directed to that comprises a flow chart describing the manner in which the test strip device is used.

First the test strip device is removed from its packaging. When packaged the cap is placed in its co axial relationship with the second end of the testing device so as to create a seal against the cleansing member that helps to prevent the cleansing member from drying out.

When the device is removed from its packaging the cap is opened and moved from its co axial position see e.g. to its parallel axis position as shown in . The user then employs the cleansing pad to wipe the cleansing pad on an area of body tissue that the user desires to have penetrated by the lancet in order to remove a blood sample. After the area around the testing site is wiped with the cleansing pad the testing site is lanced with the user actuating trigger mechanism to permit the spring to move the lancet axially so that the penetrating tip of the lancet penetrates the skin to thereby allow blood to flow from the puncture site. The depth to which the lancet will insert itself into the skin is governed by the setting established by the user through the use of the depth gauge .

After the site is lanced cap is then moved back into its co axial position primarily to help reduce the likelihood that the user will re stick himself with the lancet . As described above the lancet can be designed with a two way biasing mechanism so that the lancet after it is moved axially to engage the skin will fall into the influence of a counter spring to withdraw the lancet back below the axially outwardly facing surface of the cleansing member to reduce the likelihood of such unintentional sticks .

From a functional perspective an important reason to close the swab cap is that it enables the user to employ the pressure cup to enhance the flow of blood from the penetrated test site. Although it is likely that the pressure cup would not be needed in all circumstances such as those circumstances where the site that is lanced is a fingertip the pressure cup is especially useful when the lanced site is a relatively slower bleeding site such as a forearm.

The circumferential lid of the pressure cup is then placed around the lanced site and axially directed pressure is exerted against the body tissue. This causes additional quantities of blood to flow out of the lanced site. This finding was most surprising to Applicants as enhanced blood flow was achieved by the Applicants without the need to resort to vacuum assisted removal as in some prior art.

When sufficient blood has been bled out of the user the blood sample is then loaded on to the distal end of the test strip . After a short interval necessary for the blood on the test strip to complete its journey through the capillary and wicking components of the test strip the distal end of the test strip component is inserted into an appropriately sized and configured glucose meter. Typically it requires the glucose meter approximately 5 to 10 seconds in order to perform its necessary analysis of the analyte fluid contained on upper surface of the test strip . After the glucose meter has performed its test the user can then observe the results of the test or the display of the glucose meter which is typically either a liquid crystal display or light emitting diode display. After the results are observed the testing device is removed from the glucose meter and disposed of appropriately. A visual back up system can be used prior to disposing of the strip if the user has any doubts about the accuracy of the result i.e. user feels bad but the result is in the acceptable range .

It is believed by the Applicants that the entire testing procedure utilizing the strip of the present invention should require only about 25 seconds of the user s time. The reader is invited to compare the number of steps using the test device of the present invention with the significantly greater number of steps required for conventional testing which is set forth in . It is believed by the Applicants that the consolidation of the various components upon a single testing device that is accomplished with the present invention saves the user considerable amounts of time due largely to significantly fewer number of steps required to perform testing and the significantly fewer number of components that must be manipulated by the user. By comparison the Applicants believe that a person using the prior art testing devices will require somewhere between 2 and 3 minutes to completely perform the task which compares rather unfavorably to the estimated 25 seconds required by the device of the present invention.

The first alternate embodiment of the testing device of the present invention is generally similar to testing device in the manner it functions but slightly different in its construction and is shown in as including a body that includes a first end body portion that is attachable to and joinable with a second end body portion via a central portion to form the assembled testing device as shown in . The testing device is also generally pen shaped and includes a longitudinally extending axis A. The first end body portion includes a radially outwardly facing cylindrical surface having a knurled or otherwise roughened gripping surface for enhancing the user s ability to grip and control the device . The first end body portion also includes a proximal end and a distal end . A reduced diameter portion is disposed adjacent the distal end . The reduced diameter portion is sized for interiorly receiving the proximal end of the central body portion within the generally hollow interior passageway of the distal end. The generally hollow interior passageway is defined by a generally cylindrical interior surface .

A bundt cake shaped cleansing member receiver having a hollow central finger is disposed within the interior of the proximal end of the first end body portion and is sized and configured for receiving a toroidal shaped absorbent cleansing member that is identical to cleansing pad . As will be described in more detail below the central aperture and hollow finger of the cleansing member receiver are sized and positioned to permit lancet to pass therethrough so that when lancet is in its fully extended position the penetrating tip of the lancet will extend axially outwardly beyond the axially extending outwardly facing surface of the cleansing member. Of course when the lancet is in its retracted position the penetrating tip is disposed axially inwardly of the axially outwardly facing surface of the cleansing member so that a person using the cleansing member to disinfect and clean a body tissue area prior to penetration does not stick himself with the lancet while wiping down the tissue area.

Cap member is identical to cap and hingedly coupled to the second end body portion by a snap type living hinge member. The cap member is movable between an open position as shown in the figures wherein the longitudinal axis of the cap member is generally parallel to the longitudinal axis A of the testing device in a closed position as shown in .

The distal end of the cap is designed to mate with the proximal end of the first body portion when the snap type living hinge moves the cap member to its closed position.

The living hinge members are snap type living hinge members that are designed to be spring tensioned so that the cap only finds a rest position when the cap is in its open position as shown in or in its closed position wherein the cap is disposed co axially with the second body portion as shown in .

The proximal end of the cap member includes a pressure cup that is defined by a circumferential pressure inducing lip and a cup shaped interior. As with device the placement of the circumferential pressure extending lip on a tissue area that surrounds a tissue site that has been penetrated by the tissue penetrator along with the application of the moderate amount of axially directed force has been surprisingly found by the Applicants to induce a flow of blood out of the penetrated site to enhance the volume of blood that is obtained from the penetrated site.

An axially movable tissue penetrator that is movable between the retracted position and an extended position includes a needle like tissue penetrating lancet that is fixedly coupled to an axially movable mounting carriage . It will be noted that the mounting carriage and the lancet are coupled to the first end of a portion but is separated from the central portion unlike testing device . Nonetheless when the device is assembled as shown in the carriage and lancet are interiorly received within the hollow interior of the first end portion so that the penetrating tip of the lancet is disposed adjacent to the proximal end of the first end body portion . The lancet is movable between a retracted position wherein the penetrating tip is disposed axially inwardly of the axially outer facing surface of the cleansing member so that when the user uses the cleansing member to cleans his finger he does not stick himself with the tip of the lancet . The lancet is also movable into an extended position wherein it is moved axially outwardly under the force of a biasing member such as spring so that the penetrating tip extends axially outwardly beyond the axially outer facing surface of the cleansing member to prick tissue site to cause bleeding therefrom.

One end of the lancet is coupled to a mounting collar on the carriage that couples the lancet to the carriage .

Lancet can be fixedly coupled to the movable carriage and the carriage can be designed to move axially to cause the axial movement of the lancet . Alternatively the carriage can be fixedly positioned and the lancet be designed to be axially moveable relative to the carriage .

Spring is provided for biasing the lancet to move in an axially outward direction to engage tissue. A trigger member is provided for maintaining the lancet in its retracted position until the user actuates the trigger that releases the spring to permit the lancet to move axially outwardly to thereby prick a tissue surface.

A depth gauge including a camming surface for facilitating axial movement not shown is provided as a part of central portion for enabling the user to adjust the extent of axial movement of the lancet that permits the user to adjust the depth to which the penetrating tip of the lancet penetrates the tissue surface of the user. The depth gauge includes pointer that is reconcilable with numerical indicators that provides an indication to the user of the relative depth to which the lancet will penetrate. A gripping surface is provided for permitting the user to rotate the cylindrical gauging wheel.

The second end body portion also includes the test strip component that is disposed generally at the distal end of the second end body portion. The test strip component test strip receiver and retainer are virtually identical to test strip component and does not need to be described again herein.

Testing device also operates virtually identically to testing device thereby eliminating the need to re describe its method of operation.

The second alternate embodiment of the testing device of the present invention is generally similar to testing device insofar as it performs all of the functions of testing device . As is shown in device utilizes a body that includes a longitudinally extending second end body portion that is attachable to and joinable with a lancet cleansing member and suction cap containing end body portion via a generally disk shaped central portion . The testing device includes a first test strip component axis B and a second lancet axis C that is disposed at an outer angle to the test strip component axis B. The first end body portion includes a radially outwardly facing ovaloid surface a proximal end and a distal end . A pair of support braces help to securely connect the first end body portion to the central portion .

An ovaloid shaped cleansing member receiver having a hollow central finger is disposed within the interior of the proximal end of the first end body portion and is sized and configured for receiving a toroidal shaped absorbent cleansing member . As will be described in more detail below the central aperture and hollow finger of the cleansing member receiver are sized and positioned to permit lancet to pass therethrough so that when lancet is in its fully extended position the penetrating tip of the lancet will extend axially outwardly beyond the axially extending outwardly facing surface of the cleansing member. Of course when the lancet is in its retracted position the penetrating tip is disposed axially inwardly of the axially outwardly facing surface of the cleansing member so that a person using the cleansing member to disinfect and clean a body tissue area prior to penetration does not stick himself with the lancet while wiping down the tissue area.

Cap member is ovaloid in cross section and is hingedly coupled to the second end body portion by a snap type living hinge member . The cap member is movable between an open position as shown in and wherein the longitudinal axis of the cap member is generally parallel to the longitudinal axis C of the lancet and a closed position wherein the cap member is disposed generally co axially with the lancet .

The distal end of the cap is designed to mate with the proximal end of the first body portion when the snap type living hinge moves the cap member to its closed position.

The living hinge members are snap type living hinge members that are designed to be spring tensioned so that the cap only finds a rest position when the cap is in its open position as shown in or in its closed position wherein the cap is disposed co axially with the second body portion .

The proximal end of the cap member includes a pressure cup that is defined by a circumferential pressure inducing lip and a cup shaped interior. As with device the placement of the circumferential pressure extending lip on a tissue area that surrounds a tissue site that has been penetrated by the tissue penetrator along with the application of the moderate amount of axially directed force has been surprisingly found by the Applicants to induce a flow of blood out of the penetrated site to enhance the volume of blood that is obtained from the penetrated site.

An axially movable tissue penetrator that is movable between the retracted position and an extended position includes a needle like tissue penetrating lancet that is coupled to a mounting member The lancet is movable between a retracted position wherein the penetrating tip is disposed axially inwardly of the axially outer facing surface of the cleansing member so that when the user uses the cleansing member to cleans his finger or forearm or other sticking site he does not stick himself with the tip of the lancet . The lancet is also movable into an extended position wherein it is moved axially outwardly under the force of a biasing member so that the penetrating tip extends axially outwardly beyond the axially outer facing surface of the cleansing member to prick the tissue site to cause bleeding therefrom.

A depth gauge including a camming surface for facilitating axial movement not shown is provided as a part of central portion for enabling the user to adjust the extent of axial movement of the lancet that permits the user to adjust the depth to which the penetrating tip of the lancet penetrates the tissue surface of the user. The depth gauge includes pointer that is reconcilable with numerical indicators that provides an indication to the user of the relative depth to which the lancet will penetrate. A gripping edge is provided for permitting the user to rotate the disk shaped gauging wheel .

The second end body portion also includes the test strip component that is disposed generally at the distal end of the second end body portion. The test strip component test strip receiver and retainer are virtually identical to test strip component and do not need to be described again herein. Testing device also operates virtually identically to testing device thereby eliminating the need to re describe its method of operation.

Although the invention has been described with reference to the currently perceived best mode of practicing the invention it will be appreciated by those skilled in the art the variation and modifications exist which are encompassed within the spirit of the invention.

