---

title: IP phone intruder security monitoring system
abstract: A voice communications terminal is provided having a microphone to receive an audio stream and a voice activity detector to determine whether the audio stream comprises voice signals and when the audio stream comprises voice signals, notify a communications server and/or provide at least a portion of the audio stream to the communications server.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08107625&OS=08107625&RS=08107625
owner: Avaya Inc.
number: 08107625
owner_city: Basking Ridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050331
---
Cross reference is made to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 911 090 filed Aug. 3 2004 entitled INTEGRATED REAL TIME AUTOMATED LOCATION POSITIONING ASSET MANAGEMENT SYSTEM which is incorporated herein by this reference.

The invention relates generally to security systems and particularly to security systems using a communications network.

Property crime continues to be a major cost to economies worldwide. To combat crime most businesses use security systems that detect deter document deny and delay intrusions into a protected area or facility. Security systems are particularly important in applications where government and or private security personnel do not patrol or are otherwise not responsible for the area or facility.

A typical security system is an integrated system that typically includes a number of intrusion detection sensors an alarm processor an intrusion alarm monitoring station and a communications structure or network that connects these elements and connects the system to the reaction elements. In interior intrusion systems a broad variety of sensor types is available for use. Examples include window sensors glass break sensors door sensors wall sensors volumetric sensors beam sensors video sensors noise level sensors and motion sensors.

A security system whether providing security against exterior or interior intrusions is commonly evaluated based on three performance characteristics namely the probability of detection PD false alarm rate FAR and vulnerability to defeat. The PD provides an indication of sensor performance in detecting movement within a zone covered by the sensor. The FAR indicates the expected rate of occurrence of alarms which are not attributable to intrusion activity. Vulnerability to defeat indicates the likelihood that an intruder can bypass a sensor security system without detection. A major goal of the security planner is to field an integrated detection system that exhibits a low FAR and a high PD and is not susceptible to defeat.

Although security systems are available that meet these objectives they can be quite costly. The various components are expensive to install and commonly sold at a high cost. Although it is possible to use an existing installation such as a power line to transmit video for security monitoring a substantial investment is still required for the security system. Ongoing charges are typically also assessed for monitoring and maintaining the security system components. Moreover the components can be relatively obtrusive and unsightly and are generally used only for security activities.

These and other needs are addressed by the various embodiments and configurations of the present invention. The present invention is directed to an audio monitoring system for detecting the presence of a person that is particularly useful in an enterprise network.

 c when the audio stream includes nonbackground signals notifies a communications server and or provides all or a portion of the audio stream to the communications server. As used herein nonbackground signals refer to audio signals that are unusual relative to the other audio signals received over a determined time interval and or signals having a signal strength greater than a selected decibel level. Nonbackground audio signals could include voice signals doors opening closing foot falls a loud sudden noise such as an item being knocked over voices and the like. Some nonrecurring types of audio signals that are not indicative of an intruder such as telephone rings can be excluded from nonbackground signal classification by known techniques such as by recognizing the audio signal frequency range and or distribution the switch noting that a communication device is ringing and the like. In contrast background audio signals refer to signals that occur regularly during a selected time interval are not indicative of an intruder or though irregular or non recurring have a signal strength less than a selected decibel level. The present invention can provide an integrated security monitoring system through the use of voice communications terminals microphones in a distributed network. As a result of the convergence of IP telephony the present invention can provide a highly effective security system having a low FAR and a high PD and a low susceptibility to defeat.

a corresponding internal extension in a premises serviced by a contact processing server the server directing incoming calls to and receiving outgoing calls from the internal extension and

a voice activity detector to a determine that the audio stream comprises nonbackground signals and b in response to determining that the audio stream comprises nonbackground signals at least one of i notify contact processing server and ii provide at least a portion of the audio stream to the contact processing server.

a corresponding internal extension in a premises serviced by a communications server the server directing incoming calls to and receiving outgoing calls from the internal extension and

voice activity detector means for a determining that the audio stream comprises voice signals and b in response to determining that the audio stream comprises voice signals at least one of i notifying the communications server and ii providing at least a portion of the audio stream to the communications server.

In one configuration in the determining function the voice activity detector means performs voice activity detection on the audio stream by pre processing the audio stream to form a pre processed audio stream extracting features from a selected segment of the pre processed audio stream the extracted features including one or more of energy zero crossing a frequency domain shape of the pre processed audio stream a periodicity measure and or a statistic of speech and background noise and comparing extracted features with selected thresholds to determine whether non background noise is present or absent from the selected segment of the pre processed audio stream. The communications server includes a call controller and alarm agent means for receiving the notification from the voice communications terminal and transmitting an alarm notification to a security provider.

audio broadcasting means for receiving at least one of a text and audio message from the communications server and broadcasting the at least one of a text and audio message through a speaker and

In one configuration the voice communications terminal uses audio sensing to determine the presence of a person such as an intruder. The microphone uses voice activity detection techniques to detect any sound made in the surrounding environment. Because a typical enterprise network includes a large number of spatially distributed terminals the use of neighboring terminals can reduce the impact of false detection from outside noises such as noise from plane engines and emergency sirens and thereby reduce not only false alarms but also the likelihood that an intruder can evade detection. The identity of the terminal sending a notification can be converted into a corresponding physical location to provide useful information about the potential position of an intruder. Voice communications terminals are an essential part of an enterprise network and therefore are much less obtrusive and unsightly than conventional security cameras and sensor devices. Voice communications terminals can therefore be much harder for an intruder to avoid.

The present invention can also have significant positive impact in emergency situations. By way of example in a fire emergency the system can be activated and voice activity detection used to report the location of people who may be screaming out for help. The person could be located by locating the phone that is receiving the strongest audio signals corresponding to their cries for assistance i.e. has the greatest likelihood of voice detection of the person . This of course requires the terminal to discern background noise from voice signals and determine the strength decibels of the isolated voice signals.

The present invention can be used in lieu of or in conjunction with existing security monitoring equipment. When an intruder is detected closed circuit television cameras in the location of the reporting voice terminal can be viewed selectively by security monitoring staff. If the reporting voice communications terminal is a video endpoint the video camera in the device could be enabled to report the image that the voice communications terminal s camera records. As the terminals are connected to the network they can report back to existing security management software or to network monitoring tools.

Since voice communications terminals are not in use when the security module is enabled the entire processing power of the terminal would be available for processing the recorded signals and removing noise thus providing a more accurate voice detection. In this manner voice communications terminals can provide services in addition to normal or customary voice communications.

The terminal s speaker could also be used in conjunction with microphone detection whereby a security monitoring officer could speak or an automated message could be played to the intruder and inform them that they are being monitored.

The present invention can provide security monitoring through a cost effective medium. The installed base for IP endpoints is typically a large and unavoidable cost in an office scenario. The possibility of using IP endpoints in a security system especially by small to medium businesses can be a value added feature for IP endpoints themselves. Moreover it can be cost effective security feature compared with dedicated security systems. Security is a major cost to a business and the present invention can reduce substantially the cost of installation of a security system.

As used herein at least one . . . and at least one . . . or one or more of . . . and one or more of . . . or and and or are open ended expressions that are both conjunctive and disjunctive in operation. For example each of the expressions at least one of A B and C at least one of A B or C one or more of A B and C one or more of A B or C and A B and or C means A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and A B and C together.

The above described embodiments and configurations are neither complete nor exhaustive. As will be appreciated other embodiments of the invention are possible utilizing alone or in combination one or more of the features set forth above or described in detail below.

The invention will be illustrated below in conjunction with an exemplary communication system. Although well suited for use with e.g. a system having a private branch exchange PBX or other similar contact processing switch or server the invention is not limited to use with any particular type of communication system switch or server or configuration of system elements. Those skilled in the art will recognize that the disclosed techniques may be used in any communication application in which it is desirable to provide improved contact processing directed from an external network into a PBX or other communication system switch or server.

The media server can be any converged architecture for directing circuit switched and or packet switched customer contacts to one or more terminals. Typically the server is a stored program controlled system that conventionally includes interfaces to external communication links a communications switching fabric service circuits e.g. tone detectors and generators etc. memory for storing control programs and data and a processor i.e. a computer for executing the stored control programs to control the interfaces and the fabric and to provide automatic contact distribution functionality. Features provided by the media server typically include not only telephony features and intelligent contact routing but also localization collaboration mobility messaging system management attendant features networking and application programming interfaces. The server typically includes a network interface card not shown to provide services to the serviced terminals. Illustratively the media server can be a modified form of the subscriber premises equipment disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 192 122 6 173 053 6 163 607 5 982 873 5 905 793 5 828 747 and 5 206 903 all of which are incorporated herein by this reference Avaya Inc. s Definity Private Branch Exchange PBX based ACD system Avaya Inc. s IP600 LAN based ACD system or an S8100 S8300 S8500 S8700 or S8710 media server running a modified version of Avaya Inc. s Communication Manager voice application software with call processing capabilities and contact center functions. Other types of known switches and servers are well known in the art and therefore not described in detail herein.

The first terminals . . . N are packet switched and can include for example wire or wireless IP hardphones such as the Avaya Inc. s 4600 Series IP Phones IP softphones such as Avaya Inc. s IP Softphone Personal Digital Assistants or PDAs Personal Computers or PCs laptops packet based H.320 video phones and conferencing units packet based voice messaging and response units and packet based traditional computer telephony adjuncts.

The second terminals . . . M are circuit switched. The terminals . . . M can be any circuit switched communication device including for example wired and wireless digital or analog telephones PDAs H.320 video phones and conferencing units and voice messaging and response units.

It should be noted that the invention does not require any particular type of information transport medium between switch or server and first and second terminals i.e. the invention may be implemented with any desired type of transport medium as well as combinations of different types of transport media.

The packet switched network can be any wired and or wireless data and or distributed processing network such as the Internet. The network typically includes proxies not shown registrars not shown and routers not shown for managing packet flows.

In a preferred configuration the server network and first terminals are Session Initiation Protocol or SIP compatible and can include interfaces for various other protocols such as the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol or LDAP H.248 H.323 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol or SMTP IMAP4 ISDN E1 T1 and analog line or trunk.

It should be emphasized that the configuration of the switch server user terminals and other elements as shown in is for purposes of illustration only and should not be construed as limiting the invention to any particular arrangement of elements.

The gateways is an electronic signal repeater and protocol converter that provides a telephone exchange service supporting the connection of various types of telephones such as Digital Control Processor or DCP phones analog phones and IP telephones and outside packet switched and or circuit switched telephone lines such as analog trunks ISDN lines E1 T1 voice trunks and WAN routing IP trunks . Telephone lines are connected to the gateway via ports and media modules on the chassis with different media modules providing access ports for different types of telephones and lines. Voice and signaling data between packet switched and circuit switched protocols is effected by the media modules converting the voice path to a TDM bus inside the gateway. An engine such as a Voice Over IP or VoIP engine converts the voice path from the TDM bus to a compressed or uncompressed and packetized VoIP typically on an Ethernet connection. Each gateway commonly includes a number of port and trunk circuit packs for performing selected telecommunications functions such as DTMF tone detection tone generation playing audio music and or voice announcements traffic shaping and call admission control a media processor and one or more IP server interfaces. The gateway may perform policy based routing which uses a policy list structure to implement a routing scheme based on traffic source destination type and other characteristics. Common applications include separate routing for voice and data traffic routing traffic originating from different sets of users through different Internet connections or Internet Service Providers or ISP s and defining backup routes for defined classes of traffic. Examples of gateways include Avaya Inc. s SCC1 MCC1 CMC G350 G600 G650 and G700 .

The LAN is a conventional local area network that is wireless and or uses wires and or optical fiber as a common carrier medium. It may employ any suitable protocol with the Ethernet Protocol being preferred.

A typical subscriber terminal or is depicted in . The terminal is connected to a communication link . The terminal and link may be wired or wireless. Illustratively the terminal is a voice enabled personal computer and VoIP link is part of the local area network . The terminal is equipped with a microphone and speaker . In one configuration the terminal receives an analog input signal from the microphone samples digitizes and packetizes it and transmits the packets on the LAN . The process is reversed for input from the LAN to speaker .

The terminal includes in memory a number of computational modules that are performed by the processor and collectively enable the terminal to act as a sensor of a security system. A voice activity detection engine detects a nonbackground audio signal in a signal that has unknown characteristics. A voice activity detector receives output from the voice activity detection engine determines whether a nonbackground audio signal has been detected by the output and if so notifies an alarm agent in the multimedia server . An audio sending agent under the control of the detector sends an audio stream received via the microphone to the server for storage in a database . As will be appreciated a number of variations are possible for storing audio samples in the database. They are a to store the raw PCM samples themselves and b to store a compressed version of the samples obtained after encoding the background and nonbackground audio samples with a codec compression engine designed to reduce the storage needs. In either case feature extraction methods can be used afterwards for law enforcement purposes such as being able to do speaker recognition which is the detection of a person by their voice . The second case b would involve performing speaker recognition before compression and storage to prevent the compression from interfering with the speaker recognition stage.

An audio broadcasting agent opens a unidirectional channel with the server to broadcast audio signals to the potential intruder. In the event that the potential intruder voices or otherwise inputs an identity the microphone and audio sending agent forward the voice signals to the server . An intruder alarm notification and or audio stream may be provided to security personnel such as security provider for appropriate action.

Voice activity detection by the engine may be performed by any suitable technique including those disclosed in copending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 813 525 filed Mar. 21 2001 to Boland entitled VOICE ACTIVITY DETECTION USING ENERGY RATIOS AND PERIODICITY which is incorporated herein by this reference. As will be appreciated voice activity detection commonly follows a paradigm of pre processing feature extraction thresholds comparison and output decision stages. The pre processing stage places the input audio signal into a form that better facilitates feature extraction. The feature extraction stage differs widely from algorithm to algorithm but commonly used features include energy either full band multi band low pass or high pass zero crossings the frequency domain shape of the signal periodicity measures and or statistics of the speech and background noise. The thresholds comparison stage then uses the selected features and various thresholds of their values to determine if speech is present in or absent from the input audio signal. This usually involves use of some hold over algorithm or on time minimum threshold to ensure that detection of either presence of speech lasts for at least a minimum period of time and does not oscillate on and off. Some voice activity detection systems measure the background noise a priori to set the thresholds for later comparisons. Other systems are automatic and do not require a priori measurement of background noise.

As will be appreciated the present invention detects not only voice but also other audible signals indicative of an intruder s presence. Such audible signals are typically in the form of noise that is not ambient background noise e.g. someone banging a table or chair. While it is true that most Voice Activity Detection or VAD systems will detect such noise they can have varying levels of accuracy of detecting voice. One way to combat this would be to have a configurable VAD whereby the central security monitoring system could control the level of noise that was detected as not background noise. A complementary security monitoring device such as a CCTV camera could then be observed to see if it was a true alarm. In this case the VAD could be set to a very sensitive level but in a case when no camera was present false alarms from such a sensitive setting would be expensive. Essentially the more sensitive the VAD is set the more frequently a false detection would occur.

An operational example of the security system of the subject invention will be described with reference to . depicts a building having a plurality of offices reception areas and elevators . Each office and reception area includes voice communications a terminal . As shown by the arcs for the terminals in offices and reception area each terminal has an effective range to receive and detect voice signals accurately. The range depends of course on the relative volume level of the voice signal and any nonvoice background noise. If intruders enter through one of the elevators and converse with one another the voice activity detection engine in the terminal in reception area will detect the voice signals and report the presence of voice signals to the voice activity detector . The detector will generate and forward a notification to the alarm agent in the server . The alarm agent will in turn send an alarm notification to the security provider via either the packet switched network or circuit switched network . The security provider will dispatch appropriate personnel and or transmit a command to the alarm agent to take one or more appropriate actions including recording all voice signals detected from any of the terminals for a determined period of time broadcasting from the voice detecting terminal a voice message to the intruder and or sounding an audio alarm through out the building floor on which intruders are detected.

The voice detection ranges of the various terminals can be used to locate the intruders at any point in time. In the example as the intruders continue to converse with one another and walk to office then to office and finally office the voice activity detection system of each corresponding terminal will sequentially detect the intruders voice signals and send appropriate notifications to the switch . This information may in turn be forwarded to the security provider . Where more than one terminal detects the voice signals the physical location of the intruders can be identified more accurately such as using overlapping of microphone ranges and or triangulation or other location techniques.

Other techniques can be used to facilitate object location with a high degree of precision. Other terminal location techniques are discussed in copending U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 10 911 090 filed Aug. 3 2004 entitled Integrated Real Time Automated Location Positioning Asset Management System Ser. No. 10 795 119 filed Mar. 5 2004 entitled Advanced Port Based E911 Strategy for IP Telephony and Ser. No. 10 607 414 filed Jun. 25 2003 entitled Universal Emergency Number ELIN Based on Network Address Ranges each of which is incorporated herein by this reference. In one example the host terminals are connected in the LAN to a plurality of Ethernet switches. Each device has a corresponding Media Access Control or MAC address. The Ethernet switches are cabled to wall jacks in specific rooms or cubicles. The server maintains an auto or manual entry table with a mapping of terminal extension to MAC address and Ethernet switch and port to physical location such as wall jack location e.g. switch 12sw a4 comprises port 7 which in turn corresponds to building A floor 4 aisle C cube 10. In another example the terminal s IP address is used for object location. IP addresses are grouped into networks or sub networks. As will be appreciated a subnet is a common term used to describe a grouping of IP addresses. It is a common practice to assign a subnet of IP addresses to a relatively tight geographic region. For example an IP subnet could be assigned to a given floor in an office building or one wing of a given floor. In yet another example the extension of the terminal is used to provide object location information by mapping extension against physical location of the terminal. In many applications the terminal having a designated extension is stationary. The administered location for the terminal corresponding to an extension can therefore be used to provide object location information.

With reference to in step the voice activity detector in the terminal receives a command from the server . The command is typically one of enable or disable voice activity detection transmit an audio stream received by the microphone over a defined time period to the server and broadcast an audio message such as an alarm or a request for identification over the speaker .

In decision diamond the terminal before implementing the command determines if the sender has been authenticated by the authentication agent . This prevents a hacker or intruder from sending a false command to the terminal such as a false disablement command. If the sender is not properly authenticated the detector in step sends a denial message indicating that proper authentication was not received and refuses to execute the command. If successfully authenticated the detector proceeds to one of steps and depending on the precise command received.

In step the command is to enable the voice activity detection engine and monitor its output for detected nonbackground audio signals particularly voice. The detector periodically in decision diamond determines if a nonbackground signal is detected by the engine . If not the detector returns to and repeats decision diamond . If so the detector in step transmits a notification to the server for a packet switched notification or switch for a circuit switched notification indicating that a nonbackground signal has been detected and optionally providing the physical location of the terminal. Alternatively the server may determine the physical location of the terminal. After sending the notification the detector waits a predetermined time for a response which may be an acknowledgment or further command and repeats decision diamond .

In step the command is to transmit an audio stream to the server for a predetermined time period and or until a nonbackground signal is no longer detected. This transmission is effected by the audio sending agent . This transmission may be done for example using audio streaming techniques. To conserve bandwidth and memory space the transmitted audio may include only detected nonbackground signals and or may be compressed. At any one time only one terminal could be enabled to transmit the audio stream to the server. The server could in this manner receive at different times the audio stream from different terminals depending on which was receiving the strongest audio signals from the intruders. The server may save audio streams in a database perform speech detection on the audio stream and or provide the audio stream or a text version thereof to the security provider .

In step the command is to broadcast an audio message over the speaker . This command is effected by the audio broadcasting agent . As noted the message may be an alarm a request for intruder identification a notification that police and or security personnel has been dispatched and the like. The server pushes the message to be broadcast to the selected terminal. In response the potential intruder could be required to speak his or her name and or type an employee authorization code into a nearby terminal.

Finally in step the command is to deactivate the voice activity detection engine and terminate intruder monitoring.

In decision diamond the agent determines whether a notification has been received from a terminal. If not decision diamond is repeated at a predetermined time interval. If so the agent proceeds to step .

In step the agent updates the history log to reflect an instance of receipt of a notification. Each entry in the history log typically includes an identifier of the reporting terminal e.g. telephone number IP address or other electronic address the time and date that the notification was received and optionally the physical location of the terminal.

In step the agent determines the physical location of the reporting terminal. This may be done by any of the techniques noted above. Additionally in a business having a static terminal physical location association a lookup table may be used that indexes terminal identifier against physical location.

In step the agent applies predetermined policies or rules to determine whether an alarm notification needs to be sent to the security provider . This may include querying adjacent terminals within audio detection range of the reporting terminal to determine whether or not they too detect voice. This configuration would lower the incidence of false alarms. If necessary an alarm notification is sent to the security provider using standard virtual private network secured IP tunneling techniques.

As will be appreciated the agent when voice activity detection is in effect may periodically poll each of the terminals to determine whether the terminal has been disconnected or is otherwise nonoperational. This would prevent an intruder from disconnecting the adjacent terminals to avoid detection. If several adjacent terminals have been disconnected an alarm notification could be provided to the security provider .

A number of variations and modifications of the invention can be used. It would be possible to provide for some features of the invention without providing others.

For example in one alternative embodiment one or more of the modules in each of the terminals is relocated in the server.

In another alternative embodiment one or more of the modules in the terminal server is embodied in dedicated hardware such as an Application Specific Integrated Circuit or ASIC or other type of logic circuit in general purpose hardware such as a digital signal processor in software stored in the memory of the terminal as shown some other computer readable medium and executed on processor or as a combination of hardware and software.

In yet another alternative embodiment the present invention is used to detect the presence of a user at his or her associated terminal. This may be used for example to determine a user s presence at a selected time.

In yet another embodiment the present invention is used to eavesdrop on an employee to determine compliance with an employer s policies employment requirements.

The present invention in various embodiments includes components methods processes systems and or apparatus substantially as depicted and described herein including various embodiments subcombinations and subsets thereof. Those of skill in the art will understand how to make and use the present invention after understanding the present disclosure. The present invention in various embodiments includes providing devices and processes in the absence of items not depicted and or described herein or in various embodiments hereof including in the absence of such items as may have been used in previous devices or processes e.g. for improving performance achieving ease and or reducing cost of implementation.

The foregoing discussion of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. The foregoing is not intended to limit the invention to the form or forms disclosed herein. In the foregoing Detailed Description for example various features of the invention are grouped together in one or more embodiments for the purpose of streamlining the disclosure. This method of disclosure is not to be interpreted as reflecting an intention that the claimed invention requires more features than are expressly recited in each claim. Rather as the following claims reflect inventive aspects lie in less than all features of a single foregoing disclosed embodiment. Thus the following claims are hereby incorporated into this Detailed Description with each claim standing on its own as a separate preferred embodiment of the invention.

Moreover though the description of the invention has included description of one or more embodiments and certain variations and modifications other variations and modifications are within the scope of the invention e.g. as may be within the skill and knowledge of those in the art after understanding the present disclosure. It is intended to obtain rights which include alternative embodiments to the extent permitted including alternate interchangeable and or equivalent structures functions ranges or steps to those claimed whether or not such alternate interchangeable and or equivalent structures functions ranges or steps are disclosed herein and without intending to publicly dedicate any patentable subject matter.

