---

title: Acquisition and management of time dependent health information
abstract: A method for acquiring and managing time dependent health information is disclosed. The method comprises inputting the time dependent health information to a mobile device, time stamping the time dependent health information, and storing the time stamped time dependent health information. The method further comprises detecting the availability of a connection to a server and uploading the time stamped time dependent health information and a user identifier to the server.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07798961&OS=07798961&RS=07798961
owner: BeWell Mobile Technology Inc.
number: 07798961
owner_city: San Francisco
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050304
---
This application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 643 375 entitled DIABETES ASSISTANT filed Jan. 11 2005 which is incorporated herein by reference for all purposes.

The present invention relates generally to health information. More specifically acquisition and management of time dependent health information is disclosed.

Patients diagnosed with chronic illness often must make doctor recommended lifestyle changes. They need to adopt a new self management regimen encompassing among other things diet exercise medication testing monitoring and regularly scheduled visits with their health care practice team that includes doctors including specialists clinical nurses including specialists pharmacists health educators and nutritionists who often lack information about how patients are doing between appointment visits. People who are able to follow these recommended lifestyle changes comply with their self management regimen and communicate more effectively with their health care practice team are likely to have better individual health outcomes. Better health outcomes for chronically ill patients result in more efficient use of health care resources spent on chronic disease. One problem is that it is difficult to adopt and maintain the new self management regimen. One effective tool in enabling compliance to the new self management regimen is to have effective and timely communication and information sharing between patients and their support team. This communication between patients and support team is critical for and inherent to the success in chronically ill patients sticking to their new regimens. It would be useful if there were a way to have an interactive way for the patient to have tools to help self monitor adherence to the new regimen as well as to help others monitor adherence to the new regimen.

The invention can be implemented in numerous ways including as a process an apparatus a system a composition of matter a computer readable medium such as a computer readable storage medium or a computer network wherein program instructions are sent over optical or electronic communication links. In this specification these implementations or any other form that the invention may take may be referred to as techniques. A component such as a processor or a memory described as being configured to perform a task includes both a general component that is temporarily configured to perform the task at a given time or a specific component that is manufactured to perform the task. In general the order of the steps of disclosed processes may be altered within the scope of the invention.

A detailed description of one or more embodiments of the invention is provided below along with accompanying figures that illustrate the principles of the invention. The invention is described in connection with such embodiments but the invention is not limited to any embodiment. The scope of the invention is limited only by the claims and the invention encompasses numerous alternatives modifications and equivalents. Numerous specific details are set forth in the following description in order to provide a thorough understanding of the invention. These details are provided for the purpose of example and the invention may be practiced according to the claims without some or all of these specific details. For the purpose of clarity technical material that is known in the technical fields related to the invention has not been described in detail so that the invention is not unnecessarily obscured.

Acquiring and managing time dependent health information is disclosed. Acquiring and managing time dependent health information comprises inputting the time dependent health information to a mobile device time stamping the time dependent health information and storing the time stamped time dependent health information. Acquiring and managing time dependent health information further comprises detecting the availability of a connection to a server and uploading the time stamped time dependent health information and a user identifier to the server.

Mobile device receives information from meter . In some embodiments a health information system user enters information from meter into mobile device . In some embodiments meter communicates with mobile device electronically using a cable connection. In some embodiments meter communicates with mobile device wirelessly. In some embodiments mobile device communicates information requests to meter . In some embodiments the mobile device is a mobile phone. In some embodiments the mobile device is a wirelessly connected personal data assistant PDA .

Setup sets up a user to use the system. In some embodiments setup includes registering a user on the system collecting preference information creating appropriate application for the user s mobile device and downloading the application to the mobile device. Record records health information in the system. In some embodiments record includes entering the health information into the mobile device time stamping the health information storing the health information on the mobile device giving the user feedback such as an instant report uploading the health information to the server if a connection is possible and queuing the upload for a later time if it is not possible to upload at this time. Remind sends a reminder to a user. In some embodiments remind includes having a database indicate a reminder is required deciding when to send the reminder based on user s previous on time performance and on recent contact with user and sending the reminder based on the user s reminder preference stated method.

Preferences enters user specific preferences into the system. In some embodiments preferences includes selecting preferences connecting to server from mobile device and uploading preferences to server. Redirect sends information to someone other than the user. In some embodiments redirect includes checking for out of norm conditions alarm conditions a lack of recent and or expected data from a patient. Redirect also includes establishing the appropriate priority for the redirected message sending the redirected message to the selected person or people using the preferred redirected method. Report reports information stored in the health system database. In some embodiments report includes summarizing health information in a compact form for a user to review. Report reports are viewed in graphical form or numerical form. Reports cover different time periods including the last 24 hours the last 3 days the last week the last month the last quarter.

Repackage repackages information stored in the health system database. In some embodiments repackage includes summarizing health information in a compact form for physicians to review and sending the summary to the physician using a preferred method. Repackage repackaged information is viewed in graphical form or numerical form. Repackaged information covers different time periods including the last 24 hours the last 3 days the last week the last month the last quarter. Reorder reorders supplies and or medication for the user. In some embodiments reorder includes determining that user supplies and or medication are running low and ordering the supplies and or medication from a preferred source in a timely manner so that the user will not run out of the supplies and or medication. Disconnect disconnects a user from the health information system. In some embodiments disconnect includes removing the patient data to a non active user database removal of the rules that were applied to a patient including reminders and redirects and removal of the patient preferences and data on the mobile phone.

In the entered data is time stamped. In some embodiments the time stamp include the time and date entered into the mobile device. In some embodiments the time stamp can not be edited the time stamp data is made tamper proof by preventing editing or tampering of the time stamp. Tamper proof data is an important feature for medical research study applications. In the data is stored on the mobile device. In some embodiments the data is stored on the mobile device so that storage space is conserved. In some embodiments the data is maintained on the mobile device by storing the data in a progressively more compressed format the older the data is recent data is stored at a fine granularity and older data at a coarse granularity. For example each individual data point is stored for data entered today average data for each day is stored for data entered in the last week average data for each week is stored for data entered in the last month and average data for each month is stored for data entered in the last year.

In some embodiments after the data is stored on the mobile device the system response changes based on the user data. For example the user profile is examined to determine if the user data indicates a green yellow or red zone condition. The green zone condition indicates that the user should follow the green zone action plan. The yellow zone condition indicates that the user should follow the yellow zone caution zone action plan. The red zone indicates that the user should follow the red zone medical alert action plan. In some embodiments the green yellow and red plans are related to the health condition asthma. In some embodiments after the data is stored on the mobile device the user profile is examined to determined target ranges and or similar time of day results for the past week s entries. In some embodiments the ranges are blood glucose target ranges for a diabetic. In some embodiments the similar time of day results are the after dinner results for the past week.

In an instant report is generated to provide feedback to the user. The mobile device is capable of calculation for instant reports and storage of data for the instant reports so the mobile device is able to provide user functionality without a connection to the server or network. In some embodiments the instant report is a graph showing the just entered health information along with health information previously entered. In some embodiments the graph is a bar graph. In some embodiments the graph is a pie chart. In some embodiments the instant report is a display of numbers. In some embodiments the numbers include averages and or target ranges. In some embodiments an instant report is not provided to the user. Having no instant report or user feedback is important for medical research study applications.

In it is determined if a server connection is available. If the server connection is available data is uploaded now in . If the server connection is not available data is queued for uploading later in . The mobile device is capable of storage of data which can be later uploaded to the server so the mobile device is able to provide the user functionality without a connection to the server. In some embodiments data uploaded includes data input to the mobile device the time stamp information and the user identification information.

In some embodiments a point value is generated when a data value is stored. The point value is uploaded when the data value is uploaded. The point values are evaluated by the server to determine if a reward is due to the user. In some embodiments the system generates a random point value when a data value is stored. In some embodiments the point values are totaled and compared between users to determine if a reward is due to the user. In some embodiments the reward is a download. In some embodiments the download is a ring tone or a game.

Although the foregoing embodiments have been described in some detail for purposes of clarity of understanding the invention is not limited to the details provided. There are many alternative ways of implementing the invention. The disclosed embodiments are illustrative and not restrictive.

