---

title: Transmission line analog to digital converter
abstract: A transmission line analog-to-digital converter uses an unterminated transmission line driven by a current source to generate a stair-step waveform having equal time step periods for measuring the conversion time as a digital output value of an analog input. The converter has the advantages of simplicity, accuracy, high speed, low transistor count, and low power consumption. Fast successive approximation converters can be used for improved speed and accuracy of digital conversion of analog signals.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07071862&OS=07071862&RS=07071862
owner: The Aerospace Corporation
number: 07071862
owner_city: El Segundo
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050610
---
The invention was made with Government support under contract No. F04701 00 C 0009 by the Department of the Air Force. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

The invention relates to the field of analog to digital conversion circuits and transmission lines. More particularly the present invention is related to analog to digital converters using transmission lines for providing stair step signals for converting analog input signals to digital signals.

The analog to digital converter ADC is a ubiquitous component in modern electronics and satellite systems. The tradeoff has traditionally been between the speed of conversion the number of bits and the power consumption. The ADC samples an analog input that is then quantized by a quantizer that can be implemented in a number of ways. A flash converter uses a resistive divider to obtain the quantization. While very fast the flash converter is limited to a small number of bits of resolution because of size and power constraints. In a successive approximation ADC a digital approximation of the analog voltage is first obtained with low resolution. Then an internal digital to analog converter generates an analog approximation which is compared against the input signal to obtain a residual. The residual is then amplified and digitized in a second step to obtain more bits of precision. The successive approximation ADC is slow and requires complex circuitry including a complete internal digital to analog converter. A sigma delta ADC uses a single comparator in a feedback loop. The sigma delta ADC has a very high clock rate. The comparator samples the input signal and compares it against a reference value derived from integration of previous samples. The result is a string of binary numbers whose density represents the analog voltage. With additional digital signal processing this string can be reconstructed into a high resolution digital signal. The tradeoff is that the high resolution comes at the expense of speed. These conventional ADCs are complex circuits having high power requirements. These and other disadvantages are solved or reduced using the invention.

An object of the invention is to provide an analog to digital converter ADC having a transmission line for creating a stair step signal used for quantizing an analog input into a digital output.

Another object of the invention is to provide a transmission line ADC that accurately quantizes an analog input into a digital output.

Yet another object of the invention is to provide an ADC having a transmission line driven by a current source for creating a stair step signal used for quantizing an analog input.

Still another object of the invention is to provide an ADC having a transmission line driven by a current source for creating a stair step signal that is compared to an analog input for digitizing an analog input.

The invention is directed to an ADC having a transmission line that is driven by one or more current sources for providing a stair step signal that is compared to an analog input for quantizing the analog signal into a digital signal. The transmission line is preferably an unterminated transmission line driven by a current source to generate the stair step waveform for quantizing the analog input. The transmission line ADC stair steps are compared to a sampled analog input with each stair step having a predetermined time duration so that a clock can be used to increment a counter that is latched when the stair step signal exceeds that analog input for providing a digital value. The value of the counter is a digital quantization of the sampled analog input.

The transmission line ADC offers simplicity accuracy high speed low transistor count and low power consumption. The reflection signal properties of an unterminated transmission line enables quantization of the analog signal. The transmission line is used to generate an accurate stair step waveform that is electronically compared to the analog input signal. The timing of the stair step waveform is known accurately because the timing is determined by the length of the transmission line. A quantization is achieved by the timing of the output of a simple electronic comparator. The transmission line ADC can be scaled to very high speeds. Successive approximation transmission line ADCs can also be implemented without an increase in circuit complexity. These and other advantages will become more apparent from the following detailed description of the preferred embodiment.

An embodiment of the invention is described with reference to the figures using reference designations as shown in the figures. Referring to an analog to digital converter ADC receives an analog input that is sampled at a trigger time by a trigger signal . The trigger signal is sent to a logic circuit which then issues an input sample signal for activating a sample and hold circuit for providing a sampled analog signal to a far comparator at the far end of the transmission line. The trigger starts the conversion whereas a reset signal enables reset of the analog to digital conversion ADC after each conversion. An Iinput current source provides an Iinput current to the near end of the transmission line through an Sinput switch that is closed upon the charge signal from a logic circuit . The generation of the waveform is based on the current source being switched onto the near end of an ideal transmission line so that a stair step waveform is generated at the far end of the transmission line . After a conversion the Sswitch is opened by the deactivation of the charge signal by the logic circuit for terminating the generation of the stair step signal. A Snear switch having a Rnear resistor and a Sfar switch having a Rfar resistor are closed by the discharge signal from the logic circuit so that the transmission line is terminated through the resistors and to discharge to ground the transmission line at the end of the conversion. A near terminal of the transmission line is connected to the input current source and a far terminal of the transmission line is connected to a high impedance input of the far comparator . The stair step signal communicated to the far comparator is generated during a stair stepping period after the occurrence of the trigger . As the stair step signal increases during the stair stepping period the stair step signal crosses and exceeds the sampled analog signal from the sample and hold circuit at which time the far comparator toggles for communicating a quantization signal to a logic circuit . The logic circuit can be used to perform combinatory logic for controller operation of the ADC for example by receiving the trigger and issuing a sample signal to the sample and hold circuit by issuing a charge signal to the Sswitch to start the generation of the stair step signal and by issuing a discharge signal to the switches Sand Sto discharge the transmission line at the end of the conversion in order to be ready for the next conversion. The logic can also control the reset operation of the ADC. During the stair stepping period a counter is clocked and repetitively incremented by a clock . The reset could be fed into the logic circuit for resetting the counter so that it is ready for the next conversion. The clock has the same period as the stair step signal. Hence after a reset the counter increments in synchronism with the stepping of the stair step signal. At the quantization time the counter feeds a digital value to the logic circuit that then latches the counter value into the logic circuit . The counter presents the digital value as a digital output having N bits. After presenting the digital output the reset signal resets the counter the logic circuit as well as terminating the transmission line through switches and and resistors and . The digital output is a digital value of the analog input by virtue of relating the counter period to the stair stepping period as the stair step signal stair steps to and exceeds the sampled analog input at the time quantization.

The transmission line has a length L and has a velocity of propagation v. The characteristic transit time of the line is L v and is equal to the clock period . Initially the transmission line is deenergized. At time t 0 when the trigger is received an input sample signal is issued by the logic circuit and the sample and hold circuit captures the analog input signal as the sampled analog input. Simultaneously a charge signal is issued by the logic circuit and the Iinput current source is switched onto the transmission line . At a time L v later a transmission line signal propagates from the near end to the far end of the transmission line and the voltage at the far end becomes 2V where V IZwhere Zis the characteristic impedance of the transmission line. Because the far end is unterminated a reflection occurs that propagates back to the near end of the transmission line where the reflection reflects again and returns to the far end for producing a voltage 4Vat a the time L v. In like fashion the voltage at the far end steps up by 2Vat the times kL v where k is an odd integer thus generating the stair step signal during the stair stepping period. At the time of the trigger a clock timer is effectively started using the counter that is clocked at times kL v so that the counter increments with each stair step of the stair step signal.

With an analog input signal being 6V for example the far end of the transmission line with stair step 1Vat time L v from 1Vto 3Vat time L v from 3Vto 5Vat time L v and from 5Vat time L v at the quantization time. The counter is clocked at end of each of the L v periods and hence the counter value will be seven as a quantized digital value of input 6V. At the time of the quantization signal the accumulated clock count of seven of the counter determines the correct digital value that is then latched in the logic circuit and presented as the digital output . The transmission line can be lengthened or shorted to provide as many stair steps per volt of the analog input signal for improved resolution. As such the ADC can be constructed with any number of bits N with 2stair steps. This ADC has a practical transmission line design but can be improved by utilizing both ends of the transmission line in a double conversion ADC.

Referring to a double conversion ADC receives an analog input that is sampled at a trigger time by an input sample signal issued from the logic circuit generated from an input trigger signal for activating a sample and hold circuit for providing a sampled analog signal. The trigger starts the conversion whereas a reset signal enables reset of the ADC after conversion. An Iinput current source provides an Iinput current to an Sinput switch that is closed upon receipt of the charge signal from the logic circuit for feeding the Icurrent to the near end of a transmission line . The ADC operation is based on the current source being switched onto an ideal transmission line so that near and far stair step waveforms are concurrently generated by the transmission line . After a conversion is completed a Snear switch having a Rnear resistor and a Sfar switch having a Rfar resistor are closed by the discharge signal from the logic circuit so that the transmission line is terminated through the switches and and resistors and to terminate the generation of near and far stair step signals and to discharge to ground the transmission line at time of reset . The sampled analog signal from the sample and hold circuit is fed to a near comparator and to a far comparator for respectively generating near and far quantization signals to a logic circuit . The logic circuit receives the trigger and the reset and issues the input sample signal for sampling the analog input by the sample and hold circuit while concurrently issuing the charge signal for closing the Sinput switch to start the generation of far and near stair step signals Land Lat respective near and far end terminals of the transmission line . The near end terminal of the transmission line is driven by the current source . The near signal Lis fed to a high impedance input of the near comparator . A far signal Lof the far end of the transmission line is connected to a high impedance input of the far comparator . The far stair step signal Lis generated at the far terminal of the transmission line and the near stair step signal Lis generated at the near terminal of the transmission line . The near and far stair step signals Land Lare concurrently fed to the comparators and during a stair stepping period after the issuance of the sample signal upon the occurrence of the trigger . Both the near stair step signal Land the far stair step signal Lincrementally increase in voltage during the stair stepping period but at different stair step values. The sampled analog signal from the sample and hold circuit is electronically compared to the near stair step signal Lby the near comparator and to the far stair step signal Lby the far comparator . Both the near and far comparators operate simultaneously. Depending upon the value of the sampled analog signal from the sample and hold circuit either the near comparator or the far comparator toggles first communicating either a near or far quantization signal that is fed into the logic circuit .

During the stair stepping period a counter is clocked and repetitively incremented by a clock having an L v period. Upon receipt of either the near or the far quantization signals from the near or far comparators the counter feeds a digital value to the logic circuit that latches the counter value into the logic circuit and presents the digital value as a digital output . After presenting the digital output the reset resets the counter the logic circuit deactivates the charge signal and opens the Sswitch and issues the discharge signal that closes switches Sand S and discharging the transmission line through switches and and resistors and .

Referring to the near Land far Lstair step signals at the near and far ends of the line are effectively interleaved and generated during the stair stepping period. The near end provides odd multiples of the step height V and the far end provides even multiples of V. Therefore two comparators and are connected at respective ends of the transmission line in order to reconstruct a complete staircase with each step having height V. The comparators and are referenced to the sampled analog signal. At the time of being triggered T the clock is started. The clock period of the clock is approximately the same period as the characteristic transmission line time constant L v.

The sampled analog signal is captured by the sample and hold circuit . For example the sampled analog signal may be 5.5Vthat is between 5Vand 6V. The near signal Lis zero initially then steps to Vat T then steps to 3Vat time L v 5Vat time L v etc. The far signal Lis also at zero initially and remains at zero at T then steps to 2Vat time L v steps to 4Vat time L v and steps to 6Vat time L v when exceeding the sampled analog input. Therefore the far comparator switches first when the logic circuit latches the accumulated clock count of the counter . The logic circuit then presents the digital word to the digital output . As such the resolution of the double conversion ADC has been increased from 2Vto 1V.

The clock need not be a highly accurate jitter free clock because the stair step waveforms contain sufficient dwell time and are free from jitter. After the completion of the digitization by the logic circuit the reset is issued. The logic circuit then turns off the Sswitch and temporarily closes the Sand Sswitches and for grounding by the discharge Rand Rresistors and that provide a matched impedance condition discharging the transmission line in one characteristic time L v. At this discharged point the ADC is ready to perform the next digitization of the next analog input . This ADC can have several bits of resolution for example four or five bits of resolution. Beyond that the number of reflections on the transmission line each of which reflection are not perfectly ideal increases as digitization accuracy degrades. However the ADC can be modified with successive approximations to develop an accurate residual for improved digitization resolution.

Referring to a successive multiplexed transmission line ADC receives an analog input that is sampled at a trigger time upon a trigger using an input sample signal. The ADC conversion cycle includes an input stair stepping period followed by a residual stair stepping period for respectively generating two bytes of two byte word as a quantization of the analog input . During the input stair stepping period the logic circuit controls the analog multiplexer by the select signal. The input sample signal is used for activating an input sample and hold circuit for sampling the analog input and providing a sampled analog input signal that is fed to an analog multiplexer that provides a multiplex sampled analog input signal to a near comparator and to a far comparator . An input current source IIN provides an Icurrent to an Sinput switch that is closed upon a charge signal for feeding the Iinput current to a transmission line . ADC operation is based on the current source being switched onto the transmission line so that near and far stair step signals Land Lare generated by the transmission line at respective near and far terminals of the transmission line . The near and far stair step signals have interleaved stair stepped waveforms. When the near stair step signal is equal to or greater than the input sample and hold level that is present at the output of the analog multiplexer the near comparator toggles at a near quantization time and issues a near quantization signal. When the far stair step signal is equal to or greater than the input sample and hold level that is present at the output of the analog multiplexer the far comparator toggles at a far quantization time and issues a far quantization signal. Either one of the comparators or will toggle. When either of the near or far quantization signals from one of the comparators and is received at the end of the significant stair stepping period a residual is then sampled and held by either of the near or far sample and hold circuits and by sampling near and far residuals from two amplifiers and .

Upon a near quantization time when only the near comparator toggles first the near stair step signal exceeds the multiplex sampled analog signal at which point the near sample signal from the logic circuit activates near sample and hold circuit for sampling a near residual. The near residual is the difference between the input sampled signal and the near stair step signal and is applied to the near amplifier having gain 2and then sampled by the near sample and hold circuit . The logic circuit then issues the discharge signal to open the Sswitch while closing the Snear switch and the Sfar switch so as to discharge the transmission line . The logic circuit then selects the near residual from the near sample and hold circuit . The near residual is fed through the multiplexer using the select signal for providing the residual at the output of the multiplexer to the near and far comparators and . Upon a far quantization time when only the far comparator toggles first the far stair step signal exceeds the multiplex sampled analog signal at which point the far sample signal from the logic circuit activates far sample and hold circuit for sampling a far residual. The far residual is the difference between the input sampled signal and the far stair step signal and is applied to the far amplifier having gain 2and then sampled by the far sample and hold circuit . The logic circuit then deactivates the charge signal to open the Sswitch while also activating the discharge signal for a period L v closing the Snear switch and the Sfar switch so as to discharge the transmission line in a time L v. The logic circuit then selects the far residual from the far sample and hold circuit . The far residual is fed through the multiplexer using the select signal for providing the far residual at the output of the multiplexer to the near and far comparators and with the transmission line being discharged. The logic circuit outputs the value of the counter as the most significant byte MSB to a two byte register. The logic circuit issues the select signal to the analog multiplexer that selects either the output of the near sample and hold circuit or the far sample and hold circuit determined by whichever had first issued a quantization signal. Hence the residual is provided at the output of the analog multiplexer with the transmission line discharged.

The logic circuit is used to start the residual stair stepping period in a second digitization pass of the ADC. The charge signal is used to close Sswitch while opening discharge switches and . The near and far interleaved stair step signals increase in increments until either the near or far comparator issue a respective residual near and far digitization signals to the logic circuit . Upon either of the residual near and far digitization signals the logic circuit latches in the value of the counter and presents the latched counter value as a least significant byte to the two byte register . The two byte register then contains the digital output being a two byte digital value of the analog input . The logic circuit can then discharge the transmission line and await a new trigger for starting the next conversion. The full digital word consisting of 2N bits is then available at the digital output after two successive MSB and LSB digitization cycles. In order to prepare for the next analog to digital conversion a reset signal is issued that resets the logic circuit the two byte register and the counter . The reset signal also deactivates the charge signal for switching off switch S and activates the discharge signal for the time period L v for switching on near switch S and far switch S for discharging the transmission line in a time L v. The next analog to digital conversion begins for the next input sample signal as the conversion process is repeated.

Referring to all of the Figures and more particularly to a successive byte ADC has reduced circuit complexity and higher speed. An analog input is fed into a sample and hold circuit . A trigger is issued to the logic circuit that generates an input sample signal to activate the sample and hold circuit that feeds a sampled analog signal to a near comparator and a far comparator . Next the logic circuit issues the first charge signal which closes the switch S applying current source Ito the near end of the transmission line . An Icurrent source provides a positive Icurrent to start a most significant stair stepping period consisting of the near stair step signal Lfed to the near comparator and far step signal Lfed to the far comparator . The near and far stair step signals have interleaved stair stepped waveforms. When the near stair step signal exceeds the input sample and hold level that is present at the output of the sample and hold circuit the near comparator toggles at a near quantization time and issues a near quantization signal. When the far stair step signal exceeds the input sample and hold level that is present at the output of sample and hold circuit the far comparator toggles at a far quantization time and issues a far quantization signal. Either one of the comparators or will toggle. When either of the near or far quantization signals from one of the comparators and is received by the logic circuit the logic circuit ends the most significant stair stepping period by deactivating the first charge signal that opens switch ending the stair stepping waveforms of the most significant stair stepping period. At the same time the content of the counter is loaded into the most significant byte of the two byte register . One L v time period later the logic circuit begins the residual stair stepping period by issuing the second charge signal that closes switch S for applying negative current source I to the near end of the transmission line. The Icurrent source has a magnitude that is a factor smaller than the Icurrent source and a polarity opposite that of the Icurrent source so that the stair step signal now begins to decrease during the residual sampling period in steps a factor 2smaller than during the most significant stair stepping period. When the near stair step Lsignal drops below the sample and hold level that is present at the output of the sample and hold circuit the near comparator toggles off ending the residual stair stepping period. When the far stair step signal Ldrops below the sample and hold level that is present at the output of the sample and hold circuit the far comparator toggles off ending the residual stair stepping period. Either one of the comparators or will toggle off. When either the near or far comparators or toggles off the logic circuit ends the residual stair stepping period by deactivating the second charge signal opening switch S removing the current source Ifrom the transmission line. At the same time the content of the counter is loaded into the least significant byte of the two byte register which then becomes the conversion digital output . Next the logic circuit issues the discharge signal that closes switches S and S at the near and far ends of the transmission line. The Sand Sswitches and function to discharge the transmission line at the end of residual stair stepping period at the end of the conversion cycle. Lastly the reset signal is issued to clear the counter and start the process over again for the next analog to digital conversion.

The two Iand Icurrent sources and are independently switched onto the near terminal of the transmission line . The Icurrent source is switched in during the significant stair stepping period upon issuance of the first charge signal from the logic circuit for providing Icurrent to the transmission line . The Icurrent source is switched in during the residual stair stepping period upon issuance of the second charge signal from the logic circuit for providing a negative Icurrent to the transmission line . In so doing the near and far stair step signals increase in Vsteps during the significant stair step period for digitizing the MSB and the near and far stair step signal decrease in V 2 steps during the residual stair stepping period for digitizing the LSB. A counter is clocked by a clock having an L v time period. The counter is latched at the end of significant and residual stair stepping periods for respectively generating the MSB and LSB that are presented to a two byte register for providing the digital output .

The near and far comparators and toggle at first and second quantization times for respectively presenting first and second quantization signals to a logic circuit . The logic circuit receives the trigger and a reset for generating the first charge second charge and discharge signals using conventional combinatory logic. The logic circuit also stores digitization counter values from the counter that is incremented using the clock and reset by the reset . The logic circuit presents MSB and LSB to a two byte register for presenting a digital output that is the digitization of the sample analog signal from the sample and hold circuit .

In operation the conversion cycle includes a most significant stair stepping period and a residual stair stepping period for generating the MSB and the LSB. The current source I is switched in first during the most significant stair stepping period. The conversion digitizes the N bit MSB during the most significant stair stepping period requiring at least one clock cycle and at most N clock cycles where each cycle has a period of L v. One clock cycle later current source I is switched out by opening the Sswitch . Then the Icurrent source is switched in by closing the Sswitch during the residual stair stepping period for digitizing the N bit LSB. The Icurrent source has a magnitude of I 2 where N is the number of bits in both the MSB and LSB. The polarity of the second current source I is opposite of the Icurrent source such that the near and far stair step signal increment by Vduring the significant stair stepping period and such that the near and far stair step signal decrement by V 2 during the residual stair stepping period. When the MSB digitization is complete the additional clock cycle raises the transmission line voltage at the appropriate near or far end by one additional Vincrement. The second current source then discharges the transmission line in steps of V 2 during the residual stair stepping period requiring additionally at least one clock cycle and at most N clock cycles.

By way of example referring to in which the time has been normalized to units of L v the number of bits N in the MSB and LSB is each 3 and the sampled analog signal is 5.5V so that the far comparator that samples the far terminal of the transmission line L toggles first at time L v. One clock cycle later at cycle L v 6 the near comparator then toggles so that both the first and second comparators and indicate first and second quantizations. At the sixth cycle L v the current source I is switched out and the current source I is switched in causing the net current to change from Ito I 8 and now the near and far stair step signals are descending stair steps signals in V 8 decrements. Eventually one of the first and second comparators and will toggle back off again when the near and far stair step signals decrease below the sampled analog signal of 5.5V. By counting the L v clock cycles from the sixth cycle L v allows the residual to be digitized by loading the counter value into the logic circuit . From the residual the LSB can be presented to the two byte output register . Then the transmission line is then discharged upon the reset and through the resistors and and through the respective switches and . After discharge the conversion may begin again.

The transmission line ADC can operate at high conversion speeds. Fast gallium arsenide and indium phosphide heterojunction bipolar transistor technologies can be used with clock frequencies beyond 40.0 GHz. A high quality transmission line can be implemented in these technologies which are essentially microwave integrated circuits. Therefore the transmission line characteristic time L v could be designed for 25.0 ps. Then five bits could be decoded in 2 25 ps 800 ps using the double conversion ADC. This is a worst case maximum conversion time assuming that the analog signal is at its maximum level. On average the conversion time will be half of this time when rounded up to the next cycle or 425 ps. Allowing two more cycles for overhead for discharging the line and obtaining the next sample the conversion period is 475 ps or the average conversion rate is 2.105 Gsamples sec for a five bit sample. The successive multiplexed ADC can operate at high speeds as well. With N 5 the ADC would require an average time of 425 ps for the initial five bit conversion one additional cycle to raise the transmission line by an additional Vincrement an average time of 425 ps for the five bit residue conversion and two more overhead cycles. Therefore a total average time of 925 ps per conversion is required giving a conversion rate of 1.08 Gsamples sec for a ten bit sample. These ADC can be realizable with advanced monolithic microwave integrated circuit processes. An additional benefit is the low transistor count and accompanied low power consumption.

The present invention is directed to an analog to digital converter having a transmission line for generating a stair step signal to which a sampled analog signal is compared for determining the number of steps and hence the amount of time an hence the analog value in digital form. Preferably current sources are used to drive the transmission line to generate the stair step signals and resistors are used to discharge the transmission line for resetting the transmission line for converting another analog signal. The transmission line is relatively impervious to radiation and temperature effects. The transmission line of a desired physical length determines the circuit timing and is free of jitter for fast precise operation. The preferred forms of the invention use one or two bytes of digitization respectively using one or two stair stepping periods. As is now apparent any number of stair stepping periods and bytes of digitization can be used. Those skilled in the art can make enhancements improvements and modifications to the invention and these enhancements improvements and modifications may nonetheless fall within the spirit and scope of the following claims.

