---

title: Systems and methods for decoding an image to determine a digital identifier
abstract: A method is provided for decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. An image of a pattern on the object is received. The image includes a plurality of pixels, each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The image is divided into a plurality of tiles, each of the tiles containing a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image. A digital bit is assigned to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile. A digital identifier is determined based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08023746&OS=08023746&RS=08023746
owner: Disney Enterprises, Inc.
number: 08023746
owner_city: Burbank
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051014
---
Patterns displayed on physical objects can be used to represent digital data. For example one dimensional bar codes have been used on external product packaging to identify a type of the product by a digital identifier. However these bar codes require an area on the packaging dedicated to provide the digital identifier. In addition the bar codes are typically not aesthetically pleasing to a human observer.

Alternative embodiments use two dimensional patterns to represent digital data. For example a ShotCode implemented by OP3 AB of Sweden is a circular pattern that encodes digital data. This circular pattern can be placed on marketing media such that a person who is interested in the media can photograph the circular pattern to prompt a web browser at the person s disposal to access a particular website.

However those patterns may occupy an area dedicated to providing the digital identifier that cannot be used for other displays. The patterns can also distract the human user s attention from the physical object such as the marketing materials.

In yet another embodiment two dimensional marketing materials themselves are photographed as an image of low resolution pixels using a digital camera on a cellular telephone. The low resolution image is processed to recognize an identity of the two dimensional marketing materials. Based on this identity graphics or other information content can be transmitted to the cellular telephone to a user. However the processing of the two dimensional graphic may not be sufficiently robust to recognize its identity in commercial application.

Thus it is desirable to encode a digital identifier in a pattern on an object that makes efficient use of the surface area of the object. It is further desirable to robustly decode the pattern to determine the digital identifier.

A method is provided of decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The method comprises receiving an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The method further comprises dividing the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image. The method still further comprises assigning a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile. In addition the method comprises determining a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles.

A system is provided for decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The system comprises a digital camera to generate an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The system also comprises a decoder to i divide the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image ii assign a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile and iii determine a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles.

A computer readable medium is provided that contains instructions for configuring a microprocessor to perform a method for decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The method comprises receiving an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The method further comprises dividing the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image. The method still further comprises assigning a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile. In addition the method comprises determining a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles.

A method is provided of decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The method comprises receiving an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The method further comprises transmitting the image to a remote server that i divides the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image ii assigns a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile and iii determines a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles. The method still further comprises receiving the digital identifier from the remote server.

A system is provided for decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The system comprises a digital camera to generate an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The system further comprises a transmitter to transmit the image to a remote server that i divides the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image ii assigns a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile and iii determines a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles. The system further comprises a receiver to receive the digital identifier from the remote server.

A computer readable medium is provided that contains instructions for configuring a microprocessor to perform a method for decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The method comprises receiving an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The method further comprises transmitting the image to a remote server that i divides the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image ii assigns a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile and iii determines a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles. The method still further comprises receiving the digital identifier from the remote server.

A method is provided of decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The method comprises receiving from a portable imaging apparatus an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The method further comprises dividing the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image. The method still further comprises assigning a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile. The method also comprises determining a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles.

A system is provided for decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The system comprises a receiver to receive from a portable imaging apparatus an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The system further comprises a decoder to i divide the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image ii assign a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile and iii determine a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles.

A computer readable medium is provided that contains instructions for configuring a microprocessor to perform a method for decoding an image of a pattern on an object to determine a digital identifier. The method comprises receiving from a portable imaging apparatus an image of a pattern on the object the image comprising a plurality of pixels each of the pixels having an optical attribute with a corresponding value. The method further comprises dividing the image into a plurality of tiles each of the tiles comprising a contiguous plurality of the pixels of the image. The method still further comprises assigning a digital bit to each of the tiles based on the values of the optical attribute of the pixels in the tile. The method also comprises determining a digital identifier based on the digital bits assigned to the tiles.

Reference will now be made in detail to embodiments of the present disclosure examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings. Wherever possible the same reference numbers will be used throughout the drawings to refer to the same or like parts.

A pattern designed to be displayed on an object may contain an encoded digital identifier associated with relevant information content. The object may comprise for example a poster such as a one sheet a billboard a placard a painting a drawing a television screen on which the pattern is displayed a computer monitor on which the pattern is displayed a backdrop on which the pattern is projected apparel such as t shirts hats shoes or pockets a magazine a newspaper a retail hang tag a digital video disc DVD case a sticker a ticket a compact disc CD case a baseball card or a soda can. The pattern displayed on the object may be two dimensional even if the underlying surface of the object is not flat. shows an exemplary embodiment of a pattern displayed on an object .

A content delivery system may be provided to deliver information content associated with pattern on object . The information content associated with the digital identifier may comprise visual auditory or sensory content or a descriptor of a location to make such content accessible. For example the information content may include an image text streaming or non streaming video streaming or non streaming audio a Universal Resource Locator URL a Wireless Application Protocol WAP page a Hyper Text Markup Language HTML page an Extensible Markup Language XML document an executable program a filename an Internet Protocol IP address a telephone call a pointer or other content.

In an illustrative example object is a storybook having patterns that are symbol codes at locations where one might normally expect to find page numbers. As a human user looks at a page of the storybook he can use the content delivery system to recognize the symbol code on that page to retrieve multimedia content relating to that page. For example the content delivery system may play an MPEG 3 audio file that narrates words printed on the page. In another example the content delivery system plays a video or animation corresponding to the page.

Portable imaging apparatus comprises a digital camera which can be any electronic device capable of generating the super image of pattern on object . For example the digital camera may comprise either a charge coupled device CCD sensor or a complementary metal oxide semiconductor CMOS sensor and a set of optical lenses to convey a light pattern onto the sensor and thereby generate the super image of pattern . In one exemplary embodiment the digital camera is built into a cell phone.

In operation the user points the digital camera of portable imaging apparatus in a general direction of pattern on object and generates the super image after capturing an area of object that is covered by pattern . The area of object covered by pattern may have a surface that is adapted to be imaged by the digital camera of portable imaging apparatus to generate a super image that is a sufficiently accurate representation of pattern . For example the surface that displays pattern may be formed textured coated covered or contoured to enhance the super image generated by the digital camera. The super image can thus have a desirably high contrast or a desirably high fidelity of color hue saturation or value. In one exemplary embodiment the surface has a matte or otherwise glare reducing finish even if neighboring surfaces of physical object are glossy such as due to an ultraviolet coating designed to inhibit fading or otherwise not optimized to be imaged by the digital camera. The glare reducing finish can reduce stray reflections of light to the digital camera and thereby result in a higher accuracy of the super image.

Content delivery system may also comprise a remote server to operate in conjunction with portable imaging apparatus to deliver the information content. Remote server comprises one or more servers and which may be coupled by connections across one or more communications networks such as a local area network LAN an intranet or the internet. For example remote server may include one or more of messaging server to handle communications with portable imaging apparatus and deliver the information content content server to store and maintain the information content and rules server to determine which information content to deliver. In one embodiment messaging server content server and rules server may reside at different physical locations and be communicatively coupled via connections over the internet. For example messaging server may be physically resident at a location managed by a cellular telephone company. Meanwhile content server and rules server may physically reside at a movie production company such that content server hosts a website representing a soon to be released movie. Portable imaging apparatus may be coupled to remote server via one or more communications connections and which may include wired electrical links wireless links optical links or other modes of communicative coupling.

In one exemplary version remote server may be coupled to a wireless carrier network via connection such as an electrical land line e.g. a T1 or T3 line an optical land line or a wireless connection. Wireless carrier network may be operated by a wireless service provider that provides cellular telephony or other digital communications services to users of electronic devices such as portable imaging apparatus . For example the wireless service provider may be a cellular telephone service provider such as Sprint Nextel Corporation a personal communications services PCS provider or a provider of other wireless services. Wireless carrier network may include a wireless server and a network of base stations. Portable imaging apparatus may communicate via the base stations of wireless carrier network with the wireless server of wireless carrier network using a client server software architecture over wireless connection . Thus portable imaging apparatus is able to couple to remote server via wireless carrier network .

In another exemplary version of content delivery system shown in remote server may be coupled to internet via a connection and assigned an IP address. Portable imaging apparatus may couple to wireless carrier network via wireless connection . An internet gateway is further provided to couple wireless carrier network to internet via connections and . Portable imaging apparatus couples to remote server via wireless carrier network and internet . For example a Common Gateway Interface CGI script that resides at remote server may be called by portable imaging apparatus to receive the super image via a Hyper Text Transfer Protocol HTTP protocol and the CGI script may return the information content to portable imaging apparatus via the HTTP protocol.

In one embodiment portable imaging apparatus couples to remote server via at least one proxy that can couple to remote server such as in lieu of portable imaging apparatus in the embodiments described above. For example the proxy may comprise a personal computer or docking station. In one embodiment provided for illustrative purposes portable imaging apparatus is a stand alone digital camera and the proxy is a personal computer having a docking cradle to receive the digital camera and thereby couple to the digital camera to download the super image from the digital camera.

Content delivery system may comprise an image processor to process the super image of pattern to isolate a decodable subsection of the super image referred to herein as a sub image. Content delivery system may further comprise a decoder to decode the sub image to determine a digital identifier. Content delivery system may also include a content supplier to supply information content in relation to the digital identifier. The image processor decoder and content supplier may each be implemented in either portable imaging apparatus or remote server .

Delivering the information content may comprise presenting the information content to a user of content delivery system . For example the information content may be transmitted to portable imaging apparatus to be presented at portable imaging apparatus such as on a visual display or on audio speakers. In another example the information content is transmitted to a third party apparatus via a connection . For example third party apparatus can comprise a television a computer an animatronic character a door having a locking mechanism a vending machine or a digital video recorder DVR . In these examples the information content may be adapted to present a slideshow or video on the television or computer activate the animatronic character to perform an action de activate the locking mechanism on the door trigger the vending machine to deliver a product or store a preselected program on the DVR respectively.

One or more of portable imaging apparatus and servers and may comprise one or more computer readable media and to store computer executable software and and or data such as information content . The computer readable media and may comprise one or more of a magnetic hard drive an optically readable medium such as a compact disc CD or digital video disc DVD and solid state memory such as Flash memory. One or more of portable imaging apparatus and servers and may also comprise one or more microprocessors and to execute instructions of software and stored on one or more of computer readable media and . The instructions are executed to configure the microprocessors and such as to perform the functions of image processor decoder and content supplier . Microprocessor in portable imaging apparatus may comprise for example a DragonBall microprocessor commercially available from Motorola Inc. of Schaumberg Ill. U.S.A. Microprocessors and in one or more of servers and may comprise for example a Xeon processor commercially available from Intel Corporation of Santa Clara Calif. U.S.A.

One or more of image processor decoder and content supplier may be implemented as one or more sets of customized software and stored in one or more of computer readable media and of portable imaging apparatus or remote server . For example software may be stored in computer readable medium of remote server . Software may have access to one or more application programming interfaces APIs that provide an interface to the functionality of digital camera on portable imaging apparatus . Software and may be written in any suitable programming language and or development environment such as for example Java 2 Micro Edition Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless Symbian or Macromedia Flash Light.

Alternatively or in addition one or more of image processor decoder and content supplier may be implemented as hardware in portable imaging apparatus or remote server . The hardware may comprise electronic circuitry that includes passive and or active electronic components. For example the hardware may be implemented in at least one Application Specific Integrated Circuit ASIC .

In the exemplary embodiment of for example portable imaging apparatus comprises computer readable medium to store software and microprocessor to execute instructions of software . Software on portable imaging apparatus may comprise image editing software which can be used to crop or otherwise edit the super image captured by digital camera . For example the super image may be edited according to instructions that have previously been received by the user of portable imaging apparatus or computer readable instructions that have previously been received by portable imaging apparatus . Content server comprises computer readable medium to store the information content to be delivered shown as information content and a microprocessor . Rules server comprises computer readable medium to store software and microprocessor to execute instructions of software .

In the exemplary embodiment of image processor may be implemented in software residing on computer readable medium and executable by microprocessor of portable imaging apparatus . Decoder may be implemented in software residing on computer readable medium and executable by microprocessor of rules server . Content supplier may be implemented in hardware of messaging server and content server . However for purposes of the present invention messaging server content server and rules server may be a single server.

Portable imaging apparatus may further comprise a communications system to transmit data between portable imaging apparatus and remote server via connections and . Communications system comprises a transmitter to transmit data from portable imaging device to remote server and may also comprise a receiver to receive data from remote server at portable imaging device . For example if decoder is implemented in remote server to determine the digital identifier remotely transmitter of communications system may transmit the sub image either as part of the super image or on its own from portable imaging apparatus to remote server . If image processor is also implemented in remote server then transmitter may transmit the super image to remote server and image processor can isolate the sub image from the super image. In one embodiment communications system is a wireless communications system adapted to communicate wirelessly with remote server transmitter is a wireless transmitter and receiver is a wireless receiver.

Transmitting the super image to remote server may refer to transmitting either the full area of the super image one or more cropped sections of the super image or the super image after other preselected data have been extracted. For example the super image may be cropped by the image editing software of portable imaging apparatus prior to transmission. Also color information may be removed from the super image before transmission. By cropping or otherwise removing data from the super image content delivery system may be able to more efficiently use transmission bandwidth and data storage resources.

Pattern displayed on physical object may be designed such that the super image captured of pattern comprises a first image referred to herein as a super image containing therein a second image referred to herein as a sub image. shows an exemplary embodiment of a super image containing a sub image . Super image may have an outer border that frames a sub frame which in turn frames sub image . Sub image can be decoded to determine the digital identifier. A main border may also be provided between outer border and sub frame .

Each of outer border and sub frame comprises a full or partial design that is optically detectable and sufficiently extensive to define an inner area and an outer area the inner area being framed by the design. Outer border and sub frame are each optically detectable by having an optical attribute that contrasts with an adjacent area within super image . For example outer border may comprise a brightness of at least a preselected contrast with an inwardly or outwardly adjacent area such as a substantially dark outer border adjacent to a substantially light area . Sub frame may comprise a brightness of at least a preselected contrast with main border such as substantially dark when main border is substantially light.

In one embodiment main border may comprise a tag containing text or graphics. For example tag may comprise one or more of instructions e mail a wireless text address a telephone number an MMS address and a carrier short code to which textual or graphical messages can be sent. Main border is designed to avoid interference with the detection of outer border and sub frame . For example the pixels that form main border may have an optical attribute with values that fall within a preselected range.

Image processor may process super image at a first resolution to isolate sub image in a form that can be robustly decoded. Initially image processor may detect outer border at the first resolution. Outer border may then be used to locate registration points of super image . For example based on the location of outer border three or more predetermined non collinear registration points of super image may be detected. Registration points may be points of outer border itself points of main border points of sub frame or points of sub image that have an expected location such as an expected location in relation to points of outer border . The actual locations of registration points are compared to expected locations of registration points in super image to locate sub frame and to calculate displacement values of registration points .

Based on the displacement values of registration points image processor may perform keystone correction of sub image . Keystone correction compensates for shape distortion artifacts or other effects that may result from an undesirable angle between a photographic axis that extends from digital camera to pattern on object and a normal axis that is normal to a surface of object at which pattern is displayed. For example if opposite edges in sub image are expected to be parallel and the edges are not actually parallel in sub image sub image can be adjusted to parallelize the edges and thereby at least partially correct the rest of sub image .

Super image may also include an orientation icon that image processor can use to determine an angular orientation of sub image during image processing. For example icon may be located at sub frame at main border or at outer border . Image processor compensates for an undesirable angular orientation of sub image such as by computationally rotating sub image . In one embodiment sub image is re oriented according to the position of icon relative to the expected locations of registration points of super image .

After image processing decoder may receive sub image and decode sub image at a second resolution to determine the digital identifier. The second resolution may be lower than the first resolution whereby the higher first resolution can provide accurate isolation of sub image while the lower second resolution can provide increased robustness in decoding sub image .

The first resolution refers to the number of pixels in super image . For example the first resolution may be from about 80 80 pixels i.e. about 6 400 pixels to about 4 000 4 000 pixels i.e. about 16 megapixels with any aspect ratio as long as there are from about 80 to about 4 000 pixels in a first dimension and from about 80 to about 4 000 pixels in a second dimension that is substantially orthogonal to the first dimension. The second resolution refers to the number of tiles in sub image . The second resolution may be lower than the first resolution meaning that the number of tiles in sub image is less than the number of pixels in super image . For example the second resolution may be from about 3 3 tiles i.e. about 9 tiles to about 200 200 tiles i.e. about 40 000 tiles . In one exemplary embodiment provided for the purposes of illustration the first resolution is about 120 80 pixels and the second resolution is about 3 4 tiles such that each tile has a resolution of about 40 20 pixels and there are about 12 tiles. In another exemplary embodiment the first resolution is about 640 480 pixels and the second resolution is about 3 4 tiles.

One or more of tiles may be contiguous and non overlapping having borders that abut the borders of one or more of the other tiles as shown in the exemplary embodiment of . One or more of tiles may also separated from other tiles such that one or more of pixels of sub image are not contained in one of tiles as shown in the exemplary embodiment of . Furthermore one or more of tiles may be contiguous and have borders that overlap the borders of one or more of the other tiles such as shown in the exemplary embodiment of

Referring to decoder evaluates one or more of the optical attributes of pixels in each of tiles to assign one or more digital bits to the evaluated tile . For example each of tiles may correspond to one or more binary bits individually having values of either 0 or 1 or a digital bit that is based on another numeral system such as a decimal or hexidecimal numeral system. In one exemplary embodiment the optical attribute of pixels comprises brightness which may be evaluated by measuring the red intensity green intensity and blue intensity of each of pixels and averaging these three intensities.

Decoder may evaluate the optical attribute of each of pixels along a spectrum of possible values. For example decoder can determine the distribution of the values associated with pixels for each of the tiles . is an example of a plot of the state of a digital bit as a function of values of an optical attribute along a spectrum where the optical attribute is brightness and the digital bit is a binary bit. Spectrum comprises high and low boundaries such as the high and low boundaries and respectively. Furthermore one or more ranges of the values of the optical attribute are defined along spectrum .

In the exemplary embodiment shown in two ranges and correspond to brightness values. First range of brightness values is associated with a first state referred to as 1 of the binary bit. However second range of brightness values is associated with a second state referred to as 0 of the binary bit. In another embodiment the first and second states of the binary bit could be 0 and 1 respectively.

At least two of ranges and may be separated by one or more guard bands such as the guard band shown in to improve the robustness of the decoding process i.e. to increase the reliability of decoding the intended digital identifier. In for example guard band is shown separating first and second ranges and . Alternatively at least two of ranges and need not be separated by a guard band such that those ranges and are adjacent along spectrum .

Decoder may normalize sub image to improve the robustness with which sub image is decoded. For example sub image may be sampled at some or all of pixels to determine a range of actual values of the optical attribute of those pixels. Based on the sampling either of ranges and of spectrum or the values of pixels of sub image itself can be adjusted to provide a better distribution of the values across ranges and for different pixels . When the optical attribute is brightness normalization can compensate for example for abnormal lightening or darkening of sub image such as when pattern is positioned in direct sunlight or in shadow.

In another exemplary embodiment sub image comprises pixels that can be assigned brightness values in the spectrum of 0 to 255 where 255 is high boundary and 0 is low boundary . However upon sampling all pixels of sub image actually have brightness values in a spectrum of 0 to 200 . The high and low boundaries and as well as ranges and can be adjusted accordingly to improve the robustness with which sub image is decoded to determine the digital identifier. Alternatively the values of pixels themselves can be scaled up to a spectrum of 0 to 255 .

Pixels in each of tiles are evaluated to determine their placement in one of ranges and between high and low boundaries and . Based on the distribution among ranges and of the values of the optical attribute across pixels of each of tiles a digital bit can be assigned to tile . In addition or alternatively some of pixels may be discounted from the evaluation process through a process referred to as pixel decimation. 

In one embodiment decoder may determine a key sub range of ranges and based on the distribution of the values of the optical attribute among ranges and . For example decoder may calculate the number of pixels in each of ranges and to determine which of ranges and has the highest number of pixels . The range having the highest number of pixels is the key sub range which determines the digital bit assigned to tile . Decoder may associate the binary bit state corresponding with the key sub range whether the key range is first range or second range to individual tile . Furthermore a requirement may be imposed that the key sub range have a number of the values of the optical attribute corresponding to pixels that exceeds the next highest number of the values corresponding to pixels in any other of ranges and by a preselected number or a preselected percentage referred to as a goodness requirement. In another embodiment the range having a median of the values of the optical attribute at pixels of tile is the key range.

Referring to decoder measures the brightness at each of pixels that is in the tile T. For example pixels may have brightness values in a spectrum of from about 0 to about 255 . The individual pixels are evaluated to be either light or dark. For example for brightness values that can range from 0 to 255 pixels having a brightness value in the range from 140 to 255 may be defined as light whereas pixels having a brightness value in the range from 0 to 140 may be defined as dark. If the light pixels outnumber the dark pixels within the tile T a bit of 0 is associated with the tile T. On the other hand if the dark pixels outnumber the light pixels a bit of 1 is associated with the tile T. Since the 12 tiles Tare individually associated with binary bits sub image may be decoded to generate one of 2 or 4096 unique digital identifiers.

Decoder uses the digital bits assigned to tiles to determine a digital identifier. For example the digital bits may be arranged in sequence to compose the digital identifier as an integer. shows an exemplary embodiment of a digital identifier for the image of and based on the binary bits assigned to tiles as shown in . Digital identifier of corresponds to the binary bits of when read left to right and top to bottom thus generating digital identifier having a value of 000101111000 . Pattern may be designed such that sub image can generate one of at least Munique digital identifiers when decoded where M is a base of a digital bit assigned to each of the tiles T such as base 2 for a binary numeral system base 10 for a decimal numeral system etc.

Decoder may use one or more of the digital bits as a parity bit for error correction of the remaining digital bits. For example if the digital bits are binary bits the parity bit may be set to 0 if there are an even number of 1 bits and the parity bit may be set to 1 if there are an odd number of 1 bits or vice versa. In an exemplary embodiment if sub image is divided into 16 tiles the first through fifteenth tiles may each represent a single binary bit that contributes to digital identifier while the sixteenth bit corresponding to the sixteenth tile may be the parity bit.

Decoder may look up digital identifier to locate information content associated with digital identifier . For example decoder may associate digital identifier with information content by identifying a location that makes information content accessible. The location may comprise for example a memory address filename IP address uniform resource locator URL or telephone number.

A mapping between one or more digital identifiers and locations of sets of information content associated with those digital identifiers is provided. For example the digital identifiers may be mapped to the sets of information content in either a one to one relationship or a many to one relationship. is a table showing an exemplary embodiment of a mapping the table having a column for digital identifiers and another column for the filenames of information content . In addition to identifying information content decoder may log digital identifier to maintain a record of decoding instances such as for marketing purposes.

Decoder may further associate digital identifier with a communication protocol used to deliver information content . The communication protocol may comprise for example e mail multimedia messaging service MMS enhanced messaging service EMS short messaging service SMS WAP push application push such as in a Java 2 Platform Micro Edition push registry a standard form of telephony or standard internet protocols such as Transmission Control Protocol TCP IP User Datagram Protocol UDP HTTP and File Transfer Protocol FTP . Remote server may access the mapping between digital identifiers and the sets of information content and or communication protocols associated with those digital identifiers . Remote server looks up digital identifier in the mapping to find information content associated with digital identifier .

If digital identifier is not matched to any set of information content content delivery system can present a failure message to the user that sub image could not be recognized or that no relevant information was found. Alternatively sub image can be transferred to a technician who may edit and return sub image or visually extract digital identifier from sub image . In yet another version a preselected set of information content other than the failure message is delivered when digital identifier cannot be matched.

Image processor and or decoder may repeatedly process and or decode respectively super image or sub image to improve the determination of digital identifier . In one illustrative example the parity bit indicates an error in the digital identifier that is determined as a result of the decoding process. As a result the image processing or decoding process may be successively altered to attempt to eliminate the error. For example if object that displays pattern is in an undesirably dark or undesirably bright space the normalization process described above as part of the decoding process may be re iterated for different values of ranges and or different values of high and low boundaries and . One or more of the decoding steps may also be re iterated for different shapes or sizes of tiles .

Content supplier uses the location of information content from decoder to retrieve and deliver information content . When content supplier is implemented in remote server content supplier may deliver information content by transmitting information content to portable imaging apparatus or third party apparatus . Content supplier may also detect one or more characteristics such as a device type or capability of portable imaging apparatus or third party apparatus to optimize transmission of information content .

When content supplier is implemented in remote server content supplier may send information content comprising an activation message also referred to as a wake up message to portable imaging apparatus . The activation message may comprise for example one or more of a message to a push registry on a Java 2 Platform Micro Edition J2ME device or Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW device of portable imaging apparatus a TCP IP message an HTTP request a text message and a UDP packet. Receipt of the activation message may activate portable imaging apparatus to deliver additional preselected information content to the user. For example portable imaging apparatus may retrieve information content that is locally stored or stored on remote server . In one exemplary embodiment portable imaging apparatus comprises a telephonic device such as a cell phone and receipt of the activation messages initiates a telephone call from portable imaging apparatus to a live operator or an automated phone tree.

A plurality of different objects may be designed to encode the same digital identifier . This flexibility allows a preselected degree of artistic autonomy in the design of pattern displayed on object . For example a promotion for a new movie could include several different posters displaying different patterns all of the posters encoding the same digital identifier that can for example cause a PDA to load an internet website dedicated to providing multimedia content about the movie.

By adjusting characteristics of tiles or selecting the optical attribute used to determine digital identifier decoder can be made desirably robust and the degree and nature of artistic flexibility can be selected for a given application. For example characteristics of the tiles such as the number of pixels included in each of tiles or the number shapes or locations of tiles in sub image can be adjusted. Thus a unique digital identifier can be associated with object while desirably allowing for creative latitude in the design of pattern on object .

Performing image processing at the higher first resolution to process super image and isolate sub image and then performing decoding of sub image at the lower second resolution enhances the robustness of the process by which digital identifier is determined while also permitting substantial artistic flexibility in the design of pattern on object .

Although embodiments consistent with the present invention have been described in detail with regard to embodiments thereof other embodiments are possible. For example content delivery system may comprise other electronic structures equivalent in function to the illustrative structures herein. It is intended that the specification and examples be considered as exemplary only with a true scope and spirit of the invention being indicated by the following claims.

