---

title: Asynchronous signaling and data delivery in wireless communication system
abstract: A system and method for signaling and delivering group communication data, such as push-to-talk (PTT) setup data, to a dormant wireless telecommunication device across a control channel on a wireless communication network. Each wireless telecommunication device is able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated target group of other wireless telecommunication devices, and the wireless telecommunication device has a dormant state in which the wireless telecommunication devices bridges a control channel with a communication server and an active state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges a dedicated communication channel with the communication server. The wireless telecommunication device receives group communication setup data though a control channel for incoming group communications, and such delivery occurring without fully bridging a dedicated communication channel to that wireless telecommunication device.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07796995&OS=07796995&RS=07796995
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 07796995
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050617
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 581 970 filed on Jun. 21 2004 and U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 686 132 filed on May 31 2005. The contents of these documents are incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention generally relates to wireless telecommunications. More specifically the present invention relates to a system and method for asynchronously signaling and delivering data to a dormant wireless telecommunication device in a synchronous paging cycle on a wireless telecommunication system.

In a wireless network the users of wireless communication devices communicate over an over the air interface to a central computer. This may be done directly as in the case of a wireless LAN in an office environment or it may be done through cellular infrastructure equipment as in the case of a wireless telephone application. One type of personal communication system is a push to talk PTT system between mobile wireless communication devices. A PTT communication connection is typically initiated by a single button push on the wireless device that activates a half duplex link between the speaker and each member device of the group and once the button is released the device can receive incoming PTT transmissions once the button is released. In some arrangements the PTT speaker will have the floor where no other group member can speak while the speaker is speaking. Once the speaker releases the PTT button any other individual member of the group can engage their PTT button and they will have the floor.

A specific PTT group of recipient wireless devices for the communicating wireless device is commonly set up by the carrier and the wireless devices themselves do not allow the modification of the group i.e. to include or drop individuals from the group or to purposely direct a communication to be received by any fewer members than the entire group. A PTT group can provide a dispatch voice service that operates over standard commercial wireless infrastructure with communication between endpoints occurs within virtual groups wherein the voice of one talker is broadcast to one or more listeners. A single instance of this type of communication is commonly referred to as a dispatch call or simply a call. A call is an instantiation of a group which defines the characteristics of a call. A group in essence is defined by a member list and associated information such as group name or group ID. In the absence of a wireless multicast channel each group is formed by the combination of separate point to point connections between each endpoint and group communication servers assigned to manage the call.

The typical PTT call involves two users who are rarely located within the same telecommunication sector such that communication and replication of the communication is propagated more easily over the existing telecommunication infrastructure. However a small but very important fraction of push to talk calls involve a larger number of call participants many of whom may also be located within the same sector public safety disaster scenarios are one example.

One problem arises in that a wireless telecommunication device may have to wait for a dedicated communication channel for the initial setup of a group communication and such latency is readily apparent to the speaker and user. For wireless devices that are in a dormant state i.e. no active broadcast channels many systems periodically page the wireless device to make sure the system knows of the device s location but such paging will be the next opportunity to push data out to the wireless devices and setup the PTT communication. It is thus to such a system and method that can reduce the latency for the setup of a PTT or direct group communication by setting up the group communication without waiting for the next page or setting up a dedicated channel that the present invention is primarily directed.

The present invention in one aspect is a system and method for signaling and delivering group communication data such as push to talk PTT setup data to a dormant wireless telecommunication device across a control channel from a communication server on a wireless communication network. The wireless telecommunication devices of the group are each able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated target set of other wireless telecommunication devices. These wireless telecommunication devices each have a dormant state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges a continuous control channel with a communication server and an active state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges a dedicated communication channel with the communication server when needed. To speed group communication setup the wireless telecommunication device receives group communication setup data though a control channel for incoming group communications with such delivery occurring outside the synchronous pages or dedicated traffic channel from the communication server.

In one embodiment there is provided a system for signaling and delivering data to a wireless telecommunication device on a wireless communication network including a plurality of wireless telecommunication devices wherein group communication capable wireless telecommunication devices are able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated set of the plurality of wireless telecommunication devices. A group communication wireless telecommunication device further receives group communication setup data for incoming group communications to that wireless telecommunication device. The system also has a communication server that maintains communication with each of the plurality of wireless telecommunication devices through the at least one control channel and the communication server periodically pages each dormant wireless telecommunication device of the plurality of wireless telecommunication devices to selectively bridge a dedicated communication channel wherein upon desiring to open a dedicated broadcast channel to the wireless telecommunication device for a direct group communication to that wireless telecommunication device the communication server sending at least group communication setup data across the control channel to a dormant wireless communication device prior to bridging a dedicated communication channel to that wireless telecommunication device.

In one embodiment there is provided a communication server that maintains communication with a plurality of the wireless telecommunication devices wherein a set of the wireless telecommunication device are able to direct a single group communication stream to other members of the set of the plurality of wireless telecommunication devices and each of the set of wireless telecommunication devices having a dormant state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges at least one continuous control channel with a communication server and an active state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges one or more dedicated communication channels with the communication server. The communication server periodically pages each dormant wireless telecommunication device of the plurality of wireless telecommunication devices and further sends group communication setup data for incoming group communications to each member of the set of wireless telecommunication devices when necessary. Upon desiring to open a dedicated broadcast channel to a dormant wireless telecommunication device for a direct group communication to that wireless telecommunication device the communication server sends at least group communication setup data across the control channel to the dormant wireless communication device prior to bridging a dedicated communication channel to that wireless telecommunication device.

In one embodiment there is provided a method for signaling and delivering data across a wireless telecommunication network from the communication server to the members of the set of wireless telecommunication devices including the steps of bridging a control channel between the communication server and one or more dormant wireless telecommunication devices periodically paging each of the dormant wireless telecommunication devices from the group communication server and upon desiring to open a dedicated broadcast channel to the dormant wireless telecommunication device for a direct group communication to that wireless telecommunication device the communication server sending at least group communication setup data across the control channel to a dormant wireless communication device prior to bridging a dedicated communication channel to that wireless telecommunication device. The bridged control channel can be a synchronous or asynchronous channel.

The system and method of the present invention can therefore start to setup the group communication without waiting for either a dedicated communication channel or the a periodic page to the dormant wireless device. The system and method can therefore minimize the initial latency for the group communication from the speaker to the user. Further as long as the minimal data traffic is sent via the control channel the use of the system and method will minimally affect the performance of the wireless telecommunication network.

Objects advantages and features of the present invention will become apparent after review of the hereinafter set forth Brief Description of the Drawings Detailed Description of the Invention and the claims.

With reference to the figures in which like numerals represent like elements throughout illustrates one embodiment of a wireless telecommunication system between a group of wireless telecommunication devices target set on a wireless network . Here the one or more wireless telecommunication devices are in a PTT group such as the wireless telephone smart pager and personal digital assistant PDA with other wireless telecommunication devices across a wireless network . In the system each wireless telecommunication device is capable of selectively directly communicating across the wireless communication network with a target set of one or more other wireless telecommunication devices with the plurality. For example the target set for cellular telephone can all devices in the target set or a subset thereof such as pager and PDA .

In particular the system can deliver media such as voice data multimedia or other applicants to very large push to talk or other similar services calls defined in ad hoc fashion. These PTT calls can involve a very large number of call participants several hundred who can be scattered across an operator s wireless network or who may all be located in a small number of sectors on the same network resources.

In one embodiment a group communication server selectively receives requests to bridge direct communications between the communicating wireless telecommunication devices and the one or more other wireless telecommunication devices in the target set designated for the communicating wireless telecommunication device. The communication server then selectively bridges the requested direct communication such as a PTT voice communication. The identity of the target set is selectively available to the group communication server such as being resident on the group communication server or in a connected database or possibly on another computer device such as packet flow control server as is common in network infrastructure .

The system allows the signaling and delivery of group communication data to a wireless telecommunication device on a wireless communication network . In this embodiment each wireless telecommunication device of the set is able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated group of the set . As further described herein each wireless telecommunication device has a dormant state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges at least one continuous control channel with a communication server and an active state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges one or more dedicated communication channels with a communication server such as traffic channel TCH . The wireless telecommunication device further receives group communication setup data for incoming group communications to the wireless telecommunication device as shown in . The communication server maintains communication with each of the set of wireless telecommunication devices through the at least one control channel and periodically pages each dormant wireless telecommunication device of the set to learn of the network location of that the wireless telecommunication device and selectively bridge a dedicated communication channel if necessary. Upon desiring to open a dedicated broadcast channel to the wireless telecommunication device for a direct group communication to that wireless telecommunication device the communication server sends at least group communication setup data across the control channel to a dormant wireless communication device prior to bridging a dedicated communication channel to that wireless telecommunication device to bridge the group communication.

The communication server should only send group communication setup data across the control channel only as sending other data to include voice data is very difficult to hand off to the dedicated communication channel once bridged. Thus the communications server sends group communication setup data to one or more of the set of wireless telecommunication devices across the control channel preferably prior to opening of the dedicated communication channel. While the communication server can selectively send group communication setup data to one or more of the set of wireless telecommunication devices across the control channel the communication server can also send group communication setup data to other wireless telecommunication devices of the set through the next periodic page or at full bridging of the dedicated communication channel. The control channel can be an asynchronous control channel i.e. periodically maintained between a base station and wireless device or can be a synchronous control channel i.e. continuously maintained.

There are typically one or more intermittent communication devices that bridge communication streams between the communication server and the group of wireless telecommunication devices set as is shown in and the communication server can further determine which member wireless telecommunication devices are able to determine the best mode of communication with the wireless devices . The communication server will then direct the one or more intermittent communication devices to send data packets to those wireless telecommunication devices of the set .

The group communication server s are connected to a wireless service providers packet data service node PDSN such as PSDN shown here resident on a carrier network . Each PSDN can interface with a base station controller BSC of a base station through a packet control function PCF . The PCF is typically located in the base station . The carrier network controls messages generally in the form of data packets sent to a messaging service controller MSC . The carrier network communicates with the MSC by a network the Internet and or POTS plain ordinary telephone system . Typically the network or Internet connection between the carrier network and the MSC transfers data and the POTS transfers voice information. The MSC can be connected to one or more base stations . In a similar manner to the carrier network the MSC is typically connected to the branch to source BTS by both the network and or Internet for data transfer and POTS for voice information. The BTS ultimately broadcasts and receives messages wirelessly to and from the wireless devices such as cellular telephones by short messaging service SMS or other over the air methods known in the art.

In wireless devices that have designated a set of group members the wireless device can directly connect with the other member of the set and engage in voice and data communication. However all such direct communications will occur through or at the control of the group communication server . All data packets of the devices do not necessarily have to travel through the group communication server itself but the server must be able to ultimately control the communication because it will typically be the only server side LAN component that is aware of and or can retrieve the identity of the members of the set or direct the identity of the members of the set to another computer device.

In a PTT embodiment the wireless system allows a dispatch voice service that operates over standard commercial wireless infrastructure CDMA FDMA GSM etc. . In a dispatch model communication between endpoints wireless devices occurs within virtual groups wherein the voice of one talker is broadcast to one or more listeners . A single instance of this type of communication is commonly referred to as a dispatch call. A call is an instantiation of a group which defines the characteristics of a call. A group in essence is defined by a member list and associated information such as group name or group ID. In the absence of a wireless multicast channel each group is formed by the combination of separate point to point connections between each endpoint and group communication server s assigned to manage the call.

Each region of the PTT infrastructure is deployed over a specific portion of the carrier packet data network. The group communication server s within the region may be routing traffic between one or more PDSNs in the carrier network . A direct call is a call in which there are only two members a call originator and a call target that still use the PTT at system. For this call type the most challenging scenario for meeting performance requirements is the case when the direct call is placed with both the originator and target handset have dormant packet data connections i.e. the wireless devices do not have an open dedicated channel. Conversely the originator s and or the target s packet data connection can be in the active state and dedicated traffic channels are available at the time the direct call is placed. The call to dormant scenario is the one that provides the greatest challenge in meeting performance requirements and preventing significant latency in call set up as it more fully described herein.

As shown here the wireless device can be a cellular telephone with a graphics display but can also be any wireless device with a computer platform as known in the art such as a personal digital assistant PDA a pager with a graphics display or even a separate computer platform that has a wireless communication portal and may otherwise have a wired connection to a network or the Internet. Further the memory can be comprised of read only or random access memory RAM and ROM EPROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. The computer platform can also include a local database for storage of software applications not actively used in memory . The local database is typically comprised of one or more flash memory cells but can be any secondary or tertiary storage device as known in the art such as magnetic media EPROM EEPROM optical media tape or soft or hard disk. The wireless telephone typically will open a full duplex channel for telecommunication and in some instances will communicate via a half duplex channel only being able to talk or receive a voice stream.

In this embodiment of the wireless device the computer platform also includes a communication interface that includes a direct communication interface that can open the direct communication channel from the wireless device. The direct communication interface can also be part of the standard communication interface for the wireless device which ordinarily carries the voice and data transmitted to and from the wireless device. The direct communication interface typically is comprised of hardware as is known in the art.

The application layer signaling shown in for establishing a direct call illustrates the application layer messaging that is exchanged to establish a direct PTT call. The diagram of does not identify any physical layer signaling mechanisms as this system can be implemented on a variety of different physical systems.

The start of traffic channel setup is measured when the AT begins local access procedures to transmit a probe on the access channel. These procedures include waiting for the start of the access channel cycle performing the persistence test probability that a dedicated channel will be opened and transmitting. The end of the traffic channel setup procedure is measured when the AT receives an acknowledgement RTCAck message.

Otherwise if there is no open control channel to the target wireless device at decision then a dedicated access channel is bridged to the target wireless device as shown at step and the group communication setup data is send to the target wireless device over the open dedicated channel. It should be noted that alternatively to bridging a dedicated access channel at decision if the control channel is not available if the system is embodied with a synchronous paging cycle the group communication server can wait until the next page to send the group communication setup data. Thus after the group communication setup data is send at step then the group communication e.g. a PTT call is bridged to the target wireless device over a dedicated access traffic channel as shown at step and the process terminates.

It can thus be seen that the system provides a method for signaling and delivering data across a wireless telecommunication network from a communication server including the steps of bridging a control channel between the communication server and at least one dormant wireless telecommunication device then periodically paging each of the dormant wireless telecommunication devices from the group communication server and upon desiring to open a dedicated broadcast channel to the dormant wireless telecommunication device for a direct group communication to that wireless telecommunication device the communication server sending at least group communication setup data across the control channel to the dormant wireless communication device prior to bridging a dedicated communication channel to that wireless telecommunication device .

The step of sending group communication setup data should be the only data of the group communication to be sent across the control channel. Further the step of sending group communication setup data to one or more of the set of wireless telecommunication devices across the control channel should occur prior to opening of a dedicated communication channel. The method can further including the step of the communication server selectively sending group communication setup data to one or more of the set of wireless telecommunication devices across the control channel while sending group communication setup data to other wireless telecommunication devices through the next periodic page or other control channel bridging. Also the step of bridging a control channel can be bridging an asynchronous control channel or synchronous control channel.

The system also includes an inventive communication server that maintains communication with a plurality of wireless telecommunication devices wherein a set of the wireless telecommunication devices are able to direct a single group communication stream to other members of the set noting that each of the set of wireless telecommunication devices have a dormant state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges at least one continuous control channel with the communication server and an active state in which the wireless telecommunication device bridges one or more dedicated communication channels with the communication server . In one embodiment the communication server periodically pages each dormant wireless telecommunication device of the plurality of wireless telecommunication devices and sends group communication setup data for incoming group communications to each member of the set of wireless telecommunication devices either over a control channel to dedicated access traffic channel as shown in . Upon desiring to open a dedicated broadcast channel to a dormant wireless telecommunication device for a direct group communication the communication server sending at least group communication setup data across the control channel to the dormant wireless communication device prior to bridging a dedicated communication channel to that wireless telecommunication device .

Another embodiment includes a program resident in a computer readable medium where the program directs a communication server to perform the inventive steps of the method. The computer readable medium can be the memory of the computer of the group communication server or can be in an accessible database such as database . Further the computer readable medium can be in a secondary storage media that is loadable onto a computer platform such as a magnetic disk or tape optical disk hard disk flash memory or other storage media as is known in the art.

In the context of the method may be implemented for example by operating portion s of the wireless network to execute a sequence of machine readable instructions such as the communication server . The instructions can reside in various types of signal bearing or data storage primary secondary or tertiary media. The media may comprise for example RAM not shown accessible by or residing within the components of the wireless network . Whether contained in RAM a diskette or other secondary storage media the instructions may be stored on a variety of machine readable data storage media such as DASD storage e.g. a conventional hard drive or a RAID array magnetic tape electronic read only memory e.g. ROM EPROM or EEPROM flash memory cards an optical storage device e.g. CD ROM WORM DVD digital optical tape paper punch cards or other suitable data storage media including digital and analog transmission media.

While the foregoing disclosure shows illustrative embodiments of the invention it should be noted that various changes and modifications could be made herein without departing from the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. Furthermore although elements of the invention may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated.

