---

title: Three-dimensional nanoscale crossbars
abstract: Various embodiments of the present invention include three-dimensional, at least partially nanoscale, electronic circuits and devices in which signals can be routed in three independent directions, and in which electronic components can be fabricated at junctions interconnected by internal signal lines. The three-dimensional, at least partially nanoscale, electronic circuits and devices include layers, the nanowire or microscale-or-submicroscale/nanowire junctions of each of which may be economically and efficiently fabricated as one type of electronic component. Various embodiments of the present invention include nanoscale memories, nanoscale programmable arrays, nanoscale multiplexers and demultiplexers, and an almost limitless number of specialized nanoscale circuits and nanoscale electronic components.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07786467&OS=07786467&RS=07786467
owner: Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P.
number: 07786467
owner_city: Houston
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050425
---
This invention has been made with Government support under Agreement MDA972 01 3 005 awarded by DARPA Moletronics. The government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to electronic devices and circuits and in particular to nanoscale hybrid nanoscale microscale and hybrid nanoscale submicroscale devices and circuits with three independent dimensions in which signal paths may be routed and in which electronic components can be fabricated at junctions interconnected by internal signal lines.

Recently as the design and manufacture of electronic devices and circuits by conventional photolithography based methods has begun to approach physical limits to further decreases in component sizes alternative methods for manufacturing nanoscale electronic circuits have been developed. Nanowire crossbar technology is a particularly promising new approach to fabrication of electronic circuits and devices with dimensions significantly less than and component densities correspondingly greater than the submicroscale circuits and components that can be currently produced by photolithographic methods.

The two dimensional matrix like nanoscale memory shown in is among the most simple types of electronic devices that can be implemented using nanowire crossbars. Nanowire crossbars can also be used to implement programmable logic arrays multiplexers and demultiplexers and an almost limitless number of different specific electronic circuits. In a nanoscale memory the bistable bit storage layer can be homogeneous with each nanowire junction functioning as a diode for example but in more complex devices numerous different types of electronic components may need to be implemented at different nanowire junctions. Various techniques can be used to create these different electronic components such as diodes resistors transistors and conductive connections including chemical masking of regions within a crossbar in order to fabricate one type of electronic component at the nanowire junctions in each region or by nondeterministic self assembly or fabrication of different types of nanowires with different chemical coatings followed by testing and experimentation to discover and elaborate the types and locations of resulting electronic components within a resulting crossbar. These techniques and additional techniques for varying the types of nanowire junctions within a nanowire crossbar may add significant complexity and expense to nanowire crossbar manufacture and may significantly decrease the yield of acceptable devices. Moreover they are generally limited to partitioning an essentially two dimensional device into smaller two dimensional partitions each of which includes a potentially different type of electronic component or junction.

Significant problems are encountered with respect to interconnection of individual nanowire leads of a nanowire crossbar to submicroscale and microscale signal lines in order to incorporate the nanowire crossbar into conventional electronic devices including identifying and manipulating individual nanowires. One solution to these problems is to employ demultiplexers with microscale or submicroscale address lines that are integrated with nanowire crossbars. shows a nanowire crossbar memory integrated with nanoscale microscale demultiplexers to allow individual bit storage elements of the nanowire crossbar memory to be uniquely accessed via microscale or submicroscale address lines. In a 16 16 nanowire crossbar has parallel nanowire layers in which nanowires are extended past the boundaries of the nanowire crossbar array to form a first demultiplexer and a second demultiplexer . Demultiplexer comprises the extended nanowires from a first parallel nanowire layer of the nanowire crossbar such as nanowire overlain or underlain by a perpendicular microscale or submicroscale source voltage line and four pairs of perpendicular microscale or submicroscale address lines. The second demultiplexer is similarly implemented from the extended nanowires of the second parallel nanowire layer of the nanowire crossbar. In certain types of implementations such as the implementation shown in address lines occur as complementary pairs each pair representing one bit an its inverse of a multi bit address while in other implementations single address lines may be used. Four bit address input through the four pairs of address lines are sufficient to provide a unique address for each of the 16 nanowires such as nanowire and two four bit addresses input simultaneously to the four pairs of address lines of each of the two demultiplexers and can uniquely address a particular nanowire junction from among the 256 nanowire junctions within the nanoscale crossbar array . The electronic components at submicroscale or microscale address line nanowire junctions within the demultiplexers may be resistors diodes or transistors depending on the type of demultiplexer implemented and on the operational characteristics of the demultiplexer desired. In general in the case of a nanoscale memory device such as that shown in electronic components at submicroscale or microscale address line nanowire junctions are different from the electronic components fabricated at nanowire junctions within the nanowire crossbar. Fabrication of the nanoscale memory shown in may therefore involve masking and mask alignment operations to chemically differentiate the demultiplexer regions from the nanowire crossbar or other technique for fabricating one type of electronic component within the demultiplexer regions and another type of electronic component within the nanowire crossbar. The memory device shown in also has the significant drawback that the total area of the device is more than three times larger than that of the nanowire crossbar. Moreover the ratio of the total device area to the nanowire crossbar area increases with increasing numbers of nanowires in the nanowire crossbar. For this reason designers manufacturers vendors and integrators of nanoscale electronic devices as well as ultimately users of such devices have recognized the need for nanowire crossbars and hybrid microscale nanoscale crossbars that can be economically and efficiently manufactured with as great a component density as possible.

Various embodiments of the present invention include three dimensional at least partially nanoscale electronic circuits and devices in which signals can be routed in three independent directions and in which electronic components can be fabricated at junctions interconnected by internal signal lines. The three dimensional at least partially nanoscale electronic circuits and devices include layers the nanowire or microscale or submicroscale nanowire junctions of each of which may be economically and efficiently fabricated as one type of electronic component. Various embodiments of the present invention include nanoscale memories nanoscale programmable arrays nanoscale multiplexers and demultiplexers and an almost limitless number of specialized nanoscale circuits and nanoscale electronic components.

Various embodiments of the present invention include three dimensional nanoscale or hybrid nanoscale microscale circuits and devices in which signals can be routed in three independent directions and in which electronic components can be fabricated at junctions interconnected by internal signal lines. By building up these device layer by layer in three dimensions rather than spreading the device across two dimensions the three dimensional devices of the present invention can be more economically and efficiently manufactured. Vertical stacking of layers reduces the total area of the nanoscale component or device and can lead to significantly shorter signal paths for example eliminating the extended nanowires needed for implementation of the memory device discussed above with reference to . Decreasing signal paths through nanowires which generally exhibit high resistivities can greatly decrease the overall resistance and thermal output of a nanoscale electronic device or component. Different electronic components may be fabricated in each layer by applying different inter layer coatings without the need for complex error prone and expensive masking and mask alignment procedures needed for fabrication of different types of electronic components in two dimensional circuits and devices. Certain specialized types of components such as cutter wires used to isolate subregions of a device from one another can be fabricated together in single layers vastly simplifying the identification and activation of such components. Finally the degree of freedom in design and implementation afforded by a third independent dimension may allow for design and fabrication of complex components and devices that either cannot be designed and fabricated in two dimensions or that can be designed and fabricated in two dimensions only at unacceptable high costs.

The present invention concerns nanoscale crossbars and crossbar like circuits and devices. These devices are nanoscale in that they include features such as signal lines with widths less than 100 nanometers or in certain cases less than 10 nanometers and in the highest resolution circuits and devices less than 5 nanometers. The devices may be dimensional hybrids including larger components in addition to nanoscale components. The overall dimensions of these circuits and devices may be in submicroscale microscale or larger ranges. In the following discussion he term nanowire junction refers to a junction at the intersection of a nanowire and another conductive component such as a second nanowire a submicroscale or microscale signal line or other component of any of various dimensions. Thus the term nanowire junction. 

One embodiment of the present invention is a nanoscale memory that interfaces through two demultiplexers to microscale or submicroscale address lines and source voltage lines equivalent to a nanoscale memory of the type discussed above with reference to . The three dimensional multi layer nanoscale memory that represents one embodiment of the present invention is discussed below as a step wise implementation although the three dimensional nanoscale memory of the present invention is claimed without regard to specific implementation details. The step wise discussion is used to clearly illustrate and distinguish the various layers of the three dimensional nanoscale memory.

The diode junctions and conductive interconnections can be formed by many different possible techniques including multi level imprint lithography application of configuration voltages to address lines and nanowires by chemical deposition or by other processes. The diode junctions and interconnect junctions appear in to constitute a separate layer between the nanowires and the source voltage and address lines and although as discussed above these junctions may be implemented either as a separate coating or layer or as sheath like coatings applied to the nanowires and or address lines or even elemental or molecular components of the nanowires and or source voltage line and address lines.

Thus the complete three dimensional nanoscale memory that represents one embodiment of the present invention includes a first demultiplexer layer a nanoscale crossbar memory layer and a second demultiplexer layer all stacked one above the other to form a three dimensional device. schematically represents the layers within the complete nanoscale three dimensional memory that represents one embodiment of the present invention and shows an exemplary signal path through the layers. Signals can pass from a lower level address line through a nanowire junction to a first nanowire all part of the first demultiplexer layer. From the first nanowire the signal may pass through a single bit storage element to a second nanowire the bistable bit storage layer along with interfacing nanowires constituting a second layer within the three dimensional nanoscale memory and from the second nanowire through a second diode junction to a second address line of the second multiplexer layer. Thus as illustrated by the multi segment signal path shown in non linear signal paths may traverse the three dimensional nanoscale memory in a third vertical dimension in addition to the two dimensional horizontal and vertical signal paths encountered in a conventional crossbar or crossbar like device with two dimensional array like addressing. The segment of nanowire interconnecting an address line to a nanowire within the three dimensional nanoscale memory device is significantly shorter essentially the length of a junction than in the two dimensional nanoscale memory device discussed with reference to . Furthermore the diode and interconnection like electronic components all occur within the first demultiplexer layer and the second demultiplexer layer while the memory bit storage elements occur within the bistable bit storage layer of the three dimensional nanoscale multiplexer. Because different types of junctions can be isolated to different layers within a device expensive masking and mask alignment steps can be avoided.

Three dimensional nanoscale circuits and devices of the present invention are three dimensional in numerous different respects. First non linear signal paths can be fabricated in these circuits and devices in three independent directions rather than only the two independent directions of the essentially two dimensional devices such as the nanoscale memory discussed with reference to . For example in the nanoscale memory shown in signal paths can be arbitrarily constructed to access a particular location in the plane of the device but once a location or single bit storage element is selected signals pass only vertically in a single vertical path segment through the single bit storage element. By contrast as shown in a signal path can be constructed from multiple vertical segments in addition to segments in the plane of a particular layer. Second nanowire junctions can be interconnected together in three independent directions in the three dimensional nanoscale circuits and devices rather than in two directions in the current essentially two dimensional circuits and devices. Finally the three dimensional devices of the present invention may include an arbitrary number of functionally different layers each with a different type of nanowire junction or other nanoscale features than in adjoining layers.

Although the present invention has been described in terms of particular embodiments it is not intended that the invention be limited to these embodiments. Modifications within the spirit of the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art. For example the general approach to constructing three dimensional multi layered nanoscale electronic devices discussed above with respect to a three dimensional nanoscale memory can be applied to construct an essentially limitless number of different types of devices including programmable arrays multiplexers demultiplexers combined logic and memory circuits and any number of specialized circuits and devices. Different types of nanoscale three dimensional devices and circuits may need different numbers of layers each layer having different chemical compositions structures organizations and other variable features. As one specific example a special type of nanowire referred to as a cutter wire can be included in conventional two dimensional nanowire crossbars to allow partitioning of the crossbar by chemically or electronically cutting the cutter wire or cutter wires. Unfortunately identifying the appropriate cutter wire for a given application as well as applying the necessary stimulus to cut the cutter wire can be problematic and can significantly increase the cost of a device fabricated using cutter wires. By contrast one or more cutter wire layers can be included in a multi layer three dimensional nanoscale device obviating the need for precise identification of individual cutter wires and specialized masking and mask alignment operations. As discussed above nanowires submicroscale and microscale address lines source voltage lines and other components may be fabricated from an almost limitless number of different materials including elemental metals metallic alloys conductive polymers composite materials semiconductors and other conductive or semiconducting materials and compounds. Techniques for fabricating nanowires include self assembly and transfer from surfaces in place chemical synthesis imprint lithography and other techniques. Techniques for fabricating specific types of nanowire junctions involve depositing particular layers of particular chemical composition electronically or chemically accessing junctions to configure specific types of nanowire junctions and other techniques. Different types of junctions may also be fabricated by altering the geometries and distances of nanowire intersections. Three dimensional nanoscale circuits and devices may be interfaced to and included within larger circuits and devices whether nanoscale hybrid microscale nanoscale or conventional submicroscale or microscale in dimension.

The foregoing description for purposes of explanation used specific nomenclature to provide a thorough understanding of the invention. However it will be apparent to one skilled in the art that the specific details are not required in order to practice the invention. The foregoing descriptions of specific embodiments of the present invention are presented for purpose of illustration and description. They are not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise forms disclosed. Obviously many modifications and variations are possible in view of the above teachings. The embodiments are shown and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention and its practical applications to thereby enable others skilled in the art to best utilize the invention and various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated. It is intended that the scope of the invention be defined by the following claims and their equivalents 

