---

title: Automated self-forming, self-healing configuration permitting substitution of software agents to effect a live repair of a system implemented on hardware processors
abstract: A configuration for use with a processor that incorporates a suite of “flat” hardware architecture and superimposes thereon a self-forming, self-healing, hierarchical architecture implemented in software. Embodiments may be employed in various applications, such as maintaining network integrity. In one embodiment, a building security monitoring network provides for automated network agents to each be capable of communication with any other automated agents on a network at network startup. Shortly after network initialization, the software architecture is superimposed on the flat hardware architecture, re-arranging communication links to provide an efficient hierarchy of control and substituting working agents for compromised agents as necessary in the network. All of this is done in a “live” network, not requiring shutdown, or even reduced operation to accomplish. This “dual” architecture (hierarchical software and flat hardware) provides excellent reliability in those “layered” network applications requiring near total reliability, such as security surveillance.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07549077&OS=07549077&RS=07549077
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07549077
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050422
---
Under paragraph 1 a of Executive Order 10096 the conditions under which this invention was made entitle the Government of the United States as represented by the Secretary of the Army to the entire right title and interest therein of any patent granted thereon by the United States. This patent and related ones are available for licensing. Contact Phillip Stewart at 601 634 4113.

Many human computer interfaces today are programmed in standard sequential or object oriented software. Another software paradigm exists known generally as an agent based software architecture. A given task is divided up into several sub tasks and assigned to different agents in the system. Agents communicate concurrent modules each of which handles a part of the decision making process. Intelligent agents may be representative of software that mediates between a user and a software system and undertakes tasks that the software system cannot fulfill on its own. The use of such an intelligent agent as a mediator facilitates and simplifies one s task thus increasing productivity. If the agents are capable of learning they are referred to as adaptive agents. Some examples of situations in which agent based interaction have been used follow.

Agents manage the customized presentation of information. They preprocess data and display it in a way that is unique for each user. Agents act as tutors or guides supplementing knowledge of a user with their own. They assist in accomplishing a current task by providing alternative views and additional relevant information. Agents may be used for adaptive search and information retrieval.

One application of agents in user interaction is concentrating a bulk of interaction responsibilities in a single agent thus emulating a centralized architecture. However many real world scenarios are best modeled using a set of cooperating intelligent systems or managers. Society for example consists of many interacting entities e.g. managers. To model some aspects of society it is desirable to structure the model to interact among the desired entities. Further since data often originates at different physical locations centralized management solutions are often inapplicable or inconvenient. Thus using a number of small simple adaptive agents middle managers instead of one large complicated one director simplifies the process of solving a complex problem. In summary a cadre of agents collectively exhibit emergent behavior that as a whole is greater than the sum of its parts.

Embodiments of the present invention use interacting agents in a virtual architecture riding on top of a network to form semi optimal decision trees for fast and reliable communication. In applications required to be fully operational at all times such as applications used by security personnel this is especially advantageous. A general application of select embodiments of the present invention substitutes agents of equivalent or greater control or management capacity for those agents in a network that have been or appear to be compromised.

In select embodiments of the present invention a self healing configuration comprises uniquely identifiable elements that cooperate to accomplish one or more tasks each element having one or more functions. Each element is able to communicate with any other element via one or more links but a reduced number of links is used in operation upon superimposing on the elements one or more architectures implemented in software. These one or more architectures specify which links are employed in a particular operating scenario of the configuration. For example upon compromise of one or more elements during operation of the configuration one or more specified un compromised elements seamlessly assumes one or more functions of the compromised elements.

In select embodiments of the present invention the configuration has at least part of each of the elements implemented in hardware. One or more of the functions of each element include a control function.

In select embodiments of the present invention the configuration is a network and the elements are agents in the network each agent maintaining an IP address and one or more databases with one entry in one or more of the databases being the class of the agent. One or more of the architectures is a hierarchical architecture.

In select embodiments of the present invention a self healing network comprises agents that cooperate to accomplish at least one task and one or more architectures implemented in software to specify which links are employed in a particular scenario. Each agent maintains an IP address and one or more databases with one entry in one or more of the databases being the class of the agent. Each agent has at least one function and is able to communicate with any other agent via one or more links. One or more specified agents assumes one or more functions of any agent that is compromised during operation of the self healing network. In select embodiments of the present invention the agents at least in part are implemented in hardware and one or more of the functions is a control function. In select embodiments of the present invention one or more of the architectures is a hierarchical architecture.

Further provided in select embodiments of the present invention is a first method for establishing a self healing configuration. The method comprises arranging uniquely identifiable elements in one or more arrays to facilitate accomplishing one or more tasks each element having one or more functions and able to communicate with any other elements via one or more links. One or more architectures implemented in software is superimposed upon the arrays. The architectures specify which links are employed in a particular scenario and specify one or more of the elements to assume one or more functions of those elements compromised during operation of the configuration. The elements at least in part are implemented in hardware and one or more of the functions includes a control function. The configuration of this method may be implemented from a network incorporating linked agents each agent maintaining an IP address and one or more databases with one entry in one or more of the databases being the class of the agent. Further the method may employ one or more hierarchical architectures.

Further provided in select embodiments of the present invention is a method for establishing a self healing network. This method comprises arranging uniquely identifiable agents in one or more first networks superimposing one or more architectures upon the first networks and specifying one or more of the agents to assume one or more functions of the agents compromised during operation of the self healing network. Each agent maintains an IP address and one or more databases with one entry in one or more of the databases being the class of the agent. The architectures are implemented in software to specify which links are employed in a particular scenario each agent having one or more functions and ability to communicate with other agents via one or more links.

In select embodiments of the present invention at least parts of the agents are implemented in hardware and one or more of the functions is a control function. Further in select embodiments of the present invention the method implements one or more of the architectures as a hierarchical architecture.

In select embodiments of the present invention a self forming self healing virtual software hierarchical architecture built from a suite of specialized agents may be employed in various applications where maintaining integrity of a network is desired. At all times a flat physical hardware agent architecture comprising specialized agents provides for all agents to be interoperable each one in operable communication with each of the other agents on a network so that at network initiation with 100 operation of all agents each agent may communicate with all other agents. Such a network may be localized or worldwide.

Shortly after network initialization of networks employing embodiments of the present invention a software hierarchical agent architecture is superimposed on rides on the flat hardware architecture. This dual architecture hierarchical software and flat hardware provides excellent reliability in those layered network applications requiring near total reliability such as security surveillance. In select embodiments of the present invention the network is scalable i.e. select virtual hierarchical levels layers or shells may be changed via software to add or subtract nodes as needed through a self forming attribute.

In select embodiments of the present invention a short time after initializing the network self forming rules prohibit universal communication among agents and force agents to act in a hierarchical network enabling communications only via specified paths. That is in typical operation of embodiments of the present invention an agent on one level may communicate only with all agents reporting to it from the immediately lower level and only with the one agent on the immediately higher level to which it reports. Should an agent be compromised the number of available agents to report to for handling the compromised agent s tasks or sub agents immediately lower level if any is quickly reduced to only those in immediate proximity by implementing a set of self healing collaboration rules in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention.

In select embodiments of the present invention a system akin to distributed computing is provided with messaging between processes. The messages determine which agents may communicate and guarantee that agents are able to send messages up and down the tree. As separate processes each having its own rules for processing data embodiments of the present invention provide an object oriented information system.

Refer to depicting an example of the flat agent architecture of a site s security network at initialization. In select embodiments of the present invention the network employs the flat agent architecture formed in hardware only at the moment of initialization of the network. That is at initialization of the network all agents are physically interconnected via links for interoperable communication one to any other. Selected physical connections links may be intangible e.g. via electromagnetic waves in the RF or light spectra and the like.

Agents shown in the example of include Sensor Control Threat Detection Facility Manager Site Manager and Human Interface. Note that all agents are managers in the sense that they have supervisory control or mid level reporting responsibility for at least one controlled lower level element either non supervisory workers or lower level managers . Note that sensors that are controlled by Sensor Controls are not shown in but the sensors would have links to the Sensor Controls to which they are assigned. Typically sensors would not be agents and for purposes of illustration in this example they are not. Thus all lower level non supervisory elements may not be included in the virtual hierarchical architecture although hardware links including wireless links are most likely run to them. Thus although the network of illustrates controllers taskers it does not illustrate taskees workers with no control supervisory function. Although these types of workers are not shown on the network in select embodiments of the present invention redundancy or overlap could be provided in software to have select first level non supervisory workers assume one or more tasks of compromised neighboring workers.

Using rules to implement a self forming hierarchical agent architecture in software embodiments of the present invention superimpose a virtual hierarchical agent architecture upon the flat physically connected hardware architecture the latter present right at initiation power up of the network. Once built the self forming and self healing virtual agent architecture maintains a living network i.e. it accepts new agents or the loss of existing ones without having to interrupt operations such as powering down. Network formation is based on virtual network formation rules embedded in the operating software. Each agent abides by these rules so that the ambient state of the network at any instant of time shortly after initiation of the network appears as a fixed virtual hierarchical agent architecture for the network.

In select embodiments of the present invention two types of agents are provided to form a self forming self healing efficient communication framework for hierarchical decision making among agents . These agent types are generic enough that they may be created in any agent formation package on condition that specific functionality is provided. These agents must be capable of opening two connections. A server connection must be established to listen for conversations from other agents . A client connection is created to converse with other agents . In a seeming role reversal the server will accept messages from the client connection of another agent .

In select embodiments of the present invention the two types of agents are a first type that may be termed the Agent Name and Type Server ANATS agent and a second type that may be termed the Hierarchical Self Healing Network HSHN agent . The ANATS agent maintains a directory of existing HSHN agents including their type. When a request is received for an HSNS agent of a certain type e.g. Threat Assessment from another agent the ANATS agent sends the directory entry for that agent to the requesting agent . When a directory entry has been made a countdown timer on how long it is trusted to still exist is started. When a pre specified time is counted down the directory entry state is moved from the current status to the next lower status e.g. exists to unconfirmed to non existent and the timer is restarted. A grace copy is an unconfirmed entry.

In select embodiments of the present invention the ANATS agent s rules presented in order of priority are 

In this fashion an agent s existence is verified and an entry returned based on agent type. Because the ANATS agent is a directory to the agents that will form a decision tree it is protected so that hot swappable copies are maintained.

The second type i.e. the HSHN agent actually forms the decision tree. The tree formation rules are the same at any level of the structure. If the rules for the first agent i.e. the ANATS agent are designed well promotion and demotion in the tree is possible. There are three sets of rules for this second type in descending priority. The first or ANATS rules establish the connection of the HSHN agent with the ANATS agent . The second set of rules is the Parent Processing rules. These rules permit an agent to find and establish a connection with the layer of agents above it i.e. their parent agents . If the agent is at the root layer it can ignore these rules because it does not have a parent. The third set of rules is the Parenting rules. These rules allow a parent agent to track its child agents and verify their existence. The lowest level agents outermost leaves ignore these rules because they have no child agents .

Note that in the above embodiments of the present invention these rules do not take load or tree balancing into effect but additional rules could easily take this into account by sending messages to child agents that invalidate the current parent agent for example.

Refer to for an example of a virtual hierarchical agent architecture that may be employed in select embodiments of the present invention for a three level portion of the network of . illustrates a single Facility Manager agent controlling Threat Detection and Sensor Control agents at intermediate and lower levels respectively as formed virtually via software in a hierarchy. The Facility Manager may be below a Site Manager at the next higher level layer in the virtual architecture . The Human Interface need not be positioned in a particular layer in the virtual hierarchical architecture but rather may be a fixed link to select agents such as the Facility Manager as shown in and both the Facility Manager and Threat Detection as in .

In select embodiments of the present invention once the virtual hierarchical architecture is superimposed each agent typically has access to only a specified subset of all available hardware communication links . A virtual hierarchy is established in levels layers or shells . For the example of the lowest layer illustrated comprises the Sensor Control agents . Each of these is linked to a particular Threat Detection agent . In surveillance applications such as used for buildings there is one Threat Detection agent per room in a building. The Sensor Control agents for that room are associated with a Threat Detection agent via network formation rules embedded in software.

Generally in select embodiments of the present invention used in security applications there are several threads associated with each task or subtask that an agent must accomplish. These threads have priorities that vary with alert levels and command levels established by higher level agents . These subtasks may include network formation network healing ambient hierarchical information collection and exchange etc. Alert levels may be set as green no intruder present yellow an intruder has been detected but not classified red at least one intruder has been detected and is being tracked.

Conventional security systems rely heavily on human interpretation and maintenance at every level whereas embodiments of the present invention overcome that limitation. Embodiments of the present invention can track an intruder at high priority while continuing to investigate other ambiguities and continuing to self heal at lower priorities. For example consider a security guard responding to an intruder alert on one end of a building and another intruder infiltrating the other end of the building. An embodiment of the present invention classifies and tracks the second intruder alerting security personnel to the real time status of both intruders. This prevents surprises and possibly injury or death. Also if the intruder s is compromising certain portions of the security network the agents are continually healing the damage to restore the maximum functionality possible unlike a compromised human. This ability to simultaneously respond on several different fronts is a function of a distributed network used in embodiments of the present invention as opposed to a centralized physical network comprising intelligent nodes i.e. agents .

A virtual hierarchical architecture implemented in a network makes the system appear to security personnel as a very intelligent conventional flat fixed hardware architecture. However there is much human like learning and adaptation taking place at all times with which security personnel need not be concerned. It is analogous to having a team of maintenance personal and security advisors functioning continually to assure security personnel have current reduced information from as many sources as possible.

Initially an entire system of agents may be powered up with each having links one to the other as in the example of . It may be redundant in that each agent may be connected to every other agent via fiber optics wires connected to a fortified fiber bus run or wireless links via a radio link network. The latter assures that no matter where security personnel are in a facility their human interface agents will be in range of one of the network s wireless nodes. If this radio link were compromised security personnel may tie in through a quick connect to the fiber bus backbone at access stations located throughout the facility.

In select embodiments of the present invention a priority task after establishing all links at startup is forming the virtual hierarchical architecture . Each agent has its own database and one of its entries is the class of agent e.g. Sensor Control Threat Detection Facility Manager Human Interface etc. Each agent has a unique identifier such as an IP address that it knows. This identifier is used to direct communication to it. The identifier and database for each agent are available at initialization together with other elements that are needed for initialization.

In select embodiments of the present invention at startup each agent s database creates a living list of all the children and grandchildren agents assigned to it. In select embodiments of the present invention two approaches may be taken. The first is to connect a new agent unannounced and the second is to connect an agent after notifying a Facility Manager agent that the IP of the new agent is being activated.

In select embodiments of the present invention the first approach may be implemented in two different ways. The new agent may be inserted silently so that the next higher level agent must search all possible subnet IP addresses to link up. Alternatively the new agent may broadcast its type and IP periodically until it is adopted by a higher level agent . For example the alternative comprehends that a Facility Manager agent knows all the assignments of Threat Detection and Sensor Control agents in its domain. When a new agent is added its IP and agent type are input into the database of the Facility Manager agent . The Facility Manager agent compares the two lists to see which agents need to be adopted by a higher level agent at a given time. Thus the alternative approach may be logical for a fixed facility scenario whereas the first method may be most logical for battlefield environments. Examples include radio linked agents dropped into a combat zone from aircraft to enhance situational awareness around a base. For example a new agent at its landing determines its location via GPS and announces itself to the existing network to be adopted for immediate use.

As an example a lower three tiers of a hierarchical architecture may be formed in a network via software in major class one of a large network in a building in which all agents are initialized together. For the silent agent approach each Threat Detection agent immediately quizzes each IP on its sub net searching for potential Sensor Control agents to adopt. Simultaneously Facility Manager agents are doing the same thing searching for Threat Detection agents . Each agent knows which parent agent it is subject to and which children agents it has adopted. In select embodiments of the present invention sibling agents have no knowledge of each other thus each agent can communicate only directly with its parent and its children agents . Each agent reports its children agents to its parent agent for storage in a parent database. Thus if a parent agent loses a child agent due to compromise the parent agent may assign the orphaned grandchildren agents to another of its children agents as a family services function.

If this is not a silent network major class one but rather one in which agents announce themselves high level agents such as Threat Detection agents investigate each of their children agents announcements to check for proximity of the children agent e.g. Sensor Control agent . Each agent knows that its location and IP address contains some information that is used by the adoption algorithms in all methods. As the hierarchy is formed the IP addresses of children agents including grandchildren agents by child and parent agents are stored in the database of that agent .

In select embodiments of the present invention in the second class major class two hierarchy formation occurs by a high level agent e.g. a third tier Facility Manager agent first polling a list of mid level agents e.g. second tier Threat Detection agents and deciding which to adopt. The high level agent e.g. Facility Management agent passes a list of low level agents e.g. first tier Sensor Control agents to the mid level agents e.g. Threat Detection agents that the high level agent e.g. Facility Manager agent has adopted. The mid level agent e.g. Threat Detection agent adopts the low level agents e.g. Sensor Control agents and the virtual architecture is formed with each agent knowing its children grandchildren and parent.

Although there may be several methods of response to agent compromise an optimum method is to have the grandparent agent assign its grandchildren agents i.e. the children agents of the compromised agent live to one of the grandparent agent s other living children agents for adoption. An example of this is shown in .

In a Threat Detection agent mid level parent is compromised causing a break in the virtual architecture . This isolates a group of three Sensor Control children agents .

Refer to . A Threat Detection sibling agent of the compromised Threat Detection agent assumes the parenting responsibility for the group of Sensor Control agents and maintains two separate households clusters of Sensor Control agents . Each cluster of Sensor Control agents has separate fields of influence and each Sensor Control agent in a particular cluster shares its field of influence with the others in its cluster . Thus the hierarchical architecture of is modified in so that two Threat Detection agents share the same IP address. The original IP address for the compromised agent is inoperable thus the children agents in the household cluster are redirected to an adoptive parent agent . Note that in the above examples the repair is performed in software and is to the superimposed virtual hierarchical architecture itself not the individual agents . If physical damage is done to the links or the agents themselves a separate repair usually physical is necessary even though the network itself continues to function.

In select embodiments of the present invention a virtual hierarchical architecture has modes of adaptation other than addition substitution and removal of agents as described above. For example mobile agents may relocate to other households of agents thus reforming the virtual architecture . Such mobile agents may reside in a robot not shown separately with onboard sensors not shown separately . The robot is treated as a Mobile Threat Detection agent incorporating self tracking. The robot monitors its changing location and updates its database for possible reassignment asset transfer by its parent agent e.g. a Facility Manager agent . Thus if the robot moves from room A to room B the database of its parent agent is updated by the parent agent accordingly and the robot asset may be transferred to the Facility Manager agent for Room B. The location of any integral Sensor Control agents move with the robot. Thus the Sensor Control agents are also mobile although fixed in configuration upon the robot. In select embodiments of the present invention higher level agents e.g. Facility Manager or Human Interface agents may determine whether their robot mobile child moves in a predetermined course or is dispatched to cover particular areas. The addition of mobile agents also establishes another vehicle for self healing e.g. dispatching a robotic Threat Detection agent incorporating Sensor Control agents to cover compromise of fixed Sensor Control agents in an area.

Although only a few exemplary embodiments of this invention have been described in detail above those skilled in the art will readily appreciate that many modifications are possible in the exemplary embodiments without materially departing from the novel teachings and advantages of the invention. For example although facility security networks were used as examples any configuration hardware or software that uses elements of agents to control functions and needs to reliably continue operation or live repair itself while operating would benefit from the embodiments and methods of employment of the present invention. Accordingly all such modifications are intended to be included within the scope of this invention as defined in the following claims.

The abstract is provided to comply with the rules requiring an abstract which will allow a searcher to quickly ascertain the subject mater of the technical disclosure of any patent issued from this disclosure. 37 CFR 1.72 b . Any advantages and benefits described may not apply to all embodiments of the invention.

