---

title: Mild multi-phased personal care composition
abstract: The present invention relates to a mild multi-phased personal care composition that contains a surfactant component containing a surfactant or a mixture of surfactants; where said mild multi-phased personal care composition has a Structured Domain Volume Ratio of at least about 45%.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08314054&OS=08314054&RS=08314054
owner: The Procter & Gamble Company
number: 08314054
owner_city: Cincinnati
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050225
---
The present invention relates to a mild multi phased personal care composition comprising a surfactant component comprising a surfactant or a mixture of surfactants wherein said mild multi phased personal care composition has a Structured Domain Volume Ratio of at least about 45 .

Personal care compositions are becoming more popular in the United States and around the world. Personal care compositions are well known and widely used. Desirable personal care composition must meet a number of criteria. For example in order to be acceptable to consumers a personal care composition must exhibit good cleaning properties must exhibit good lathering characteristics must be mild to the skin not cause drying or irritation and preferably should even provide a conditioning benefit to the skin. Personal care compositions have also been used to alter the color and appearance of skin.

Personal care compositions that attempt to provide skin conditioning benefits are known. Many of these compositions are aqueous systems comprising an emulsified conditioning oil or other similar materials in combination with a lathering surfactant. Although these products provide both conditioning and cleansing benefits it is often difficult to formulate a product that deposits sufficient amount of skin conditioning agents on skin during use. In order to combat emulsification of the skin conditioning agents by the cleansing surfactant large amounts of the skin conditioning agent are added to the compositions. However this introduces another problem associated with these dual cleansing and conditioning products. Raising the level of skin conditioning agent in order to achieve increased deposition negatively affects product lather performance and stability.

One attempt at providing conditioning and cleansing benefits from a personal cleansing product while maintaining stability has been the use of dual chamber packaging. These packages comprise separate cleansing compositions and conditioning compositions and allow for the co dispensing of the two in a single or dual stream. The separate conditioning and cleansing compositions thus remain physically separate and stable during prolonged storage and just prior to application but then mix during or after dispensing to provide conditioning and cleansing benefits from a physically stable system. Although such dual chamber delivery systems provide improved conditioning benefits over the use of conventional systems it is often difficult to achieve consistent and uniform performance because of the uneven dispensing ratio between the cleansing phase and the conditioning phase from these dual chamber packages. Additionally these packaging systems add considerable cost to the finished product.

Accordingly the need still remains for stable mild multi phased personal care composition that provides cleansing with increased lather longevity and improved lathering characteristics and skin benefits such as silky skin feel improved soft skin feel and improved smooth skin feel. The need also remains for a personal care composition comprising two phases in physical contact that remain stable for long periods of time.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide a mild multi phased personal care composition comprising visually distinct phase comprising a surfactant having a structured domain combined with a second visually distinct phase that can comprise high levels of benefit components that are not emulsified in the composition but comprised in a separate benefit phase so that the benefit components can be deposited at higher levels while at the same time maintaining superior lather performance.

The present invention relates to a multi phased personal care composition comprising at least two visually distinct phases wherein at least one phase comprises a cleansing phase comprising a surfactant component comprising a surfactant or a mixture of surfactants wherein said mild personal care composition has a Structured Domain Volume Ratio of at least about 45 wherein said phases form a pattern and wherein said phases are packaged in physical contact with one another and maintain stability.

The present invention further relates to a mild multi phase personal care composition comprising at least two visually distinct phases wherein at least one phase comprises a cleansing phase comprising a surfactant component comprising a surfactant or a mixture of surfactants wherein said surfactant component further comprises an opaque structured domain wherein said opaque structured domain is lamellar phase wherein said mild multi phased personal care composition has a Structured Domain Volume Ratio of at least about 45 wherein the visually distinct phases form a pattern and wherein said visually distinct phases are packaged in physical contact with one another and maintain stability.

The present invention is also directed to a method of cleansing moisturizing and delivering skin benefit agents and particles to the skin by applying to the skin a composition as described above.

The mild multi phased personal care composition of the present invention comprises at least two visually distinct phases wherein the phases form a pattern wherein said composition comprises a surfactant component comprising a surfactant or a mixture of surfactants wherein said mild multi phased personal care composition has a Structured Domain Volume Ratio of at least about 45 .

These and other essential limitations of the compositions and methods of the present invention as well as many of the optional ingredients suitable for use herein are described in detail hereinafter.

The term anhydrous as used herein unless otherwise specified refers to those compositions or materials containing less than about 10 more preferably less than about 5 even more preferably less than about 3 even more preferably zero percent by weight of water.

The term ambient conditions as used herein refers to surrounding conditions at one 1 atmosphere of pressure 50 relative humidity and 25 C.

The term cosmetically efficacious level as used herein is a level conferring a benefit during use of the composition.

The term Consistency value or k as used herein is a measure of viscosity and is used in combination with Shear Index to define viscosity for materials whose viscosity is a function of shear. The measurements are made at 25 C. and the units are poise equal to 100 centipoise .

The term domain as used herein means a volume of material component composition or phase comprising a molecular mixture which can be concentrated but not further separated by physical forces such as ultracentrifugation. For example surfactant lamellar surfactant micellar surfactant crystal oil wax water glycerine mixture hydrated hydrophilic polymer all constitute domains which can be concentrated and observed by ultracentrifugation but which cannot be further separated into distinct molecular components by the same forces.

The term hydrophobically modified interference pigment or HMIP as used herein means a portion of the interference pigment surface has been coated including both physical and chemical bonding of molecules with a hydrophobic material.

The term interference pigment as used herein means a pigment with pearl gloss prepared by coating the surface of a particle substrate material generally platelet in shape with a thin film. The thin film is a transparent or semitransparent material having a high refractive index. The higher refractive index material shows a pearl gloss resulting from mutual interfering action between reflection and incident light from the platelet substrate coating layer interface and reflection of incident light from the surface of the coating layer.

By the term multi phased or multi phase as used herein is meant that the at least two phases herein occupy separate but distinct physical spaces inside the package in which they are stored but are in direct contact with one another i.e. they are not separated by a barrier and they are not emulsified or mixed to any significant degree . In one preferred embodiment of the present invention the multi phased personal care compositions comprising at least two phases are present within the container as a visually distinct pattern. The pattern results from the mixing or homogenization of the multi phased composition. The patterns include but are not limited to the following examples striped marbled rectilinear interrupted striped check mottled veined clustered speckled geometric spotted ribbons helical swirl arrayed variegated textured grooved ridged waved sinusoidal spiral twisted curved cycle streaks striated contoured anisotropic laced weave or woven basket weave spotted and tessellated. Preferably the pattern is selected from the group consisting of striped geometric marbled and combinations thereof.

In a preferred embodiment the striped pattern may be relatively uniform and even across the dimension of the package. Alternatively the striped pattern may be uneven i.e. wavy or may be non uniform in dimension. The striped pattern does not need to necessarily extend across the entire dimension of the package. The phases may be various different colors or include particles glitter or pearlescence.

The term mild multi phased personal care composition as used herein refers to compositions intended for topical application to the skin or hair.

The term opaque structured domain as used herein refers to a surfactant domain with ordered structures e.g. lamellar structure vesicule structure cubic structure etc. and it is visually opaque to a naked eye in a 10 mm inner diameter plastic centrifuge tube after the Ultracentrifugation Method described herein.

The term phases as used herein refers to a region of a composition having one average composition as distinct from another region having a different average composition wherein the regions are visible to the naked eye. This would not preclude the distinct regions from comprising two similar phases where one phase could comprise pigments dyes particles and various optional ingredients hence a region of a different average composition.

The term Shear Index or n as used herein is a measure of viscosity and is used in combination with Consistency value to define viscosity for materials whose viscosity is a function of shear. The measurements are made at 25 C. and the units are dimensionless.

The term stable as used herein unless otherwise specified refers to compositions that maintain at least two separate phases when sitting in physical contact at ambient conditions for a period of at least about 180 days wherein the distribution of the two phases in different locations in the package does not change over time.

By separate is meant that the well distributed nature of the visually distinct phases is compromised such that larger regions of at least one phase collect until the balanced dispensed ratio of the two or more compositions relative to each other is compromised.

The phrase substantially free of as used herein means that the composition comprises less than about 3 preferably less than about 1 more preferably less than about 0.5 even more preferably less than about 0.25 and most preferably less than about 0.1 by weight of the composition of the stated ingredient.

The Vaughan Solubility Parameter VSP as used herein is a parameter used to define the solubility of hydrophobic compositions comprising hydrophobic materials. Vaughan Solubility parameters are well known in the various chemical and formulation arts and typically have a range of from about 5 to about 25 cal cm .

All percentages parts and ratios as used herein are by weight of the total composition unless otherwise specified. All such weights as they pertain to listed ingredients are based on the active level and therefore do not include solvents or by products that may be included in commercially available materials unless otherwise specified.

The mild multi phased personal care composition compositions and methods of the present invention can comprise consist of or consist essentially of the essential elements and limitations of the invention described herein as well as any additional or optional ingredients components or limitations described herein or otherwise useful in personal care compositions intended for topical application to the hair or skin.

The mild multi phased personal care composition of the present invention is typically in the form of a liquid. The term liquid as used herein means that the composition is generally flowable to some degree. Liquids therefore can include liquid semi liquid cream lotion or gel compositions intended for topical application to skin. The compositions typically exhibit a viscosity of from about 1 500 cps to about 1 000 000 cps as measured by the Viscosity Method as described in copending application Ser. No. 60 542 710 filed on Feb. 6 2004. These compositions contain at least two phases which are described in greater detail hereinafter.

When evaluating a mild multi phased personal care composition by the methods described herein preferably each individual phase is evaluated prior to combining unless otherwise indicated in the individual methodology. However if the phases are combined each phase can be separated by centrifugation ultracentrifugation pipetting filtering washing dilution or combination thereof and then the separate components or phases can be evaluated. Preferably the separation means is chosen so that the resulting separated components being evaluated is not destroyed but is representative of the component as it exists in the mild multi phased personal care composition. All of the product forms contemplated for purposes of defining the compositions and methods of the present invention are rinse off formulations by which is meant the product is applied topically to the skin or hair and then subsequently i.e. within minutes the skin or hair is rinsed with water or otherwise wiped off using a substrate or other suitable removal means with deposition of a portion of the composition.

The mild multi phase personal care compositions of the present invention comprises at least two phases wherein in the composition can have a first phase a second phase and so on. The ratio of a first phase to a second phase is about 90 10 to about 10 90 preferably about 80 20 to about 20 80 more preferably about 70 30 to about 30 70 even more preferably about 60 40 to about 40 60 still more preferably about 50 50. Each phase could be one or more of the following nonlimiting examples including a cleansing phase a benefit phase and a non lathering structured aqueous phase which are described in greater detail hereinafter.

The mild multi phase personal care composition of the present invention can comprise a cleansing phase. The cleansing phase comprises a surfactant component comprising a surfactant or a mixture of surfactants.

The surfactant component comprises a surfactant or a mixture of surfactants. The surfactant component comprises surfactants suitable for application to the skin or hair. Suitable surfactants for use herein include any known or otherwise effective cleansing surfactant suitable for application to the skin and which is otherwise compatible with the other essential ingredients in the mild multi phased personal care composition including water. These surfactants include anionic nonionic cationic zwitterionic or amphoteric surfactants soap or combinations thereof.

Preferably the surfactant component comprises a mixture of at least one nonionic surfactant at least one anionic surfactant and at least one amphoteric surfactant. The general categories of alkyl amines and alkanolamines are less preferred surfactants because such surfactants tend to be less mild than other suitable surfactants. In a preferred embodiment of the present invention the mild multi phased personal care composition is substantially free of alkyl amines and alkanolamines.

The surfactant component in the present invention exhibits Non Newtonian shear thinning behavior. Preferably the mild multi phased personal care composition has a viscosity of greater than about 1 500 centipoise cps more preferably greater than about 5 000 cps even more preferably greater than about 10 000 cps and still more preferably greater than about 20 000 cps as measured by the Viscosity Method described in copending application Ser. No. 60 542 710 filed on Feb. 6 2004.

The surfactant component comprises a structured domain comprising a structured surfactant system. The structured domain enables the incorporation of high levels of benefit components in a separate visually distinct phase that are not emulsified in the composition but suspended. In a preferred embodiment the structured domain is an opaque structured domain. The opaque structured domain is preferably a lamellar phase. The lamellar phase produces a lamellar gel network that is a type of colloidal system. The lamellar phase provides resistance to shear adequate yield to suspend particles and droplets and at the same time provides long term stability since they are thermodynamically stable. The lamellar phase yields a higher viscosity without the need for viscosity modifiers.

Preferably the surfactant component has a Yield Point of greater than about 0.1 Pascal Pa more preferably greater than about 0.5 Pascal even more preferably greater than about 1.0 Pascal still more preferably greater than about 2.0 Pascal still even more preferably greater than about 5 Pascal and even still even more preferably greater than about 10 Pascal as measured by the Yield Point Method described hereafter.

The mild multi phased personal care composition comprising the surfactant component has a Structured Domain Volume Ratio of at least about 45 preferably at least about 50 more preferably at least about 55 even more preferably at least about 60 still more preferably at least about 65 still even more preferably at least about 70 and still even still more preferably at least about 80 as measured by the Ultracentrifugation Method described hereafter.

The mild multi phased personal care composition preferably comprises a surfactant component at concentrations ranging from about 5 to about 99 preferably from about 10 to about 99 more preferably from about 25 to about 90 even more preferably from about 35 to about 88 still more preferably from about 40 to about 85 and still even more preferably from about 45 to about 85 by weight of the mild multi phased personal care composition. The preferred pH range of the mild multi phased personal care composition is from about 5 to about 8 more preferably about 6.

The surfactant component has a Total Lather Volume of at least about 600 ml preferably greater than about 800 ml more preferably greater than about 1000 ml even more preferably greater than about 1200 ml still more preferably greater than about 1500 ml and still even more preferably greater than about 2000 ml as measured by the Lather Volume Test described hereafter. The surfactant component preferably has a Flash Lather Volume of at least about 300 ml preferably greater than about 400 ml even more preferably greater than about 500 ml as measured by the Lather Volume Test described hereafter.

The structured domain has a Total Lather Volume of at least about 450 ml preferably greater than about 500 ml more preferably greater than about 600 ml even more preferably greater than about 800 ml still more preferably greater than about 1000 ml and still even more preferably greater than about 1250 ml as measured by the Lather Volume Test described hereafter. The structured domain preferably has a Flash Lather Volume of at least about 200 ml preferably greater than about 250 ml even more preferably greater than about 300 ml as measured by the Lather Volume Test described hereafter.

The mild multi phased personal care composition preferably comprises at least one nonionic surfactant. Preferably the nonionic surfactant has an HLB from about 1.0 to about 15.0 preferably from about 3.4 to about 15.0 more preferably from about 3.4 to about 9.5 even more preferably from about 3.4 to about 5.0. The mild multi phased personal care composition preferably comprises a nonionic surfactant at concentrations ranging from about 0.01 to about 50 more preferably from about 0.10 to about 10 and even more preferably from about 0.5 to about 5.0 by weight of the surfactant component.

Non limiting examples of nonionic surfactants for use in the compositions of the present invention are disclosed in McCutcheon s Detergents and Emulsifiers North American edition 1986 published by allured Publishing Corporation and McCutcheon s Functional Materials North American Edition 1992 .

Nonionic surfactants useful herein include those selected from the group consisting of alkyl glucosides alkyl polyglucosides polyhydroxy fatty acid amides alkoxylated fatty acid esters lathering sucrose esters amine oxides and mixtures thereof.

Non limiting examples of preferred nonionic surfactants for use herein are those selected form the group consisting of C Cglucose amides C Calkyl polyglucosides sucrose cocoate sucrose laurate and mixtures thereof. In a preferred embodiment the nonionic surfactant is selected from the group consisting of glyceryl monohydroxystearate Steareth 2 hydroxy stearic acid propylene glycol stearate PEG 2 stearate sorbitan monostearate glyceryl stearate laureth 2 and mixtures thereof. In a preferred embodiment the nonionic surfactant is Steareth 2.

The balance between the hydrophilic and lipophilic moieties in a surfactant molecule is used as a method of classification hydrophile lipophile balance HLB . The HLB values for commonly used surfactants are readily available in the literature eg. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients The Pharmaceutical Press. London 1994 . The HLB system was originally devised by Griffin J. Soc. Cosmetic Chem. 1 311 1949 . Griffin defined the HLB value of a surfactant as the mol of the hydrophilic groups divided by 5 where a completely hydrophilic molecule with no non polar groups had an HLB value of 20.

The mild multi phased personal care composition preferably comprises at least one anionic surfactant. The mild multi phased personal care composition preferably comprises an anionic surfactant at concentrations ranging from about 1 to about 50 more preferably from about 4 to about 30 even more preferably from about 5 to about 25 by weight of the surfactant component.

Preferably the anioninc surfactant is selected from the group consisting of alkyl ether sulfates alkyl sulfonates and mixtures thereof.

Anionic surfactants suitable for use in the mild multi phased personal care composition composition include alkyl and alkyl ether sulfates. These materials have the respective formula ROSOM and RO CHO SOM wherein R is alkyl or alkenyl of from about 8 to about 24 carbon atoms x is 1 to 10 and M is a water soluble cation such as ammonium sodium potassium and triethanolamine. The alkyl ether sulfates are typically made as condensation products of ethylene oxide and monohydric alcohols having from about 8 to about 24 carbon atoms. Preferably R has from about 10 to about 18 carbon atoms in both the alkyl and alkyl ether sulfates. The alcohols can be derived from fats e.g. coconut oil or tallow or can be synthetic. Lauryl alcohol and straight chain alcohols derived from coconut oil are preferred herein. Such alcohols are reacted with about 1 to about 10 preferably from about 3 to about 5 and more preferably with about 3 molar proportions of ethylene oxide and the resulting mixture of molecular species having for example an average of 3 moles of ethylene oxide per mole of alcohol is sulfated and neutralized.

Specific examples of alkyl ether sulfates which may be used in the mild multi phased personal care composition composition are sodium and ammonium salts of coconut alkyl triethylene glycol ether sulfate tallow alkyl triethylene glycol ether sulfate and tallow alkyl hexaoxyethylene sulfate. Highly preferred alkyl ether sulfates are those comprising a mixture of individual compounds said mixture having an average alkyl chain length of from about 10 to about 16 carbon atoms and an average degree of ethoxylation of from about 1 to about 4 moles of ethylene oxide.

Other suitable anionic surfactants include water soluble salts of the organic sulfuric acid reaction products of the general formula R SO M wherein Ris chosen from the group consisting of a straight or branched chain saturated aliphatic hydrocarbon radical having from about 8 to about 24 preferably about 10 to about 18 carbon atoms and M is a cation. Suitable examples are the salts of an organic sulfuric acid reaction product of a hydrocarbon of the methane series including iso neo ineso and n paraffins having about 8 to about 24 carbon atoms preferably about 10 to about 18 carbon atoms and a sulfonating agent e.g. SO HSO oleum obtained according to known sulfonation methods including bleaching and hydrolysis. Preferred are alkali metal and ammonium sulfonated Cn paraffins.

Other suitable surfactants are described in 1989 published by M. C. Publishing Co. and in U.S. Pat. No. 3 929 678.

Preferred anionic surfactants for use in the mild multi phased personal care composition composition include ammonium lauryl sulfate ammonium laureth sulfate triethylamine lauryl sulfate triethylamine laureth sulfate triethanolamine lauryl sulfate triethanolamine laureth sulfate monoethanolamine lauryl sulfate monoethanolamine laureth sulfate diethanolamine lauryl sulfate diethanolamine laureth sulfate lauric monoglyceride sodium sulfate sodium lauryl sulfate sodium laureth sulfate potassium laureth sulfate sodium lauryl sarcosinate sodium lauroyl sarcosinate lauryl sarcosine cocoyl sarcosine ammonium cocoyl sulfate ammonium lauroyl sulfate sodium cocoyl sulfate sodium lauroyl sulfate potassium cocoyl sulfate potassium lauryl sulfate monoethanolamine cocoyl sulfate sodium tridecyl benzene sulfonate sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate and combinations thereof.

Anionic surfactants with branched alkyl chains such as sodium trideceth sulfate for example are preferred in some embodiments. Mixtures of anionic surfactants may be used in some embodiments.

The mild multi phased personal care composition preferably comprises at least one amphoteric surfactant. The mild multi phased personal care composition preferably comprises an amphoteric surfactant at concentrations ranging from about 1 to about 50 more preferably from about 2 to about 30 even more preferably from about 3 to about 25 by weight of the surfactant component.

Amphoteric surfactant suitable for use in the present invention include those that are broadly described as derivatives of aliphatic secondary and tertiary amines in which the aliphatic radical can be straight or branched chain and wherein one of the aliphatic substituents contains from about 8 to about 18 carbon atoms and one contains an anionic water solubilizing group e.g. carboxy sulfonate sulfate phosphate or phosphonate. Examples of compounds falling within this definition are sodium 3 dodecyl aminopropionate sodium 3 dodecylaminopropane sulfonate sodium lauryl sarcosinate N alkyltaurines such as the one prepared by reacting dodecylamine with sodium isethionate according to the teaching of U.S. Pat. No. 2 658 072 N higher alkyl aspartic acids such as those produced according to the teaching of U.S. Pat. No. 2 438 091 and the products described in U.S. Pat. No. 2 528 378.

Amphoacetates and diamphoacetates conform to the formulas above where R is an aliphatic group of 8 to 18 carbon atoms. M is a cation such as sodium potassium ammonium or substituted ammonium. Sodium lauroamphoacetate sodium cocoamphoactetate disodium lauroamphoacetate and disodium cocodiamphoacetate are preferred in some embodiments.

Additional surfactant from the classes of zwitterionic surfactant and or cationic surfactant may be incorporated in the mild multi phased personal care composition.

Zwitterionic surfactants suitable for use in the mild multi phased personal care composition include those that are broadly described as derivatives of aliphatic quaternary ammonium phosphonium and sulfonium compounds in which the aliphatic radicals can be straight or branched chain and wherein one of the aliphatic substituents contains from about 8 to about 18 carbon atoms and one contains an anionic group e.g. carboxy sulfonate sulfate phosphate or phosphonate. Such suitable zwitterionic surfactants can be represented by the formula 

Other zwitterionic surfactants suitable for use in the mild multi phased personal care composition include betaines including high alkyl betaines such as coco dimethyl carboxymethyl betaine cocoamidopropyl betaine cocobetaine lauryl amidopropyl betaine oleyl betaine lauryl dimethyl carboxymethyl betaine lauryl dimethyl alphacarboxyethyl betaine cetyl dimethyl carboxymethyl betaine lauryl bis 2 hydroxyethyl carboxymethyl betaine stearyl bis 2 hydroxypropyl carboxymethyl betaine oleyl dimethyl gamma carboxypropyl betaine and lauryl bis 2 hydroxypropyl alpha carboxyethyl betaine. The sulfobetaines may be represented by coco dimethyl sulfopropyl betaine stearyl dimethyl sulfopropyl betaine lauryl dimethyl sulfoethyl betaine lauryl bis 2 hydroxyethyl sulfopropyl betaine and the like amidobetaines and amidosulfobetaines wherein the RCONH CH radical is attached to the nitrogen atom of the betaine are also useful in this invention.

Cationic surfactants can also be used in the mild multi phased personal care composition but are generally less preferred and preferably represent less than about 5 by weight of the mild multi phased personal care composition.

The electrolyte if used can be added per se to the mild multi phased personal care composition or it can be formed in situ via the counterions included in one of the raw materials. The electrolyte preferably includes an anion comprising phosphate chloride sulfate or citrate and a cation comprising sodium ammonium potassium magnesium or mixtures thereof. Some preferred electrolytes are sodium or ammonium chloride or sodium or ammonium sulfate. A preferred electrolyte is sodium chloride. The electrolyte is preferably added to the surfactant component of the composition.

The electrolyte when present should be present in an amount which facilitates formation of the stable composition Non Newtonian shear thinning behavior . Generally this amount is from about 0.1 by weight to about 15 by weight preferably from about 1 to about 6 by weight of the mild multi phased personal care but may be varied if required.

The mild multi phase personal care compositions of the present invention can comprise a benefit phase. The benefit phase in the present invention is preferably anhydrous. The benefit phase comprises hydrophobic compositions comprising hydrophobic components. The benefit phase comprises from about 20 to about 100 preferably at least about 35 most preferably at least about 50 of a hydrophobic component. The hydrophobic compositions suitable for use in the present invention have a Vaughan Solubility Parameter as described in copending application Ser. No. 60 542 710 filed on Feb. 6 2004 of from about 5 to about 15. The hydrophobic compositions are preferably selected among those having defined rheological properties as described in copending application Ser. No. 60 542 710 filed on Feb. 6 200 including selected Consistency value k and Shear Index n . These preferred rheological properties are especially useful in providing the mild multi phased personal care composition compositions with improved deposition of hydrophobic components on the skin.

Nonlimiting examples of hydrophobic components suitable for use herein can include a variety of hydrocarbons oils and waxes silicones fatty acid derivatives cholesterol cholesterol derivatives diglycerides triglycerides vegetable oils vegetable oil derivatives acetoglyceride esters alkyl esters alkenyl esters polyglycerin fatty acid esters lanolin and its derivatives wax esters beeswax derivatives sterols and phospholipids vitamins and pro vitamins and combinations thereof.

Non limiting examples of hydrocarbon oils and waxes suitable for use herein include petrolatum mineral oil micro crystalline waxes polyalkenes paraffins cerasin ozokerite polyethylene perhydrosqualene and combinations thereof.

Non limiting examples of silicone oils suitable for use as hydrophobic components herein include dimethicone copolyol dimethylpolysiloxane diethylpolysiloxane mixed C Calkyl polysiloxanes phenyl dimethicone dimethiconol and combinations thereof. Preferred are non volatile silicones selected from dimethicone dimethiconol mixed C Calkyl polysiloxane and combinations thereof. Nonlimiting examples of silicone oils useful herein are described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 011 681 Ciotti et al. .

Non limiting examples of diglycerides and triglycerides suitable for use as hydrophobic components herein include castor oil soy bean oil derivatized soybean oils such as maleated soy bean oil safflower oil cotton seed oil corn oil walnut oil peanut oil olive oil cod liver oil almond oil avocado oil palm oil and sesame oil vegetable oils sunflower seed oil and vegetable oil derivatives coconut oil and derivatized coconut oil cottonseed oil and derivatized cottonseed oil jojoba oil cocoa butter and combinations thereof.

Non limiting examples of acetoglyceride esters suitable for use as hydrophobic components herein include acetylated monoglycerides.

Non limiting examples of alkyl esters suitable for use as hydrophobic components herein include isopropyl esters of fatty acids and long chain esters of long chain i.e. C C fatty acids e.g. cetyl ricinoleate non limiting examples of which incloude isopropyl palmitate isopropyl myristate cetyl riconoleate and stearyl riconoleate. Other examples are hexyl laurate isohexyl laurate myristyl myristate isohexyl palmitate decyl oleate isodecyl oleate hexadecyl stearate decyl stearate isopropyl isostearate diisopropyl adipate diisohexyl adipate dihexyldecyl adipate diisopropyl sebacate acyl isononanoate lauryl lactate myristyl lactate cetyl lactate and combinations thereof.

Non limiting examples of alkenyl esters suitable for use as hydrophobic components herein include oleyl myristate oleyl stearate oleyl oleate and combinations thereof.

Non limiting examples of polyglycerin fatty acid esters suitable for use as hydrophobic components herein include decaglyceryl distearate decaglyceryl diisostearate decaglyceryl monomyriate decaglyceryl monolaurate hexaglyceryl monooleate and combinations thereof.

Non limiting examples of lanolin and lanolin derivatives suitable for use as hydrophobic components herein include lanolin lanolin oil lanolin wax lanolin alcohols lanolin fatty acids isopropyl lanolate acetylated lanolin acetylated lanolin alcohols lanolin alcohol linoleate lanolin alcohol riconoleate and combinations thereof.

Still other suitable hydrophobic components include milk triglycerides e.g. hydroxylated milk glyceride and polyol fatty acid polyesters.

Still other suitable hydrophobic components include wax esters non limiting examples of which include beeswax and beeswax derivatives spermaceti myristyl myristate stearyl stearate and combinations thereof. Also useful are vegetable waxes such as carnauba and candelilla waxes sterols such as cholesterol cholesterol fatty acid esters and phospholipids such as lecithin and derivatives sphingo lipids ceramides glycosphingo lipids and combinations thereof.

In a preferred embodiment the mild multi phased personal care composition can comprise a multi phase composition having a benefit phase wherein the benefit phase preferably can comprise one or more hydrophobic components wherein at least 20 by weight of the hydrophobic components are selected from petrolatum mineral oil sunflower seed oil micro crystalline waxes paraffins ozokerite polyethylene polybutene polydecene and perhydrosqualene dimethicones cyclomethicones alkyl siloxanes polymethylsiloxanes and methylphenylpolysiloxanes lanolin lanolin oil lanolin wax lanolin alcohols lanolin fatty acids isopropyl lanolate acetylated lanolin acetylated lanolin alcohols lanolin alcohol linoleate lanolin alcohol riconoleate castor oil soy bean oil maleated soy bean oil safflower oil cotton seed oil corn oil walnut oil peanut oil olive oil cod liver oil almond oil avocado oil palm oil and sesame oil and combinations thereof. More preferably at least about 50 by weight of the hydrophobic components are selected from the groups of petrolatum mineral oil paraffins polyethylene polybutene polydecene dimethicones alkyl siloxanes cyclomethicones lanolin lanolin oil lanolin wax. The remainder of the hydrophobic components are preferably selected from isopropyl palmitate cetyl riconoleate octyl isononanoate octyl palmitate isocetyl stearate hydroxylated milk glyceride and combinations thereof.

The mild multi phase personal care compositions of the present invention can comprise a non lathering structured aqueous phase. The non lathering structured aqueous phase of the composition comprises a water structurant and water. The non lathering structured aqueous phase can be hydrophilic and in a preferred embodiment the non lathering structured aqueous phase is a hydrophilic gelled water phase. In addition the non lathering structured aqueous phase typically comprises less than about 5 preferably less than about 3 and more preferably less than about 1 by weight of the non lathering structured aqueous phase of a surfactant. In one embodiment of the present invention the non lathering structured aqueous phase is free of surfactant.

The non lathering structured aqueous phase preferably produces a Total Lather Volume of greater than about 350 ml more preferably greater than about 330 ml even more preferably greater than about 300 ml as measured by the Lather Volume Test described in copending application Ser. No. 60 532 798 filed on Dec. 24 2003. The non lathering structured aqueous phase preferably produces a Flash Lather Volume of greater than about 150 ml preferably greater than about 130 ml even more preferably greater than about 100 ml as measured by the Lather Volume Test described in copending application Ser. No. 60 532 798 filed on Dec. 24 2003.

Preferably the non lathering structured aqueous phase exhibits a Yield Point of at least about 0.1 Pa preferably at least about 1 Pa more preferably at least about 10 Pa as measured by the Yield Point Method described in copending application Ser. No. 60 542 710 filed on Feb. 6 2004. Preferably the non lathering structured aqueous phase exhibits a Water Mobility of less than about 2.5 seconds more preferably less than about 2 seconds and even more preferably less than about 1 second as measured by the Water Mobility Method described in copending applications Ser. No. 60 532 798 filed on Dec. 24 2003.

Preferably the non lathering structured aqueous phase exhibits a Correlated Haze of less than about 50 Correlated Haze more preferably less than about 30 Correlated Haze even more preferably less than about 20 Correlated Haze and still more preferably less than about 10 Correlated Haze as measured by the Correlated Haze Index Method described in copending application Ser. No. 60 542 710 filed on Feb. 6 2004.

The non lathering structured aqueous phase has a preferred rheology profile as defined by Consistency Value k and Shear Index n . Preferred Consistency Values of the non lathering structured aqueous phase are from about 10 to about 100 000 poise 1 s preferably from about 10 to about 10 000 poise 1 s and more preferably from about 100 to about 1 000 poise 1 s . The Shear Index of the non lathering structured aqueous phase typically ranges from about 0.1 to about 0.8 preferably from about 0.1 to about 0.5 and more preferably from about 0.20 to about 0.4.

The Shear Index n and Consistency Value k are well known and accepted industry standards for reporting the viscosity profile of compositions having a viscosity that is a function of an applied shear rate. The methodology used to obtain these values was described in greater detail in copending application Ser. No. 60 542 710 filed on Feb. 6 2004.

The non lathering structured aqueous phase of the present invention comprises from about 30 to about 99 by weight of the non lathering structured aqueous phase of water. The non lathering structured aqueous phase generally comprises more than about 50 preferably more than about 60 even more preferably more than about 70 still more preferably more than about 80 by weight of the non lathering structured aqueous phase of water.

The non lathering structured aqueous phase will typically have a pH of from about to about 8 more preferably about 7. The non lathering structured aqueous phase can optionally comprise a pH regulator to facilitate the proper pH range.

The non lathering structured aqueous phase can have a net cationic charge net anionic charge or neutral charge. In a preferred embodiment the non lathering structured aqueous phase has a net anionic charge.

The non lathering structured aqueous phase of the present compositions can further comprise optional ingredients such as those described hereinafter. Preferred optional ingredients for the non lathering structured aqueous phase include pigments pH regulators and preservatives. In one embodiment the non lathering structured aqueous phase comprises a water structurant e.g. acrylates vinyl isodecanoate crosspolymer water a pH regulator e.g. triethanolamine and a preservative e.g. 1 3 dimethylol 5 5 dimethylhydantoin DMDMH available from Lonza under the trade name GLYDANT .

The non lathering structured aqueous phase comprises from about 0.1 to about 30 preferably from about 0.5 to about 20 more preferably from about 0.5 to about 10 and even more preferably from about 0.5 to about 5 by weight of the non lathering structured aqueous phase of a water structurant.

The water structurant is typically selected from the group consisting of inorganic water structurants charged polymeric water structurants water soluble polymeric structurants associative water structurants and mixtures thereof.

Non limiting examples of inorganic water structurants for use in the mild multi phased personal care composition composition include silicas clays such as a synthetic silicates Laponite XLG and Laponite XLS from Southern Clay or mixtures thereof.

Non limiting examples of charged polymeric water structurants for use in the mild multi phased personal care composition include Acrylates Vinyl Isodecanoate Crosspolymer Stabylen 30 from 3V Acrylates C10 30 Alkyl Acrylate Crosspolymer Pemulen TR1 and TR2 Carbomers Ammonium Acryloyldimethyltaurate VP Copolymer Aristoflex AVC from Clariant Ammonium Acryloyldimethyltaurate Beheneth 25 Methacrylate Crosspolymer Aristoflex HMB from Clariant Acrylates Ceteth 20 Itaconate Copolymer Structure 3001 from National Starch Polyacrylamide Sepigel 305 from SEPPIC or mixtures thereof.

Non limiting examples of water soluble polymeric structurants for use in the mild multi phased personal care composition composition include cellulosic gel hydroxypropyl starch phosphate Structured XL from National Starch polyvinyl alcohol or mixtures thereof.

Nonlimiting examples of associative water structurants for use in the the mild multi phased personal care composition include xanthum gum gellum gum pectin alginate or mixtures thereof.

The mild multi phased personal care composition can comprise a particle. Water insoluble solid particle of various shapes and densities is useful. In a preferred embodiment the particle tends to have a spherical an oval an irregular or any other shape in which the ratio of the largest dimension to the smallest dimension defined as the Aspect Ratio is less than about 10. More preferably the Aspect Ratio of the particle is less than about 8 still more preferably the Aspect Ratio of the particle is less than about 5.

The particle of the present invention has a particle size volume average based on the particle size measurement described in copending application Ser. No. 60 542 710 filed on Feb. 6 2004 of less than about 100 m preferably less than about 80 m and more preferably the particle size of less than about 60 m.

The particle of the present invention preferably has a particle size of greater than about 0.1 m preferably a particle size of greater than about 0.5 m more preferably a particle size greater than about 1 m still more preferably a particle size greater than about 2 m even more preferably a particle size greater than about 3 m and still even more preferably a particle size greater than about 4 m.

The particle has a diameter from about 1 m to about 70 m more preferably from about 2 m to about 65 m and even more preferably from about 2 m to about 60 m in diameter.

The mild multi phased personal care composition of the present invention comprises the particle at a cosmetically efficacious level. Preferably the particles are present from at least about 0.1 by weight of the composition more preferably at least about 0.2 by weight of composition even more preferably at least about 0.5 still more preferably at least about 1 and even still more preferably at least 2 by weight of composition. In the mild multi phased personal care composition of the present invention preferably the particles comprises no more than about 50 by weight of composition more preferably no more than about 30 still more preferably no more than about 20 and even more preferably no more than about 10 by weight of composition.

Preferably the particle will also have physical properties which are not significantly affected by typical processing of the composition. Preferably a particle having a melting point greater than about 70 C. is used more preferably having a melting point greater than about 80 C. and even more preferably having a melting point of greater than about 95 C. is used. As used herein melting point would refer to the temperature at which the particle transitions to a liquid or fluid state or undergoes significant deformation or physical property changes. In addition many of the particles of present invention are cross linked or have a cross linked surface membrane. These particles do not exhibit a distinct melting point. Cross linked particles are also useful as long as they are stable under the processing and storage conditions used in the making of compositions.

The particles that can be present in the present invention can be natural synthetic or semi synthetic. In addition hybrid particles can also be present. Synthetic particles can made of either cross linked or non cross linked polymers. The particles of the present invention can have surface charges or their surface can be modified with organic or inorganic materials such as surfactants polymers and inorganic materials. Particle complexes can be present.

Non limiting examples of natural particles include various precipitated silica particles in hydrophilic and hydrophobic forms available from Degussa Huls under the trade name Sipemet. Precipitated hydrophobic synthetic amorphous silica available from Degussa under the trade name Sipernet D11 is a preferred particle. Snowtex colloidal silica particles available from Nissan Chemical America Corporation.

Nonlimiting examples of synthetic particles include nylon silicone resins poly meth acrylates polyethylene polyester polypropylene polystyrene polyurethane polyamide epoxy resins urea resins and acrylic powders. Non limiting examples of useful particles are Microease 110S 114S 116 micronized synthetic waxes Micropoly 210 250S micronized polyethylene Microslip micronized polytetrafluoroethylene and Microsilk combination of polyethylene and polytetrafluoroethylene all of which are available from Micro Powder Inc. Additional examples include Luna smooth silica particles particles available from Phenomenex MP 2200 polymethylmethacrylate EA 209 ethylene acrylate copolymer SP 501 nylon 12 ES 830 polymethly methacrylate BPD 800 BPD 500 polyurethane particles available from Kobo Products Inc. and silicone resins sold under the name Tospearl particles by GE Silicones. Ganzpearl GS 0605 crosslinked polystyrene available from Presperse is also useful.

Non limiting examples of hybrid particles include Ganzpearl GSC 30SR Sericite crosslinked polystyrene hybrid powder and SM 1000 SM 200 mica and silica hybrid powder available from Presperse .

The exfoliant particle is selected from the group consisting of polyethylene microcryatalline wax jojoba esters amourphors silica talc tracalcium orthophosphate or blends thereof and the like. The exfoliant particle has a particle size dimension along the major axis of the particle of from about 100 microns to about 600 microns preferably from about 100 microns to about 300 microns. The exfoliant particle has a hardness of less than about 4 Mohs preferably less than about 3 Mohs. The hardness as so measured is a criterion of the resistance of a particular material to crushing. It is known as being a fairly good indication of the abrasive character of a particulate ingredient. Examples of materials arranged in increasing order of hardness according to the Moh scale are as follows h hardness 1 talc h 2 gypsum rock salt crystalline salt in general barytes chalk brimstone h 4 fluorite soft phosphate magnesite limestone h 5 apatite hard phosphate hard limestone chromite bauxite h 6 feldspar ilmenite hornblendes h 7 quartz granite h 8 topaz h 9 corrundum emery and h 10 diamond.

Preferably the exfoliant particle has a color distinct from the cleansing base. The exfoliant particle is preferably present at a level of less than about 10 preferably less than about 5 by wt of the composition.

The mild multi phased personal care composition can comprise a shiny particle. In a preferred embodiment the mild body wash composition comprises a multi phase personal care composition that can comprise a shiny particle in at least one phase of the multi phase personal care composition. Nonlimiting examples of shiny particles include the following interference pigment multi layered pigment metallic particle solid and liquid crystals or combinations thereof.

An interference pigment is a pigment with pearl gloss prepared by coating the surface of a particle substrate material with a thin film. The particle substrate material is generally platelet in shape. The thin film is a transparent or semitransparent material having a high refractive index. The high refractive index material shows a pearl gloss resulting from mutual interfering action between reflection and incident light from the platelet substrate coating layer interface and reflection of incident light from the surface of the coating layer. The interference pigments of the multi phased personal care compositions preferably comprises no more than about 20 weight percent of the composition more preferably no more than about 10 weight percent even more preferably no more than about 7 weight percent and still more preferably no more than about 5 weight percent of the multi phased personal care composition. The interference pigment of the multi phased personal care composition preferably comprises at least about 0.1 weight percent of the multi phased personal care composition more preferably at least about 0.2 weight percent even more preferably at least about 0.5 weight percent and still more preferably at least about 1 weight percent by weight of the mild multi phased personal composition. When pigment is applied and rinsed as described in the Pigment Deposition Tape Strip Method as described in copending application Ser. No. 60 469 075 filed on May 8 2003 the deposited pigment on the skin is preferably at least 0.5 g cm more preferably at least 1 g cm and even more preferably at least 5 g cm.

The interference pigments of the present invention are platelet particulates. The platelet particulates preferably have a thickness of no more than about 5 m more preferably no more than about 2 m still more preferably no more than about 1 m. The platelet particulates of the preferably have a thickness of at least about 0.02 m more preferably at least about 0.05 m even more preferably at least about 0.1 m and still more preferably at least about 0.2 m.

The particle size determines the opacity and luster. The particle size is determined by measuring the diameter thickness of the particulate material. The term diameter as used herein means the largest distance across the major axis of the particulate material. Diameter can be determined by any suitable method known in the art such as particle size analyzer Mastersizer 2000 manufactured by Malvern Instruments. The interference pigment preferably have an average diameter not greater than about 200 m more preferably not greater than 100 m even more preferably not greater than about 80 m still more preferably not greater than than about 60 m. The interference pigment preferably have a diameter of at least about 0.1 m more preferably at least about 1.0 m even more preferably at least about 2.0 m and still more preferably at least about 5.0 m.

The interference pigment can comprise a multilayer structure. The centre of the particulates is a flat substrate with a refractive index RI normally below 1.8. A wide variety of particle substrates are useful herein. Nonlimiting examples are natural mica synthetic mica graphite talc kaolin alumina flake bismuth oxychloride silica flake glass flake ceramics titanium dioxide CaSO CaCO BaSO borosilicate and mixtures thereof preferably mica silica and alumina flakes.

A layer of thin film or a multiple layer of thin films are coated on the surface of a substrate described above. The thin films are made of highly refractive materials. The refractive index of these materials is normally above 1.8.

A wide variety of thin films are useful herein. Nonlimiting examples are TiO FeO SnO CrO ZnO ZnS ZnO SnO ZrO CaF AlO BiOCl and mixtures thereof or in the form of separate layers preferably TiO FeO CrOSnO. For the multiple layer structures the thin films can be consisted of all high refractive index materials or alternation of thin films with high and low RI materials with the high RI film as the top layer.

The interference color is a function of the thickness of thin film the thickness for a specific color may be different for different materials. For TiO a layer of 40 nm to 60 nm or a whole number multiple thereof gives silver color 60 nm to 80 nm yellow color 80 nm to 100 nm red color 100 nm to 130 nm blue color 130 nm to 160 nm green color. In addition to the interference color other transparent absorption pigments can be precipitated on top of or simultaneously with the TiOlayer. Common materials are red or black iron oxide ferric ferrocyanide chromium oxide or carmine. It was found that the color of the interference pigment in addition to its brightness had a significant influence on human perception of skin tone. In general preferred colors are silver gold red green and mixtures thereof.

Nonlimiting examples of the interference pigments useful herein include those supplied by Persperse Inc. under the trade name PRESTIGE FLONAC supplied by EMD Chemicals Inc. under the trade name TIMIRON COLORONA DICHRONA and XIRONA and supplied by Engelhard Co. under the trade name FLAMENCO TIMICA DUOCHROME .

In an embodiment of the present invention the interference pigment surface is either hydrophobic or has been hydrophobically modified. The Particle Contact Angle Test as described in copending application Ser. No. 60 469 075 filed on May 8 2003 is used to determine contact angle of interference pigments. The greater the contact angle the greater the hydrophobicity of the interference pigment. The interference pigment of the present invention possess a contact angle of at least 60 more preferably greater than 80 even more preferably greater than 100 still more preferably greater than 100 . The hydrophobically modified interference pigment or HMIP allows for the entrapment of the HMIP within the phases and greater deposition of the HMIP. Preferably the ratio of HMIP to a phase is 1 1 to about 1 70 more preferably 1 2 to about 1 50 still more preferably 1 3 to about 1 40 and most preferably 1 7 to about 1 35.

In an embodiment of the present invention the HMIP s are preferably entrapped within the hydrophobic composition. This necessitates that the hydrophobic composition particle size is generally larger than the HMIP. In a preferred embodiment of the invention the hydrophobic composition particles contain only a small number of HMIPs per hydrophobic composition particles. Preferably this is less than 20 more preferably less than 10 most preferably less than 5. These parameters the relative size of the benefit droplets to the HMIP and the approximate number of HMIP particles per hydrophobic composition particles can be determined by using visual inspection with light microscopy.

The HMIP and the hydrophobic composition can be mixed into the composition via a premix or separately. For the case of separate addition the hydrophobic pigments partition into the hydrophobic composition during the processing of the formulation. The HMIP of the present invention preferably has a hydrophobic coating comprising no more than about 20 weight percent of the total particle weight more preferably no more than about 15 weight percent even more preferably no more than about 10 weight percent. The HMIP of the present invention preferably has a hydrophobic coating comprising at least about 0.1 weight percent of the total particle weight more preferably at least about 0.5 weight percent even more preferably at least about 1 weight percent. Nonlimiting examples of the hydrophobic surface treatment useful herein include silicones acrylate silicone copolymers acrylate polymers alkyl silane isopropyl titanium triisostearate sodium stearate magnesium myristate perfluoroalcohol phosphate perfluoropolymethyl isopropyl ether lecithin carnauba wax polyethylene chitosan lauroyl lysine plant lipid extracts and mixtures thereof preferably silicones silanes and stearates. Surface treatment houses include US Cosmetics KOBO Products Inc. and Cardre Inc.

A variety of suitable optional ingredients can be employed in the mild multi phase personal care composition. Such optional ingredients are most typically those materials approved for use in cosmetics and that are described in reference books such as the CTFA Cosmetic Ingredient Handbook Second Edition The Cosmetic Toiletries and Fragrance Association Inc. 1988 1992. These optional materials can be used in any aspect of the compositions of the present invention including each phase as described herein.

Non limiting optional ingredients include humectants and solutes. A variety of humectants and solutes can be employed and can be present at a level of from about 0.1 to about 50 preferably from about 0.5 to about 35 and more preferably from about 2 to about 20 by weight of the personal care composition. A preferred humectant is glycerin.

A preferred water soluble organic material is selected from the group consisting of a polyol of the structure R1 O CH CR2HO H where R1 H C1 C4 alkyl R2 H CHand n 1 200 C2 C10 alkane diols guanidine glycolic acid and glycolate salts e.g. ammonium and quaternary alkyl ammonium lactic acid and lactate salts e.g. ammonium and quaternary alkyl ammonium polyhydroxy alcohols such as sorbitol glycerol hexanetriol propylene glycol hexylene glycol and the like polyethylene glycol sugars and starches sugar and starch derivatives e.g. alkoxylated glucose panthenol including D L and the D L forms pyrrolidone carboxylic acid hyaluronic acid lactamide monoethanolamine acetamide monoethanolamine urea and ethanol amines of the general structure HOCHCH NHwhere x 1 3 y 0 2 and x y 3 and mixtures thereof. The most preferred polyols are selected from the group consisting of glycerine polyoxypropylene 1 glycerol and polyoxypropylene 3 glycerol sorbitol butylene glycol propylene glycol sucrose urea and triethanol amine.

Nonionic polyethylene polypropylene glycol polymers are preferably used as skin conditioning agents. Polymers useful herein that are especially preferred are PEG 2M wherein x equals 2 and n has an average value of about 2 000 PEG 2 M is also known as Polyox WSR N 10 from Union Carbide and as PEG 2 000 PEG 5M wherein x equals 2 and n has an average value of about 5 000 PEG 5 M is also known as Polyox WSR 35 and Polyox WSR N 80 both from Union Carbide and as PEG 5 000 and Polyethylene Glycol 200 000 PEG 7M wherein x equals 2 and n has an average value of about 7 000 PEG 7 M is also known as Polyox WSR N 750 from Union Carbide PEG 9M wherein x equals 2 and n has an average value of about 9 000 PEG 9 M is also known as Polyox WSR N 3333 from Union Carbide PEG 14 M wherein x equals 2 and n has an average value of about 14 000 PEG 14 M is also known as Polyox WSR 205 and Polyox WSR N 3000 both from Union Carbide and PEG 90M wherein x equals 2 and n has an average value of about 90 000. PEG 90M is also known as Polyox WSR 301 from Union Carbide. 

Other non limiting examples of these optional ingredients include vitamins and derivatives thereof e.g. ascorbic acid vitamin E tocopheryl acetate and the like sunscreens thickening agents e.g. polyol alkoxy ester available as Crothix from Croda preservatives for maintaining the anti microbial integrity of the cleansing compositions anti acne medicaments resorcinol salicylic acid and the like antioxidants skin soothing and healing agents such as aloe vera extract allantoin and the like chelators and sequestrants and agents suitable for aesthetic purposes such as fragrances essential oils skin sensates pigments pearlescent agents e.g. mica and titanium dioxide lakes colorings and the like e.g. clove oil menthol camphor eucalyptus oil and eugenol .

A TA Instruments AR2000 Controlled Stress Rheometer can be used to determine the Yield Point of the surfactant component. For purpose herein the Yield Point of the surfactant component or the mild multi phased personal care composition is the amount of stress required to produce the onset of flow where a significant increase in strain rate occurs. The determination is performed at 25 C. with a 4 cm diameter parallel plate measuring system and a 1 mm gap. The determination is performed via the programmed application of a shear stress continuous ramp typically from about 0.1 Pa to about 500 Pa over a time interval of 5 minutes collecting 30 data points per decade of stress in an evenly spaced logarithmic stress progression. Stress results in a deformation of the sample and a shear stress vs. strain curve can be created. The shear stress Pa is graphed on the x axis vs. the strain on the y axis using logarithmic scales for both axes. Mild multi phased personal care compositions and surfactant components which are structured exhibit an initial region at low stresses that appears as a straight line when plotted in this way. The Yield Point is the stress point at which the observed strain deviates by greater than 10 from a regression line i.e. from the predicted strain extended from the initial straight line region on the log log plot determined by linear regression of log log transformed stress strain data points between 0.2 2.0 Pa and continues to deviate by a substantially increasing and accelerating amount with each subsequent point such that flow occurs. The surfactant component is measured either prior to combining in the composition or after combining in the composition by separating the compositions by suitable non destructive physical separation means.

Lather volume of a cleansing phase a surfactant component or a structured domain of a mild multi phased personal care composition is measured using a graduated cylinder and a rotating apparatus. A 1 000 ml graduated cylinder is used which is marked in 10 ml increments and has a height of 14.5 inches at the 1 000 ml mark from the inside of its base for example Pyrex No. 2982 . Distilled water 100 grams at 25 C. is added to the graduated cylinder. The cylinder is clamped in a rotating device which clamps the cylinder with an axis of rotation that transects the center of the graduated cylinder. Inject 0.5 cc of a surfactant component or cleansing phase into the graduated cylinder onto the side of the cylinder above the water line and cap the cylinder. When the structured domain is evaluated use only 0.25 cc keeping everything else the same. The cylinder is rotated for 20 complete revolutions at a rate of about 10 revolutions per 18 seconds and stopped in a vertical position to complete the first rotation sequence. A timer is set to allow 15 seconds for the lather thus generated to drain. After 15 seconds of such drainage the first lather volume is measured to the nearest 10 ml mark by recording the lather height in ml up from the base including any water that has drained to the bottom on top of which the lather is floating .

If the top surface of the lather is uneven the lowest height at which it is possible to see halfway across the graduated cylinder is the first lather volume ml . If the lather is so coarse that a single or only a few foam cells bubbles reach across the entire cylinder the height at which at least 10 foam cells are required to fill the space is the first lather volume also in ml up from the base. Foam cells larger than one inch in any dimension no matter where they occur are designated as unfilled air instead of lather. Foam that collects on the top of the graduated cylinder but does not drain is also incorporated in the measurement if the foam on the top is in its own continuous layer by adding the ml of foam collected there using a ruler to measure thickness of the layer to the ml of foam measured up from the base. The maximum foam height is 1 000 ml even if the total foam height exceeds the 1 000 ml mark on the graduated cylinder . 30 seconds after the first rotation is completed a second rotation sequence is commenced which is identical in speed and duration to the first rotation sequence. The second lather volume is recorded in the same manner as the first after the same 15 seconds of drainage time. A third sequence is completed and the third lather volume is measured in the same manner with the same pause between each for drainage and taking the measurement.

The lather result after each sequence is added together and the Total Lather Volume determined as the sum of the three measurements in ml. The Flash Lather Volume is the result after the first rotation sequence only in ml i.e. the first lather volume. Compositions according to the present invention perform significantly better in this test than similar compositions in conventional emulsion form.

The Ultracentrifugation Method is used to determine the percent of a structured domain or an opaque structured domain that is present in a mild multi phased personal care composition that comprises a surfactant component. The method involves the separation of the composition through ultracentrifugation into separate but distinguishable layers. The mild multi phased personal care composition of the present invention can have multiple distinguishable layers for example a non structured surfactant layer a structured surfactant layer and a benefit layer.

First dispense about 4 grams of mild multi phased personal care composition into Beckman Centrifuge Tube 11 60 mm . Next place the centrifuge tubes in an Ultracentrifuge Beckman Model L8 M or equivalent and set ultracentrifuge to the following conditions 50 000 rpm 18 hours and 25 C.

After ultracentrifuging for 18 hours determine the relative phase volume by measuring the height of each layer using an Electronic Digital Caliper within 0.01 mm . First the total height is measured as Hwhich includes all materials in the ultracentrifuge tube. Second the height of the benefit layer is measured as H. Third the structured surfactant layer is measured as H. The benefit layer is determined by its low moisture content less than 10 water as measured by Karl Fischer Titration . It generally presents at the top of the centrifuge tube. The total surfactant layer height H can be calculated by this equation 

The structured surfactant layer components may comprise several layers or a single layer. Upon ultracentrifugation there is generally an isotropic layer at the bottom or next to the bottom of the ultracentrifuge tube. This clear isotropic layer typically represents the non structured micellar surfactant layer. The layers above the isotropic phase generally comprise higher surfactant concentration with higher ordered structures such as liquid crystals . These structured layers are sometimes opaque to naked eyes or translucent or clear. There is generally a distinct phase boundary between the structured layer and the non structured isotropic layer. The physical nature of the structured surfactant layers can be determined through microscopy under polarized light. The structured surfactant layers typically exhibit distinctive texture under polarized light. Another method for characterizing the structured surfactant layer is to use X ray diffraction technique. Structured surfactant layer display multiple lines that are often associated primarily with the long spacings of the liquid crystal structure.

Finally the structured domain volume ratio is calculated based on the following equation Structured Domain Volume Ratio 100 

The mild multi phase personal care compositions of the present invention are preferably applied topically to the desired area of the skin or hair in an amount sufficient to provide effective delivery of the skin cleansing agent hydrophobic material and particles to the applied surface. The compositions can be applied directly to the skin or indirectly via the use of a cleansing puff washcloth sponge or other implement. The compositions are preferably diluted with water prior to during or after topical application and then subsequently the skin or hair rinsed or wiped off preferably rinsed off of the applied surface using water or a water insoluble substrate in combination with water.

The present invention is therefore also directed to methods of cleansing the skin through the above described application of the compositions of the present invention. The methods of the present invention are also directed to a method of providing effective delivery of the desired skin active agent and the resulting benefits from such effective delivery as described herein to the applied surface through the above described application of the compositions of the present invention.

The mild multi phase personal care compositions may be prepared by any known or otherwise effective technique suitable for making and formulating the desired mild multi phase product form. It is effective to combine toothpaste tube filling technology with a spinning stage design. Additionally the present invention can be prepared by the method and apparatus as disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 213 166. The method and apparatus allows two or more compositions to be filled with a spiral configuration into a single container. The method requires that at least two nozzles be employed to fill the container. The container is placed on a static mixer and spun as the composition is introduced into the container.

Alternatively it is effective to combine at least two phases by first placing the separate compositions in separate storage tanks having a pump and a hose attached. The phases are then pumped in predetermined amounts into a single combining section. Next the phases are moved from the combining sections into the blending sections and the phases are mixed in the blending section such that the single resulting product exhibits a distinct pattern of the phases. The pattern is selected from the group consisting of striped marbled geometric and mixtures thereof. The next step involves pumping the product that was mixed in the blending section via a hose into a single nozzle then placing the nozzle into a container and filing the container with the resulting product. Specific non limiting examples of such methods as they are applied to specific embodiments of the present invention are described in the following examples.

If the mild multi phase personal care compositions comprise patterns of varying colors it can be desirable to package these compositions in a transparent or translucent package such that the consumer can view the pattern through the package. Because of the viscosity of the subject compositions it may also be desirable to include instructions to the consumer to store the package upside down on its cap to facilitate dispensing.

It should be understood that every maximum numerical limitation given throughout this specification includes every lower numerical limitation as if such lower numerical limitations were expressly written herein. Every minimum numerical limitation given throughout this specification includes every higher numerical limitation as if such higher numerical limitations were expressly written herein. Every numerical range given throughout this specification includes every narrower numerical range that falls within such broader numerical range as if such narrower numerical ranges were all expressly written herein.

All parts ratios and percentages herein in the Specification Examples and claims are by weight and all numerical limits are used with the normal degree of accuracy afforded by the art unless otherwise specified.

The following examples further describe and demonstrate embodiments within the scope of the present invention. The examples are given solely for the purpose of illustration and are not to be construed as limitations of the present invention as many variations thereof are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

Each of the examples below are of mild multi phase personal care compositions comprising 50 by weight of the personal care composition of a first phase and 50 by weight of the mild multi phase personal care composition of a second phase. The amount of each component in a particular phase is provided as a weight percent based on the weight of the particular phase that contains the component.

The compositions described above can be prepared by conventional formulation and mixing techniques. Prepare the first phase composition by first adding citric acid into water at 1 3 ratio to form a citric acid premix. Then add the following ingredients into the main mixing vessel in the following sequence water sodium trideceth sulfate sodium lauroamphoacetate Steareth 2 sodium chloride sodium benzoate Disodium EDTA glydant. Heat to 65 70 C. Start agitation of the main mixing vessel. In a separate mixing vessel disperse polymers Polyquaterium 10 Jaguar C 17 or N Hance 3196 in water at 1 10 ratio and form a polymer premix. Add the completely dispersed polymer premix into the main mixing vessel with continuous agitation. Disperse Polyox WSR 301 in water and then add to the main mixing vessel. Then add the rest of the water. Cool to 48 C. and add perfume into the batch. Keep agitation until a homogenous solution forms.

The second phase can be prepared by adding petrolatum into a mixing vessel. Heat the vessel to 190 F. 88 C. . Then add mineral oil and particles. High shear the batch to ensure good particle dispersion. Keep agitating the batch and slowly cool down the batch to ambient temperature.

These phases can be combined by first placing the separate phases in separate storage tanks having a pump and a hose attached. The phases are then pumped in predetermined amounts into a single combining section. Next the phases are moved from the combining sections into the blending sections and the phases are mixed in the blending section such that the single resulting product exhibits a distinct pattern of the phases. The pattern is selected from the group consisting of striped marbled geometric and mixtures thereof. The next step involves pumping the product that was mixed in the blending section via a hose into a single nozzle then placing the nozzle into a container and filing the container with the resulting product. The products remain stable at ambient for at least 180 days.

The following examples described are non limiting examples of a mild body wash comprising a multi phase personal care composition and particulate.

The compositions described above can be prepared by conventional formulation and mixing techniques. Prepare the first phase composition by first adding citric acid into water at 1 3 ratio to form a citric acid premix. Then add the following ingredients into the main mixing vessel in the following sequence water sodium trideceth sulfate sodium lauroamphoacetate Steareth 2 sodium chloride sodium benzoate Disodium EDTA glydant. Heat to 65 70 C. Start agitation of the main mixing vessel. In a separate mixing vessel disperse polymers Polyquaterium 10 Jaguar C 17 or N Hance 3196 in water at 1 10 ratio and form a polymer premix. Add the completely dispersed polymer premix into the main mixing vessel with continuous agitation. Disperse Polyox WSR 301 in water and then add to the main mixing vessel. Then add the rest of the water. Cool to 48 C. and add perfume into the batch. Keep agitation until a homogenous solution forms.

The second phase can be prepared similarly by conventional formulation and mixing techniques. Prepare by first adding citric acid into water at 1 3 ratio to form a citric acid premix. Then add the following ingredients into the main mixing vessel in the following sequence water sodium trideceth sulfate sodium lauroamphoacetate Laureth 2 sodium chloride sodium benzoate Disodium EDTA glydant. Heat to 65 70 C. Start agitation of the main mixing vessel. In a separate mixing vessel disperse polymers Polyquaterium 10 Jaguar C 17 or N Hance 3196 in water at 1 10 ratio and form a polymer premix. Add the completely dispersed polymer premix into the main mixing vessel with continuous agitation. Disperse Polyox WSR 301 in water and then add to the main mixing vessel. Then add the rest of the water. Cool to 48 C. and add perfume into the batch. Finally add the particulate matter and keep agitation until a homogenous solution forms.

These phases can be combined by first placing the separate phases in separate storage tanks having a pump and a hose attached. The phases are then pumped in predetermined amounts into a single combining section. Next the phases are moved from the combining sections into the blending sections and the phases are mixed in the blending section such that the single resulting product exhibits a distinct pattern of the phases. The pattern is selected from the group consisting of striped marbled geometric and mixtures thereof. The next step involves pumping the product that was mixed in the blending section via a hose into a single nozzle then placing the nozzle into a container and filing the container with the resulting product. The products remain stable at ambient for at least 180 days.

The following comparative examples versus the mild multi phased personal care composition described in the present application demonstrate the superior performance the composition of the present invention delivers.

A body wash is procured having the following ingredients water sunflower seed oil sodium laureth sulfate sodium lauroamphoacetate glycerin petrolatum lauric acid cocamide MEA fragrance guar hydroxypropyltrimoniumchloride lanolin alcohol citric acid DMDM hydantoin tetrasodium EDTA etidronic acid titanium dioxide PEG 30 dipolyhydroxystearate. The body wash is marketed under the trade name Dove All Day Moisturizing Body Wash by Lever Bros. Co. Greenwich Conn. USA. The body wash contains a Structured Domain Volume Ratio of at least about 42 and has a Total Lather Volume of 1410 ml and a Flash Lather Volume of 310 ml and a Yield Stress of 7 Pa.

A body wash is procured having the following ingredients water petrolatum ammonium laureth sulfate sodium lauroamphoacetate ammonium lauryl sulfate lauric acid fragrance trihydroxystearin citric acid guar hydroxypropyl trimonium chloride sodium benzoate DMDM hydantoin disodium EDTA PEG 14M. The body wash is marketed under the trade name Oil of Olay Daily Renewal Moisturizing Body Wash by Procter Gamble Inc. Cincinnati Ohio USA. The body wash contains a Structured Domain Volume Ratio of at least about 64 and has a Total Lather Volume of 1630 ml a Flash Lather Volume of 410 ml and a Yield Stress of 2.8 Pa.

All documents cited in the Detailed Description of the Invention are are in relevant part incorporated herein by reference the citation of any document is not to be construed as an admission that it is prior art with respect to the present invention.

While particular embodiments of the present invention have been illustrated and described it would be obvious to those skilled in the art that various other changes and modifications can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. It is therefore intended to cover in the appended claims all such changes and modifications that are within the scope of this invention.

