---

title: Direct reacting anolyte-catholyte fuel cell for hybrid energy sources
abstract: A fuel cell and a method for using the fuel cell to make electricity, in which the fuel cell has an anode half-cell having an electrocatalytic anode and a liquid anolyte that is substantially isopropanol dissolved in seawater. The fuel cell has a cathode half-cell having an electrocatalytic cathode and a liquid catholyte that is substantially hydrogen peroxide dissolved in slightly acidic seawater. The half-cells share a common proton exchange membrane. When the anode and cathode are in electrical connection the isopropanol is oxidized to carbon dioxide, which is fugitive, and the hydrogen peroxide is reduced to water. In the method, the anolyte and the catholyte, which are in effect the fuel of the fuel cell, are metered and re-circulated as needed to produce the necessary electrical power. The electrocatalytic electrodes are typically comprised of palladium and iridium alloys.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07585580&OS=07585580&RS=07585580
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07585580
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050504
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for Governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

The present invention relates generally to a fuel cell and more particularly to a fuel cell wherein both the anolyte and the catholyte are liquids that can be utilized and stored externally to the cell stack.

Direct methanol fuel cells DMFC have been under investigation for the past decade. These cells are comprised of a solution phase anolyte methanol undergoing oxidation on a catalytic surface at the anode a membrane and oxygen undergoing reduction on a catalyst at the cathode. Improvements have been made on power density efficiency cell stack and life.

The electrochemical equations associated with the DMFC are Anode CHOH HO CO 6H 6 1 Cathode 4H 4 O2HO 2 Cell Reaction 2CHOH 3O 2CO 4HO 3 

The proposed mechanism for the oxidation of the methanol equations 4 6 is described below and occurs as a two step process where the methanol CHOH oxidizes to form carbon dioxide CO via a carbon monoxide CO intermediate step equation 5 . The carbon monoxide is undesirable as it can poison the catalyst and lower voltages and efficiencies. CHOH CO 4H 4 4 CO HO CO 2H 2 5 CHOH HO CO 6H 6 6 

The advantages of DMFC cell stacks are that they are lightweight compact can operate at ambient temperatures and run for thousands of hours. Typical voltages are 0.5V at 100 mA cm2.

A major disadvantage in addition to CO catalyst poisoning of DMFC cell stacks is the crossover of the methanol across the membrane lowering cell voltages and fuel efficiency. Many studies have been conducted on membranes to minimize or eliminate this fuel crossover.

A further disadvantage is that the aforementioned DMFC requires molecular oxygen which is difficult to store. Oxygen is stored as either a high pressure gas or a very low temperature liquid. The critical temperature of oxygen is 118.6 C. and the critical pressure is 49.8 atm.

What is desired is a fuel cell that employs liquid fuels that can be stored externally to the cell stack. In U.S. Pat. No. 6 485 851 inventors Sekharipuram R. Narayanan Thomas I. Valdez William Chun disclose a methanol water fuel cell that employs a liquid oxidant hydrogen peroxide.

U.S. Published Application 2004 0072044 A1 having inventors John Rusek and Daniel Prater bearing serial No. 10 269 046 teaches a direct hydrogen peroxide fuel cell utilizing a proton donating fuel where the proton donating fuel is methanol. As shown the hydrogen peroxide is added to the cathode side of the fuel cell and methanol is added to the anode side of the fuel cell producing an electric current and a flow of protons i.e. proton transfer through the anode cathode membrane. Methanol and hydrogen peroxide solutions are added periodically to the anode and cathode sides of the fuel cell usually by automatic computer control system.

Accordingly it is an objective of the present invention to provide a fuel cell that employs liquid fuels that can be stored externally to the cell stack.

Another objective of the present invention is to provide a fuel cell that does not require molecular oxygen as a chemical component.

Another objective of the present invention is to avoid the crossover of an anolyte across the fuel cell membrane lowering cell voltages and fuel efficiency.

These objectives are accomplished through the present invention an electrochemical fuel cell comprised of a cathode half cell and an anode half cell having a common shared proton exchange membrane. The cathode half cell is filled with a catholyte which is comprised of a solution of an oxidant and seawater and the anode half cell is filled with an anolyte which is comprised of a solution of a reductant and seawater. The oxidant is an acceptor of electrons and the reductant is a donor of electrons. The protons generated upon oxidation of the reductant move from the anode half cell through the proton exchange membrane to the cathode half cell and electrons move from the electrocatalytic anode to the electrocatalytic cathode via an electrical connection over an electrical load.

The invention is an electrochemical fuel cell comprised of two half cells separated by a proton exchange membrane PEM an electrocatalytic anode an electrocatalytic cathode a liquid anolyte comprised of a reductant dissolved in an aqueous solution capable of supporting electrical conductivity such as seawater and a liquid catholyte comprised of a oxidant dissolved in an aqueous solution capable of supporting electrical conductivity such as seawater. Examples of other aqueous solutions capable of supporting electrical conductivity are solutions with salts such as sodium potassium calcium magnesium and lithium. Examples of oxidants that are soluble in seawater are hydrogen peroxide hypochlorite and hypochlorous acid. Examples of reductants that are soluble in seawater are methanol propanol isopropanol ethanol acetone oxalic acid formic acid formaldehyde acetic acid and acetaldehyde. Methanol and isopropanol are preferred reductants as they are relatively inexpensive and the oxidation products are largely carbon dioxide and hydrogen ions. Isopropanol when used in a fuel cell produces three times as many electrons as methanol on a mole per mole basis. The methanol or isopropanol concentration in the anolyte solution is maintained at a selected level by injection of pure methanol or isopropanol into the anolyte flow stream from a reservoir of pure material. Hydrogen peroxide is a preferred oxidant as it is relatively inexpensive it forms water upon reduction in the presence of hydrogen ions and it is relatively safe to store and handle. Most importantly when used in a fuel cell as a catholyte containing seawater hydrogen peroxide has a much higher theoretical cell voltage than molecular oxygen on the order of 1.7 V versus 0.5 V for molecular oxygen. The hydrogen peroxide concentration in the catholyte is maintained at a selected level by injection of 50 HOinto the catholyte flow stream from a reservoir of 50 HO. The anolyte and the catholyte are re circulated and replenished as necessary. The catholyte at least initially also contains a catalytic amount of acid .

Referring to anolyte is fed into the bottom of the anode half cell and the catholyte is fed into the bottom of the cathode half cell of fuel cell . The anode half cell has an electrocatalytic electrode comprised of a palladium and iridium catalytic surface. The cathode half cell also has an electrocatalytic electrode comprised of a palladium and iridium catalytic surface. A preferred construction of the Pd Ir electrode is described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 740 220. The palladium and iridium are simultaneously deposited on a carbon substrate to form a palladium iridium alloy. There is an electrical potential of 1.7 V between the anode and cathode and when in electrical connection the reducing agent of the anolyte isopropanol is oxidized to carbon dioxide and the oxidizing agent of the catholyte hydrogen peroxide is reduced to water. The two half cells are separated by a proton exchange membrane wherein protons move across the membrane from the anode side to the cathode side.

The invented fuel cell is stoichiometrically described by the half cell equations 7 8 and the full cell equation 9 for methanol and hydrogen peroxide and half cell equations 10 11 and the full cell equation 12 and for isopropanol and hydrogen peroxide. Multiple fuel cells can be combined in series in a stacked formation producing a higher voltage or combined in parallel increasing the amperage.

The following are the Methanol Hydrogen Peroxide Seawater Electrochemical Reactions Anode CHOH HO CO 6H 6 7 Cathode 6H 6 3HO 6HO 8 Cell Reaction CHOH 3HO CO 6HO 9 

The following are the Isopropanol Hydrogen Peroxide Seawater Electrochemical Reactions Anode CHOH 5HO 3CO 18H 18 10 Cathode 18H 18 9HO 18HO 11 Cell Reaction CHOH 9HO 3CO 13HO 12 

As shown in the equations 10 12 above when the reductant is oxidized it produces a proton it also produces an electron and when eighteen electrons and eighteen protons are produced one molecule of isopropanol or another reductant like methanol is oxidized to carbon dioxide . Carbon dioxide is only partially soluble in seawater and it vents off as a gas as it is formed therefore driving the reaction irreversibly toward the continued formation of carbon dioxide. On the cathode side of the fuel cell the arrival of electrons through the load and protons through the membrane bring about the reduction of the hydrogen peroxide to two moles of water. The catholyte and the anolyte are pumped into the fuel cell from ports that enter close to the bottom. In addition to seawater and hydrogen peroxide the catholyte contains a small quantity of acid. The acid facilitates the conversion of the hydrogen peroxide to water.

Referring to is a schematic diagram illustrating the mechanical supporting elements and the chemical flow of the components of the fuel cell . The fuel cell is connected across a load . The voltage across the load is about 1.7 V. The negative terminal is connected to anode and the positive terminal is connected to the cathode . The anolyte is prepared by combining isopropanol with seawater . The isopropanol is preferably stored as a substantially pure liquid fuel in storage tank . Seawater is metered via pump through line through valve and admixed with the isopropanol which is metered by pump from storage tank . The anode half cell is supplied anolyte through line through the bottom of the cell. Static or dynamic mixers not shown can be included in line . In a similar fashion catholyte is prepared using a metering process. Seawater is metered in via pump through line through valve and admixed with the hydrogen peroxide that is metered by pump from storage tank . The catholyte can additionally contain an acid stored in tank and metered into the stream by pump . The preferred concentration of hydrogen peroxide is approximately 50 by weight where water makes up the balance. The preferred acid is sulfuric acid. Substantially pure sulfuric acid is about 96 by weight. The preferred concentration of the sulfuric acid is limited by the ability to accurately meter in small quantities of acid into a relatively large stream of seawater. The catholyte enters the cathode half cell through line . Static or dynamic mixers not shown can be included in line . The anolyte exits the half cell via line and is re circulated via return line . As the reductant isopropanol is consumed it is converted to carbon dioxide . Carbon dioxide is vented via line . Spent anolyte can be discharged through line or refurbished through the addition of additional isopropanol as needed. The vented carbon dioxide can be diffused into the ambient seawater or trapped in an alkali medium. The catholyte exits the half cell via line and is re circulated via return line . As the oxidant hydrogen peroxide is consumed it forms water. Spent catholyte can be discharged through line or refurbished with additional hydrogen peroxide . In a shut down mode the half cells can be flushed with seawater fresh water and drained dry.

The PEM as shown in is selected to be inert to oxidants like hydrogen peroxide. Polymeric film material comprised of perfluorinated sulfonic acid polymer or a co polymer of tetrafluoroethylene and perfluorovinylether sulfonic acid resist oxidation and allow the exchange of protons. The PEM is modified to have improved wettability. The fuel cell can achieve full power from a dry state in less than 5 minutes.

Typically the fuel cell is operated in a controlled temperature environment of about 25 50 C. High temperatures will cause the hydrogen peroxide to decompose to molecular oxygen gas which if vented could form a tract stream of bubbles. The concentration of the reductant fuel is maintained between 0.1 1.0M the concentration of the oxidant is maintained between 0.05 0.1M and the acid concentration is 0.05 0.1M.

Furthermore the invention is a method for producing electricity. The method comprises electrochemically reacting in an anode half cell having an electrocatalytic anode a liquid anolyte with a liquid catholyte in a cathode half cell having an electrocatalytic cathode. Both the anolyte and the catholyte contain seawater. The half cells share a common proton exchange membrane and similar electrocatalytic electrodes. The liquid anolyte and the liquid catholyte are replenished as needed.

An advantage of the disclosed invention is that it can be refueled using conventional liquid fueling systems. Adoption of this system enables rapid turnaround and lower operating costs. The reductant can be stored as a neat liquid a concentrated liquid or mixed and metered as needed. Similarly the oxidant can be stored as a neat liquid a concentrated liquid or mixed and metered as needed. In the case of hydrogen peroxide the hydrogen peroxide is preferably stored as a concentrated aqueous solution which is mixed and metered as needed. The catholyte preferably initially contains a catalytic amount of acid to jump start the fuel cell.

The invention provides a source of electricity that is particularly adaptable for underwater vehicles and applications such as unmanned underwater vehicles UUVs . The fuel and oxidizer can be stored at ambient temperatures as liquids and as such provide a system having greater safety and handling than one that uses a compressed gas or a cryogenic liquid. Another advantage is that the fuel cell can be configured such that it can operate with a minimal exhaust stream and will therefore be difficult to detect in an underwater environment.

It is to be understood that the foregoing description and specific embodiments are merely illustrative of the best mode of the invention and the principles thereof and that various modifications and additions may be made to the invention by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and scope of this invention which is therefore understood to be limited only by the scope of the appended claims.

