---

title: Portable data acquisition system
abstract: According to typical inventive embodiments, a compact data acquisition unit is modularly assembled of COT components, based on a PC-104 or other form factor of relatively small size. Inside a durable casing, a dc-dc converter increases battery-generated dc voltage for a computer processor that communicates with storage/memory and collects sensory information via an a-to-d converter. The inventive data acquisition unit can be implemented in either handheld (e.g., so as to include touchscreen interactivity) or situate (e.g., so as to be combined with sensory instrumentation) fashion. Especially propitious inventive practice involves wireless communication with an inventive “podded” device, remotely placed, that includes an inventive data acquisition unit, one or more sensors, and a pod containing the unit and the sensor(s). For underwater applications, a preferred embodiment of an inventive podded device is planoconvex, having a flat side for mounting on vehicular structure and an outwardly curved/rounded side for mitigating hydrodynamic penalties.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08180595&OS=08180595&RS=08180595
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 08180595
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050421
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. provisional application No. 60 566 225 filed 23 Apr. 2004 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Portable Data Acquisition System joint inventors Jeffrey A. Daniels and Dave A. Mellick.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates to data acquisition more particularly to methods and devices for acquiring data from sensors characterized by unfavorable placement such as in terms of accessibility or associability of apparatus.

Many applications require the placement of sensors in locations that are remote or hard to reach or not conducive to the association of instrumentation. The acquisition of sensor data in such applications can be difficult or impractical.

The U.S. Navy for instance conducts testing of both model scale and full scale marine vessels such as involving acoustic evaluation. Some locations on the marine vessel e.g. sail control surfaces certain areas of the hull do not readily lend themselves to external situation of sensors and other instrumentation. External hull placement of sensors can be undesirable due to mechanical unfeasibility of sensor mounting e.g. absence of proximate hull penetrators for facilitating sensor mounting or adverse hydrodynamic ramifications e.g. flow disturbance of sensor mounting. Further some naval vessels require sensor arrays to operate during navigation to monitor acoustic performance e.g. to detect and record problems such as structure born noise . The installation of sensor capability in the vicinity of a noise source would obviate extraordinary sensing measures involving equipment conveyance to the suspected location of noise generation.

The present invention s Portable Data Acquisition System PDAS meets the aforementioned needs. As typically embodied the inventive system is a small completely self contained battery powered low profile scaleable rugged lightweight compact data acquisition system. Use of the present invention s portable data acquisition system is of interest to the U.S. Navy for instance for embedded applications as a high speed data recorder for precision instrumentation such as accelerometers. A typical inventive PDAS is a robust integral compact unit that is smaller than a conventional laptop computer. An inventive prototypical situate embodiment that was made by the U.S. Navy is representative in terms of size measuring about 7 5 1 . An inventive handheld embodiment might measure say about 3.5 3.5 7 . The present invention s portable data acquisition system affords superior performance and lower costs.

According to many inventive embodiments the present invention s PDAS is combined with one or more sensors such as motion sensors e.g. accelerometers or velocimeters or pressure sensors e.g. hydrophones . An inventive integral combination including an inventive PDAS one or more sensors e.g. a sensor array and a housing can be mounted externally e.g. on a marine vessel or used in handheld fashion as an easy to use device e.g. for onboard monitoring . For instance an inventive PDAS and an array of sensors can be encapsulated encased or embedded in a matrix material thereby forming an inventive integral device that is adaptable to attachment to a structure of interest. The matrix can describe a selected external surface shape depending upon the projected application. Some marine applications may require an exterior matrix shape that is hydrodynamically contoured e.g. characterized by appropriate degrees of curvature flatness and smoothness so as to facilitate coupling with a marine hull and yet minimize drag when so coupled.

The present invention s PDAS as typically embodied is a fully integrated and highly adaptable data recorder. Based on commercial off the shelf COTS and PC 104 modular technology a typical PDAS system can range in size between a single six channel unit and a large network of up to sixty four channel modules. Typically designed for low power embedded applications an inventive six channel system comes fully capable of running entirely off of minimal battery power. The low power requirements allow for operation with only passive cooling. In addition to the advantage of no fan the inventive system typically allows for data storage without the use of mechanically noisy magnetic drives. Data storage can be handled entirely by solid state technology. The aforementioned inventive PDAS test prototype bench model made by the U.S. Navy was specifically designed for a minimized profile this prototypical single six channel data recorder with power can fit in a compact space of seven inches by five inches by one inch 7 5 1 .

According to typical inventive embodiments the PDAS is capable of recording a minimum of six channels simultaneously at speeds up to 220 KSPS. Data storage for a typical inventive system is entirely solid state with capacities as high as 310 GB allowing for extended recording periods even at high acquisition speeds. A very high capability system can record 64 channels simultaneously at about 220 KHZ yet be smaller than a computer keyboard and not be prohibitively expensive. Frequently two solid state hard drives represent 75 of the cost. By operating entirely off of minimal battery power the inventive system is equipped to record in remote areas previously unreachable or unattainable. The present invention s PDAS design typically uses commercial off the shelf COTS components which allows for a rapid development time at a fraction of the costs of most other data acquisition systems.

Many of the numerous possible embodiments of the present invention fall into either of two categories generally defined herein in terms of the respective types of applications viz. i the situate variety of inventive devices and ii the handheld variety of inventive devices. Every inventive PDAS device has a functionality that is determined by the associated user defined software. The potential multifarious inventive applications reside in commercial industrial educational R D and military realms. Typically based on a modular PC 104 design inventive practice is capable of adapting to a multitude of environments and contexts including mounting to a ship s hull embedding in a ship s propeller or being handheld for daily use or for structure born noise applications.

As mentioned hereinabove some inventive embodiments are referred to herein as being of the situate genre. An inventive situate PDAS can be used for instance as a rugged acquisition and or control system that is especially useful in embedded fashion or in certain environments e.g. harsh environments underwater environments environments where noise or vibration is not desirable or environments lacking power supply availability. The situate application mode encompasses many possible naval applications e.g. external monitoring of ship flow noise and or self noise that may translate into commercial applications. As an example an inventive situate PDAS can be encapsulated e.g. embedded or encased in a matrix to form an inventive integral device for both sensing physical phenomena and acquiring data. The inventive integral device can be designed to be both attachable and detachable. The matrix should be transparent to the physical phenomena being measured e.g. acoustically transparent for sound measurements. An inventive situate system can be used in unmanned vehicles e.g. an unmanned underwater vehicle UUV or an unmanned aerial vehicle UAV for communication as well as for data acquisition.

In accordance with typical inventive embodiments suitable for situate utilization a method is provided for performing sensing and for acquiring data based on the sensing. The inventive method comprises attaching an inventive self contained unit to an object. The inventive self contained unit includes a data acquisition device at least one sensor e.g. at least one motion sensor and or at least one pressure sensor and a pod enclosing the data acquisition device and the at least one sensor. The data acquisition device includes a processor for receiving signals from the at least one sensor. Typically the data acquisition device further includes a direct current power supply a direct current to direct current converter between the direct current power supply and the processor storage means for data associated with the processor and a housing for the processor the direct current power supply the direct current to direct current converter and the storage means . Typically one or more inventive practitioners can communicate with the inventive self contained unit from one or more remote locations.

As frequently embodied the present invention s pod has a planoconvex outside pod surface that includes a smooth convex outside pod surface and a flat outside pod surface. The object has an outside object surface that is flat or curved or some combination thereof. The attaching of the self contained unit to the object includes adjoining the flat outside pod surface to the outside object surface. If the object is a marine vessel usual inventive practice provides that the attaching is performed so that the smooth convex outside pod surface is exposed but the flat outside pod surface is not exposed and so that the planoconvex outside pod surface has a minimal amount of drag associated therewith when the self contained unit is in an attached state with respect to the marine vessel during travel. If the outside object surface is flat then the flat outside pod surface will naturally be conformal or at least substantially conformal with respect to the flat configuration of the outside object surface. According to many inventive embodiments the pod is characterized by flexibility thus facilitating attachment to outside object surfaces that are characterized by some degree of curvature. The attaching to the object of an inventive self contained unit that includes a flexible pod can be effected in such a way that the pod flexibly changes shape the flat outside pod surface thus becoming curved in a configuration that at least substantially conforms to the curved configuration of the outside object surface.

As also mentioned hereinabove some inventive embodiments are referred to herein as being of the handheld genre. A typical inventive handheld PDAS has at least one of three primary applications viz. as data loggers data analyzers and data controllers. All three inventive handheld applications can be useful in a variety of contexts including military commercial educational industrial e.g. automotive and aerospace and research and development. Any research requiring portable high bandwidth data analysis such as wideband audio or vibration analysis can benefit from an inventive handheld PDAS device. Among the notable uses is as a small handheld interactive portable system for monitoring structure born noise during acoustic trials especially in naval or other military contexts.

In accordance with typical inventive embodiments suitable for handheld utilization a combination comprises sensory means and data acquisition means. The sensory means includes at least one sensor. The data acquisition means includes a processor for receiving signals from the at least one sensor a direct current power supply a direct current to direct current converter for changing the voltage obtained by the processor from the direct current power supply storage means for information associated with the processor and an outer casing. The outer casing is for the processor the direct current power supply the direct current to direct current converter and the storage means. Resident in the storage means is a computer program product including a computer useable medium having computer program logic recorded thereon for enabling the processor to process data related to the signals. According to some inventive embodiments the combination further comprises one or more physical connections e.g. wires between the sensory means and the data acquisition means. According to frequent inventive practice the data acquisition means further includes a touchscreen display for facilitating interactivity between a user and the processor the computer useable medium having computer program logic recorded thereon for enabling the interactivity. The outer casing describes an approximate geometric rectangular prism shape having six geometric sides the touchscreen display being situated at one geometric side.

There are two types of handheld devices on the market currently namely low bandwidth standalone data loggers and laptop attachable medium bandwidth real time analyzers. Current stand alone data loggers typically have a 10 20 kHz bandwidth and only have very limited data storage. Analyzers that are attached to laptops achieve a 20 40 kHz bandwidth and are limited in data storage to the laptop s hard drive size. However there are currently no known portable devices on the market that integrate the computer laptop support and the acquisition control into a single device such as accomplished by the present invention s PDAS.

Other objects advantages and features of the present invention will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

Reference is now made to which illustrates the stacking of three PC 104 modules . The source of the diagram shown in is the PC 104 Consortium which describes itself in its website http www.pc104.org as a Consortium of over 100 members world wide who have joined together to disseminate information about PC 104 and to provide a liaison function between PC 104 and standard organizations. The inventive system is designed around the PC 104 form factor the PC 104 form presents a variety of design possibilities for inventive practice. According to some inventive embodiments each module with the PC 104 form factor is 3.5 3.5 1 in size. The modules contain both a 16 bit ISA and a 32 bit PCI bus running vertically through the board. This allows the PC 104 modules to be directly stacked together as shown in . In addition to stacking PC 104 boards can also be connected in parallel with the help of a custom back plane or cabling system allowing the entire inventive system to achieve a profile of less than one inch.

The present invention s hardware design as typically embodied is now described with reference to which illustrates the typical layout of the inventive system. is a block diagram of a single PDAS unit as typically embodied according to inventive practice. The present invention s PDAS unit includes the following a PC 104 processor board one or more PC 104 analog to digital converters data storage a dc dc power converter and a power source e.g. one or more batteries . Typically these key components of an inventive PDAS unit are commercial off the shelf COTS items. According to usual inventive practice PDAS also includes at least one ethernet input output port and at least one analog input port . As shown in inventive PDAS unit provides for at least one PC 104 analog to digital converter with the option of providing for up to five total PC 104 analog to digital converters . Each A to D converter corresponds to an A input port . The sensory information in the form of analog electrical signals is transmitted from sensor s to A to D converter s via A input port s . According to some inventive embodiments the sensory information is transmitted through wires that connect sensor s with A to D converter s via A input port s . Also diagrammatically portrayed is a casing that typically is made of a metal plastic or composite material.

With reference to through given that the inventive system prototype is highly modularized and thus easily adaptable specifications are provided herein for both the total system as well as for each of its individual components. Total hardware specifications i.e. for the overall inventive system are listed in . Individual component specifications i.e. for each individual component of inventive system are listed in through . Because of the versatility of inventive system many different applications and corresponding requirements are possible. It may be helpful in inventive practice to separately document each component in order to facilitate calculation or approximate calculation of the specifications for an original or modified system .

The prototypical PDAS system that was made as a bench model by the present inventors as employees of the U.S. Navy is pictured in . This inventive test prototype is designed around the highly integrated PC 104 6SDI A D data acquisition board manufactured by General Standards Corp. 8302 Whitesburg Drive Huntsville Ala. Handling the processing for the inventive bench model unit is a PC 104 TM5400 processor board manufactured by Technoland 1050 Stewart Drive Sunnyvale Calif. Regarding the processor board Technoland s TM5400 processor board was selected to replace the originally selected MZ104 processor board manufactured by Tri M Engineering 1407 Kebet Way Port Coquitlam British Columbia Canada problems seemed to have arisen with the MZ104 processor board such as an inability to enable bus mastering and a lack of operating system support for UDMA both important aspects of the inventive system . Data storage is accomplished by using an E Disk a solid state drive from BITMICRO Networks Inc. 45550 Northport Loop East Fremont Calif. Power is supplied to the system by six Panasonic batteries a HESC104 dc dc converter and a magnetic induction battery charger such as shown in from the aforementioned Tri M Systems. The rectangular box shaped metal casing is shown with the detachable top face removed.

The inventive bench model has an operating system drivers and embedded software. Chosen as the operating system for inventive bench model unit was Red Hat Linux 8.0. Any version of Linux with a 2.4 kernel would have been acceptable. This is because the Linux drivers for the analog to digital board are only compatible with 2.4 kernels. Aside from the purchase price benefit Linux and Linux drivers are available free of charge Linux provided a customizable embedded operating system platform that may not have been possible under Microsoft Windows. Linux allowed for customizing most or all aspects of the inventive system including processing overhead minimizing memory footprint and the development of startup scripts for embedded applications. While Linux has proven itself with respect to inventive bench model unit future applications contemplated by the U.S. Navy and inventive practice in general will be able to take advantage of a wide range of other possible platforms. For inventive PDAS applications that require a user interface a more appropriate operating system such as Windows can be utilized. A benefit of Windows would be the use of a wide range of drivers including Windows NT 2000 Labview Matlab Solaris and others.

Two pieces of software were written in the development of the inventive PDAS bench model viz. an entirely embeddable script and a graphical user interface test platform. Given that the focus of this early phase development was for embedded applications only the script is documented herein. One of the requirements for the inventive system was to be able to begin recording at a given condition such as a particular depth. To achieve this an external trigger input was added to the bench model unit that communicates to the processor via the serial input port . For the bench model unit a simple slide switch represents this trigger. Later inventive models contemplated by the U.S. Navy will most likely make use of a pressure switch to control power to the inventive unit and the trigger switch will be used to control whether or not the system should begin recording upon booting up.

Reference is now made to which shows an example setup file for embedded applications. The system s triggering device is used to start recording using a startup script. This script s only input is a setup file that is defined prior to recording. The setup file allows the user to define all aspects of how the system should perform while recording file output names length of recording time and any additional comments about the system setup. A copy of the setup file is maintained with the output data files for future reference. What the embedded script returns are six data files one per channel. Each file is named using the tag specified in the setup file with a channel number as an extension such as 031303.ch5 describes channel 5 recorded on Mar. 13 2003 for example. Also returned is a copy of the setup file as well an error log file in the event that a problem with the system occurred while recording.

With reference to through the present invention s PDAS is versatile and is adaptable to multifarious applications of both situate e.g. embedded and handheld e.g. interactive genres. and illustrate a preferred inventive embodiment or preferred inventive embodiments for embedded applications. through illustrates a preferred embodiment for interactive applications. illustrates inventive flexibility for a potential variety of applications both embedded and interactive.

As shown in and inventive podded system includes an inventive PDAS eleven sensors e.g. accelerometers velocimeters and or pressure sensors and a pod . Inventive podded system typically also includes one or more physical connections such as wires shown in . According to some inventive embodiments the use of wireless sensors obviates the need for physical connectors such as wires . Thus depending on the inventive embodiment sensors communicate with PDAS either remotely or via physical connections such as wires . Inventive podded system is representative of inventive situate embodiments for marine applications according to which an inventive PDAS and at least one sensor and if present at least one wire are contained in a pod . Data download and communication from inventive podded system can be through wireless network connection such as Bluetooth . According to some inventive embodiments a magnetic induction charger is also included in the inventive PDAS unit that is contained in pod . Using magnetic induction charger the recharging of the batteries is accomplished from outside pod via magnetic induction in the absence of direct electrical connection.

The inventive podded system depicted in and FIG. B more specifically its pod is designed to be low profile and hydrodynamic so as not to significantly disrupt the flow of water when submerged. An inventive pod can be selectively shaped including both top and bottom for a given application. As shown in pod has a curved or substantially curved upper exterior surface and a flat or substantially flat lower exterior surface . As shown in and pod has a curved or substantially curved upper exterior surface and a curved or substantially curved lower exterior surface . The oval peripheral plan shape of pod i.e. the oval perimeter defined or approximately defined by the planar surface is apparent in . Pod as shown in and has an upper exterior surface and a lower exterior surface that meet along their respective perimeters to form a junctional edge pod tapering in thickness toward junctional edge . However according to inventive practice the peripheral plan shape need not be regular or symmetrical. The peripheral plan shapes of pod embodiments can vary in accordance with application requirements having for instance a polygonal shape a closed curved shape or a closed curvilinear shape.

Pod shown in geometrically describes both in profile and in three dimensions a planoconvex shape pod being flat on one side planar surface and convex in three dimensions on the other side convex surface . Pod shown in geometrically describes in profile and perhaps also in three dimensions depending upon the embodiment or application a concavoconvex shape pod being concave in two or three dimensions on one side planar surface and convex in three dimensions on the other side convex surface . Pod shown in geometrically describes in profile and perhaps also in three dimensions depending upon the embodiment or application a convexoconvex synonymously double convex or bi convex shape pod being convex in two or three dimensions on one side planar surface and convex in three dimensions on the other side convex surface .

According to typical inventive practice pod is characterized by flexibility and thus being different representations of the same flexible pod . Flexible pod typically consists of or includes a flexible material such as an elastomeric material e.g. natural or synthetic rubber . As shown in flexible pod is in its default condition having a flat lower surface . Because pod is flexible it can adjoin or substantially adjoin not only flat surfaces but can also within limits accommodatingly bend so as to adjoin or substantially adjoin various curved surfaces such as shown in and . In addition to or as alternative to imbuing pod with flexibility inventive pod can be made to have a conformoconvex shape. According to such inventive embodiments upper surface is selectively shaped to be convex and lower surface is selectively shaped e.g. in a curved configuration or in a partly flat partly curved configuration to conform to a surface of interest. Lower surface can have either a regular or irregular shape. Hence and can be understood to represent the same flexible pod or different flexible pods or different inflexible pods . In other words the shapes shown and and a variety of other shapes can be reached as either i a flexibly compliant deviation from original form or ii the original form itself.

Terms such as planar flat convex planocovex convexoconvex bi convex double convex and rectangular prism as used herein are not intended herein to suggest geometric exactitude. For instance the terms planar and flat as used herein synonymously denote definition or approximate definition or substantial definition or general definition of a geometric two dimensional plane. Similarly the terms convex planoconvex and rectangular prism do not necessarily suggest that these characterizations need be geometrically precise but rather suggest that these characterizations can be approximately substantially or generally so.

The three dimensional shape of convex surface is similarly a variable characteristic particularly with regard to the extent of bulging of the convex surface measured herein in terms of the perpendicular height h of the highest point of the convex surface from the planar surface . The pod shown in and is symmetrical height h connecting the highest point of convex surface with the geometric center c of the oval planar surface . Dimensionally speaking pod is characterized not only by a height h which is the longest distance from convex surface to planar surface but also by a length l which is the longest distance across planar surface . Pod as shown in is characterized by a length to height ratio l h of approximately ten i.e. 10 1 . According to most inventive embodiments involving marine applications hydrodynamic considerations will dictate a sufficiently low profile for pod and electro mechanical considerations will dictate a sufficiently high profile for pod dimensionally translating into an approximate range of length to height ratio l h that is between about five i.e. 5 1 and twenty i.e. 20 1 .

Pod can comprise for instance a container e.g. a pressure vessel and or an incompressible material e.g. a conventional liquid acoustic material such as castor oil or a conventional solid potting material such as polyurethane . The entire inventive podded unit is a continuous integral piece with no pressure penetrations. The present invention s pod typically has a convex exterior surface that is characterized by convexity smoothness and continuousness. In typical marine applications for instance planar surface is attached e.g. adhered to a marine vessel while convex surface is exposed to the aqueous environment. The configuration of convex surface is thus hydrodynamically propitious e.g. in terms of minimizing the degree of drag or additional drag associated with the presence of pod on the marine vessel.

Pod is a pressure resistant and completely sealed container that houses the electronic components and in typical practice is quite small in size relative to the marine vessel to which it is attached. Pod typically includes both an exterior shell and an interior matrix material the latter typically being a solid or liquid medium for at least substantially surrounding the electronic components. Inventive podded system can be made according to various approaches including the following i an approach involving encapsulation by and molding of a potting material or ii an approach involving containment of acoustic fluid by a pressure vessel or iii an approach involving containment of PDAS by a pressure vessel and encapsulation by and molding of an elastomeric material. According to some encapsulation molding embodiments of inventive podded system pod includes a matrix material but does not include a shell . Regardless of the fabrication methodology the present invention s pod can be imbued with hydrodynamic qualities in terms of shape such as noted hereinabove. If pod includes both a matrix material and a shell the lower surface and the upper surface are surfaces of shell . If pod includes a matrix material but not a shell the lower surface and the upper surface are surfaces of matrix material . In the light of the instant disclosure ordinarily skilled artisans will understand and be capable of practicing various methods and techniques for making an inventive podded system .

As noted hereinabove a first approach to fabricating inventive podded system involves encapsulation molding of components in a potting material such as polyurethane. According to one fabrication method using potting material the inventive PDAS unit and the one or more sensors and if present the one or more wires are encapsulated in potting material e.g. a polymeric material such as including polyurethane and a surrounding pod shell to create a complete inventive podded system assembly. In the encapsulation procedure the pod shell which can be but is not necessarily a pressure vessel is enclosed around PDAS unit and sensor s and if present wire s and the combination is molded e.g. injection molded into an integral podded system unit using potting material .

As also previously noted herein according to some inventive embodiments pod includes potting material but lacks a shell . Here the potting material itself forms a hydrodynamic exterior surface such as discussed hereinabove that is the lower surface and the upper surface are surfaces of matrix material . According to one fabrication method inventive PDAS unit and sensor s and if present wire s are molded in place in the potting material in such a way that inventive PDAS unit and sensor s and if present wire s are encased in potting material in the absence of any housing such as pod shell .

As further noted hereinabove according to some inventive embodiments pod includes an exterior shell that is a pressure vessel and an interior matrix material that is an acoustically transparent fluid typically a liquid e.g. an oil such as castor oil . The electronic components and the acoustic fluid are contained in the pressure vessel . According to one fabrication method inventive PDAS unit and sensor s and if present wire s are placed inside pressure vessel which is then filled with acoustic fluid . Prior to filling pressure vessel with acoustic fluid PDAS unit can be attached to a portion of the inside surface of pressure vessel such as inside central lower surface portion shown in .

As previously discussed herein many inventive embodiments of podded unit include a flexible pod podded unit thereby being a versatile bendable device that is capable of abutting or substantially abutting attachment with respect to flat surfaces as well as multifariously shaped surfaces that generally define albeit with some deviation from a geometric plane. According to one inventive method that is especially well suited for fabricating a flexible podded unit in the interior of pod is a pressure vessel such as shown in that contains inside it a PDAS unit . Interior pressure vessel which encloses PDAS unit and sensor s and if present wire s are molded in place in elastomeric material in such a way that interior pressure vessel and sensor s and if present wire s are encased in elastomeric material in the absence of any housing such as pod shell .

Lower surface of pod can be conformally attached e.g. flush mounted or nearly flush mounted on a complementarily shaped flat nearly flat slightly curved moderately curved etc. surface such as may exist on a marine hull. For instance the inventive podded unit can be glued onto model scale or full scale vehicles using an epoxy resin e.g. polyester resin concrete or PRC under a vacuum with vacuum channels machined into the lower surface underside of the pod . A sensor array of podded units can be placed almost anywhere on a marine vessel e.g. on the hull on the top of the rudder on the side of the rudder on the stem planes anywhere on the sail and or on the stem cone to beam form toward the control surfaces. Furthermore the inventive podded unit is not limited to locations where the Onboard Data Acquisitions System ODAS and power can be accessed through hull penetrators.

Inventive podded unit shown in and is an example of embedded practice in accordance with the present invention. Another example of an inventive situate device is shown in . Inventive podded unit shown in and and inventive podded unit A shown in are characterized by different shapes and are suitable for different purposes. As distinguished from inventive podded unit shown in and inventive podded unit A shown in includes an inventive PDAS unit but does not include any sensors . The present invention s PDAS unit is embedded in a cylindrical pod . Pod can include both a matrix material and a shell or can include a matrix material but not include a shell . Further either of the aforediscussed approaches viz. the potting material encapsulation approach wherein matrix material is molded in a cylindrical shape or the acoustic fluid approach wherein shell is a cylindrically shaped pressure vessel can be adopted for making inventive podded unit A. As examples of inventive applications an inventive podded unit having dimensions 3.5 3.5 7 can be mounted inside a sail or other wet compartment or a rotating hub. The pod can be provided with penetrations for network communication battery recharging and cables to be run to various locations to mounted sensors.

Because of the high performance of the inventive system its small form factor and its easily integrated video output the inventive PDAS unit very much lends itself to being an interactive handheld device such as a PDAS test unit A shown in . This kind of inventive device can utilize a small touchscreen LCD panel to provide both input and output to the user. Another option is a DC input . Windows can be the operating system and Labview can be used as the software to provide real time data analysis in the field. portrays the layout of an embodiment of an inventive handheld interactive unit A. Shown in are analog inputs direct current input touchscreen LCD panel power status LED on off switch and outer casing . One or more sensors can be connected externally to inventive handheld unit A more specifically to one or more analog to digital converters via analog input e.g. serial ports . A sensor can be connected to inventive handheld unit A in a closely coupled manner e.g. by directly connecting to an analog input port or by using an adapter for this type of connection. Alternatively a wire connector such as shown in can be used to connect sensor to analog input port . As shown in casing describes with some approximation a geometric rectangular prism shape having six geometric sides or faces wherein the touchscreen display is situated on one geometric side or face.

A handheld inventive system such as interactive unit A may have commercial appeal. Handheld models on the market might have any of several deficiencies. First of all the average sample rate of most conventional devices is 20 KSPS per channel well below the required sample rate for most vibration and acoustic measurements in contrast the handheld inventive system allows for speeds up to 220 KSPS. Furthermore most conventional recorders only have data storage capacities in the megabyte range in contradistinction the inventive PDAS can have up to several hundred gigabytes. Moreover current handheld systems use a proprietary non customizable software interface by comparison by using Windows and Labview the operator of the present invention s handheld system will have the flexibility to setup the test environment to his her liking. Essentially this will allow the practitioner of the present invention to take the familiarity ease and power of a desktop or rack mount computer into the field.

While some known laptop acquisition systems also attempt to provide high powered systems in the field they too have their disadvantages. Most current laptop systems use a laptop connected to a separate acquisition device via a USB serial parallel or Ethernet cable. Firstly conventional laptop systems are not especially portable since several components are required to be used. In addition the secondary device typically cannot run off of battery power again reducing the conventional laptop system s portability. Further depending on the device connection the total throughput of a conventional system may range from only several kilobytes per second for a serial port to up to a few megabytes for an Ethernet connection. By comparison since the acquisition card in the inventive PDAS is connected via a PCI connection the present invention s maximum data throughput can be as high as 132 MB.

The present invention is not to be limited by the embodiments described or illustrated herein which are given by way of example and not of limitation. Other embodiments of the present invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from a consideration of this disclosure or from practice of the present invention disclosed herein. Various omissions modifications and changes to the principles disclosed herein may be made by a person skilled in the art without departing from the true scope and spirit of the present invention which is indicated by the following claims.

