---

title: Business alerts on process instances based on defined conditions
abstract: System and method for notifying a user of an occurrence of a defined condition in a process. The process includes a plurality of event records associated with the process; each of the plurality of event records includes a plurality of data fields having data relating to the process. A subset of the plurality of event records is defined where the subset relates to the defined condition. The data in the defined subset is updated at a predetermined time interval. The user is notified when the updated data of the defined subset indicates that the defined condition has occurred. The subset may alternatively be defined as a function of a current time, a last run time and the defined condition.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07774359&OS=07774359&RS=07774359
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07774359
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050426
---
Embodiments of the present invention generally relate to the field of business process notifications. In particular embodiments of this invention relate to notifying a user of an occurrence of a defined condition in a process by pre correlating business event data.

Business entities engage in numerous activities based on a variety of automated processes e.g. relying on computerized activities and business software applications and operations based on human actions e.g. phone calls faxes e mails etc. . As a result obtaining an accurate snapshot of what is going on with the business becomes more complex and critical for businesses to make quick decisions to leverage market opportunities to respond in a timely manner to gain an advantage or to prevent losses.

Businesses and other organizations use computers and in particular computer database applications to monitor and record information about organizational activities. Often an organization will have recurring processes or activities that must be performed. Indeed it is common for an organization to have numerous instances of an activity in various stages of completion at any given time. As one example a business may sell goods based on orders received from customers. An activity or a process of interest may be fulfilling those customer orders each purchase order represents a separate instance of that activity or process. At any particular time that business may have multiple instances of the activity i.e. multiple orders from multiple customers in various stages of completion. As another example a financial institution may loan funds to customers based on applications from those customers. An activity of interest may be the processing of a loan application to completion e.g. approval or rejection with each loan application representing a separate instance of the activity. At any particular time there may be multiple loan application instances in various stages of processing. As yet another example a governmental entity responsible for issuing permits may have multiple permit applications in various stages of being processed.

In facilitating management of business activities a system known as a Business Activity Monitor BAM concentrates and analyzes data from and for heterogeneous event sources in an attempt to present a single real time view of the business state status trends and critical conditions. Businesses or enterprise entities that successfully monitor business activities will be able to make decisions faster based on more relevant data and therefore will gain significant advantages. Such a business that can make decisions in real time is sometimes referred to as a Zero Latency Enterprise ZLE .

Currently existing systems provide notifications or alerts to users upon an occurrence of an event in a process or an activity. For example a sales manager may wish to be notified when purchase order 123 from Customer A is shipped. Or a manager in an accounting department may wish to be notified when an event such as the delivery status of purchase order 223 from Customer B so that she may issue an invoice to Customer B.

The existing systems however require that the software developers statically hard code the notification conditions in the existing systems for the users. The existing systems also expect that the software developers set or predict conditions for a given specific situation. For example suppose Merchant X establishes an agreement with Customer A that Customer A would not pay for shipping costs for any order placed by Customer A that are not shipped within two hours after the orders are received by Merchant X. Consequently Merchant X s sales manager may wish to be notified when any purchase order placed by Customer A is not shipped within two hours after the order is received. In other words instead of being notified when an event e.g. order received order approved order shipped or the like has happened to a particular order Merchant X s sales manager wishes to know the occurrence of a defined condition to any instance of the process e.g. the existence of one or more unfulfilled purchase orders received more than 90 105 or 120 minutes ago .

Under the existing systems Merchant X s sales manager may need to specifically request that the software be adapted to his needs and to accommodate the agreement with Customer A. In addition when Merchant X s sales manager wishes to change the notification conditions due to changes to the agreement with Customer A the software developer may be required to modify the existing systems so that Merchant X s sales manager receives the correct notification.

In addition some existing event alert or notification systems inefficiently evaluate the set of data or records to determine whether the event has happened. For example some existing system would execute a query against all purchase orders data constantly to determine whether the event happened. As the purchase order data increases the existing system spends a substantial amount of resources to perform tasks such as receiving the purchase orders creating purchase order records receiving updated data on purchase orders correlating updated data with the purchase order records processing all the purchase order data or the like. In addition the same set of data may constantly being updated or modified. As a result these existing systems require considerable resources to accommodate these modifications or changes to the data not to mention the need to evaluate data to determine whether a notification needs to be issued.

Accordingly improvements in business process notifications by pre correlating a set of data from multiple instances of business processes or activities before notifying the users are desired to address one or more of these and other disadvantages.

Embodiments of the present invention overcome shortcomings of prior art by pre correlating a plurality of updated data from a plurality of instances or event records such that systems would execute user queries against a subset of the plurality of instances or event records to determine whether the defined condition has occurred. Consequently instead of evaluating a complete and voluminous set of event records embodiments of the present invention define a subset of event records and notify the user of the occurrence of the defined condition from the defined subset. In addition embodiments of the present invention advantageously notify the user when the defined condition has occurred in instances of the process when data in the defined subset may be unavailable.

According to one aspect of the invention a method notifies a user of an occurrence of a defined condition in a process including a plurality of event records associated with the process. Each of the plurality of event records includes a plurality of data fields having data relating to the process. The method defines a subset of the plurality of event records where the subset relates to the defined condition. The data in the defined subset is updated at a predetermined interval. The method notifies the user when the updated data of the defined subset indicates that the defined condition has occurred.

In accordance with another aspect of the invention a system notifies a user of an occurrence of a defined condition in a process including a plurality of event records associated with the process. Each of the plurality of event records includes a plurality of data fields having data relating to the process. An event provider defines a subset of the plurality of event records where the subset relates to the defined condition. The event provider also updates the data in the subset of the plurality of event records at a predetermined time interval. A notification component notifies the user when the updated data of the defined subset indicates that the defined condition has occurred.

According a further aspect of the invention one or more computer readable media have computer executable components for notifying a user of an occurrence of a defined condition in a process including a plurality of event records associated with the process. Each of the plurality of event records includes a plurality of data fields having data relating to the process. An event provider pre correlates data with a subset of the plurality of event records wherein the subset relates to the defined condition. The event provider also updates the data in the defined subset at a predetermined time interval. A notification component notifies the user when the updated data of the defined subset indicates that the defined condition has occurred.

Referring first to an exemplary flow diagram illustrates an example of a typical business activity such as purchase order processing according to one embodiment of the invention. Business processes include automated activities e.g. completion of updating software applications sales processes or purchase order processing physical activities e.g. a truck driver delivering a package to a recipient or a combination of both. In another example business processes include a sequence of steps for achieving a business goal e.g. a sales transaction . The business processes take time to execute and each step may be done at different location organization or the like. In order to better manage the business processes or activities single changes of state to steps in a process such as events are monitored.

In the illustrated embodiment a purchase order is initially received at . It is to be understood that a plurality of instances of purchase orders may be received and each instance of purchase orders includes a set of data relating to the purchase order. In managing multiple instances of a business activity one useful and desirable function is to be notified when a condition has occurred to any given instance of the process e.g. an occurrence of a defined condition in the business process . For example one may be interested to be notified How many orders with a price above 500.00 has not shipped in 24 hours 

At the purchase order reaches a milestone and at this milestone data of the purchase order is received or recorded. For example data of the purchase order includes the date when purchase order was received the name of the person who took the purchase order the name of the person who placed the purchase order or the like. It is to be understood that the milestone at may be a stage of completion of certain tasks. As discussed earlier many instances of purchase order activity may be running simultaneously and each instance may reach different stages of completion. Advantageously current time may be collected when a milestone is reached e.g. at and .

At data relating to the product quantity of the purchase order is collected. At data associated with the shipping destination defined in the purchase order is collected. At a user determines whether to approve the purchase order. If the user determines to deny the purchase order data of the time of the denial is collected at and the decision to deny the purchase order is collected at . On the other hand if the status of the purchase order is approved data including the name of the approver is collected at and shipping is prioritized at . Once again the purchase order activity reaches a milestone and data relating to time and or other data is collected. Next data associated with the type of shipping for the deliverables of the purchase order is entered or collected at before at when the carrier type data is collected. The purchase order activity reaches another milestone at .

While describes a typical purchase order activity it is to be understood that other business activities with relevant milestones or stages of completions may be implemented without departing from the scope of the present invention. In addition the types of data collected in describing are used for exemplary purposes and not by means of limitations. Other operational data relating to a business activity may be collected for future queries and analysis.

Other examples of business processes or activities include health care management in a hospital. For example many patients check into the hospital everyday with each patient requiring individual attention and diagnosis from doctors. In order to receive the proper treatment the patient may go through a number of stages as she checks into the hospital. For example a nurse may first obtain personal and medical history data from the patient before basic physiological data are measured such as blood pressure weight height or the like data. The patient may next be preliminarily interviewed by doctors. Similarly the patient may visit different departments e.g. radiology technician for taking a chest x ray before seeing the treating doctor. As such the hospital management may define a plurality of data fields having data relating to the process. For example as the patient is checked in a Check in data field may record a time data indicating when the patient was checked in. Other data fields such as patient name treating doctor name or the like may be included.

Each checked in patient represents an instance in this process of obtaining health care services. In monitoring the process hospital management personnel may wish to know the quality of health care by evaluating how fast patients are being interviewed or treated by doctors. As such a managing doctor in the neurology department may wish to be notified when any patient has not been interviewed by a doctor within two hours after the patient has checked in. On the other hand a managing physician in the oncology department may wish to know any patient who has not received a follow up by a doctor with 7 days after receiving a radiation treatment.

While illustrates a typical table for a P.O. process according to one embodiment other data structures may be used such as described in a commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 750 885 filed on Jan. 5 2004 entitled CORRELATING PROCESS INSTANCE DATA ACROSS MULTIPLE APPLICATIONS the entire disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference. For example if the data provided in the table in is stored in one database a business user may formulate queries against this table using a client user interface e.g. either through an application that connects directly to the database that stores the data or via intermediate web pages and web services . Because all the data relating to the business activity is stored in one database in this illustrated example is sufficient to make the data available in a table.

As depicted in data structures such as tables enable users manage business activities or processes. However the users customarily do not monitor all instances of purchase orders they would like to be notified when data indicates a defined condition has occurred in any instance of a purchase order handling process.

For example instead of being notified when a particular purchase order has been shipped a sales manager may wish to be notified when any instance of a purchase orders in a process e.g. purchase order fulfillment requesting over 500 units of particular merchandise so as to ensure the availability of the merchandize in the inventory. On the other hand a shipping department manager for a group of apple farmers may wish to be notified based on a different condition such as when any purchase order is not shipped within three days because apples may not be fresh by the time the customers receive their orders. In another example a customer service representative may wish to be notified when any purchase order is delivered to a customer so she may speak to the customer in person. Similarly an accounting department manager may wish to be notified when any purchase order from a particular customer has been delivered so that she may prepare invoices to the customer.

In a further example merchants and customers customarily establish Service Level Agreements SLAs or other similar agreements to govern transactions or activities between the parties. For example provisions of a SLA may provide that if Customer A places a purchase order with a total price of 5 000.00 or more before 9 00 am EST Merchant X agrees to ship the purchase orders within two hours. Otherwise the parties agree that Merchant X would ship the purchase order at no cost to Customer A or other agreed penalty between the parties. Likewise Merchant X may establish a similar SLA with Customer B or other customers depending on the specific needs of the customers. For example Merchant X may establish the following SLAs with Customer ABC CDE and XYZ 

One simple implementation to meet Merchant X s needs in the above examples is to execute the defined conditions against a table or a data structure containing all data to determine whether the defined conditions have occurred. However such implementation may be inefficient in certain processes because constantly maintaining a table with all event records in the process requires substantial computing and processing resources from the system. For example suppose Merchant X maintains a table shown in containing 10 000 event records i.e. instances in a purchase order fulfillment process at the beginning of a business day. In addition about 1 000 new event records are collected every two minutes which further increases the size of the table. In meeting a defined condition provided in the SLA as agreed between the parties the system is required to periodically monitor the event records to determine whether defined condition has occurred i.e. POs placed by Customer ABC must be shipped 1 within two hours from the time of ordering if the price of the orders ranges from 500.00 to 1000.00 or 2 within eight hours if the price of the orders ranges from 1 000.00 to 10 000.00 . In addition the system would also need to execute the conditions defined by other users. As such the system would be required to monitor each event record as data is collected update data in each event record and execute the defined condition against all event records. In contrast embodiments of the present invention overcome the deficiencies of prior art by efficiently defining a subset of a plurality of event records where the subset relates to the defined conditions before determining whether the defined conditions have occurred.

The event provider receives a plurality of events relating to a business activity. For example is a diagram illustrating an exemplary activity record with a plurality of data fields according to one embodiment of the invention. Initially an active table includes PO 123 with only limited data in the data fields for an event record such as the PO the time when the PO was received and the total price of the PO. The data for other data fields such as Approved Time Approver Ready or IsCompleted is not yet available. Consequently the table is synchronized with a monitored event source or collects additional data relating to the purchase order process at a regular time interval. A row next indicates that data such as Approved Time and Approver for activity record becomes available. As a result the data fields in event record are modified. Similarly a row indicates that data such as Ready and IsCompleted is available and activity record is updated accordingly. As all data fields of the event record are populated with corresponding data the event record is moved or directed to a completed table e.g. a completed activity record which includes activity records that have been completed.

Referring again to as an example of one embodiment will be described using examples relating to Merchant X managing processes and activities with customers including Customer ABC CDE and XYZ. System listens for monitoring events from the monitored event source relating to the process. For example system may include a user interface UI or application programming interface API not shown to collect events from the monitored event source . It is also to be understood by those skilled in the art that the events from the monitored event source may include identifying keys or elements such as ID encryption keys or other identifying methods to associate the data with a corresponding activity. Each record in activity records represents an instance of the process. For example when a PO 123 is received at 8 00 A.M. requesting a quantity of 150 units a new activity record PO 123 is inserted in the activity records . Data in the plurality of data fields include data relating to values measured in time values measured in quantity values measured in currency or the like. For example for a Received data field the corresponding data may be 10 00 A.M. or five hours from current time while for a Customer Name data field the corresponding data may be ABC or Smith .

Referring again to the correlation of events into the activity records allows all the data for the process instance to be accumulated and to be sent as a single event to the notification component . To achieve this event provider identifies or defines the records of interest e.g. the subset and submits the subset including events to the notification component which will evaluate the subset against conditions e.g. subscriptions defined by all users. For example the sales department manager of Merchant X may define a condition that he wishes to be notified when purchase orders placed by Customer ABC are not shipped within two hours from the time the order is received if the price of the orders ranges from 500.00 to 1 000.00. He may also wish to be notified if orders are not shipped within eight hours from order reception time if the price of the orders ranges from 1 000.00 to 10 000.00. As an illustration when Customer ABC places a PO 245 that is received at 10 34 A.M. with a total price of 668.00 the event provider identifies PO 245 to be included in the subset of the collection of event records because PO 245 was recently changed. The notification component determines that this relates to the condition defined by the sales manager. Similarly other subscriptions can be defined as queries about the behavior and data of the process instances.

It is important to note that instead of executing those queries directly against the data in the tables and the event provider picks the relevant records in the subset and offloads the subscription evaluation to the notification component . As such in one embodiment the work between the pre correlation system comprising of tables and in the database and the notification component is separated. For example if there are thousands of subscribing users this will not affect the general storage of activity data for analysis in the database .

The notification component next accesses subset to determine whether the defined condition has occurred. Using PO 245 as an example notification component determines whether to notify the sales manager when PO 245 is not shipped within two hours. In one embodiment notification component includes a subscription table including a plurality of users with corresponding defined conditions. The notification component may also include a notification table having a collection of users to which the notification component sends notification. is a diagram illustrating a notification to the user of an occurrence of a defined condition in a process using a subscription table according to one embodiment of the invention.

A subset table shows one or more event records submitted by the event provider . A subscription table includes one or more users with corresponding defined conditions. For example the subscription table includes condition parameters for a user Joe who wishes to be notified of purchase orders placed by Customer ABC. In particular the defined condition indicates that the user Joe wishes to be notified when any Customer ABC s order with a price range from 500.00 to 1 000.00 is not shipped within two hours. In order to evaluate this defined condition the event provider compares the shipped time with received time of ABC orders between 500.00 and 1 000.00 and compares the current time with the received time of ABC orders between 500.00 and 1 000.00 that do not have a specified shipped time See and B below for a further description on current time evaluation . Assuming the current time is after 12 41 P.M. the event provider defines a subset to include PO 123 because PO 123 was received more than 2 hours ago and has not been shipped. The PO 123 may be updated and notification component would notify user Joe that PO 123 has not been shipped in two hours.

As another example the user Joe may wish to be notified when any Customer ABC s order with a price range from 1 000.01 to 10 000.00 is not shipped within eight hours. By this example embodiments of the present invention create a subscription record including a separate condition defined by the user Joe. For example the user Joe may want to define a condition for orders between 500 and 1000 because the processing time of such orders may be 8 hours instead of 2 hours. Similarly different users such as Mary and Jane may define their own alert notifications as expressed by records and .

It is to be understood that subset table may include additional data fields with data relating to the process. The additional condition parameters may be set in the subscription table according to the conditions defined by additional users. Also as seen in rows and one user e.g. user Joe may define one or more conditions with separate and different parameters to meet his or her needs.

From subset table and subscription table notification component determines that the user Joe and user Jane need to be notified as the defined conditions at rows and respectively have occurred. The notification component may maintain a notification table including the notifying user and data from event records relating to the defined condition. For example notification component first reviews subset that PO 219 was placed by Customer XYZ requesting a total price of 1 498. The PO 129 may be updated and may showed that it was received at 10 35 A.M. and that PO 219 was shipped at 11 38 A.M. Upon reviewing subscription table notification component determines that Jane s defined condition has occurred because PO 219 having a total price range between 0.00 and 5 000.00 was not shipped within one hour. Therefore notification component notifies the user Jane of PO 219 by sending a notification to a wireless device such as a cell phone a pager a personal digital assistant PDA a wireless communication device a Blackberry or other communication device. In one embodiment the user Jane may specify a notification means of receiving notices from notification component . Such notification means may include e mail communication telephone communication facsimile communication wireless communication or other types of communication means.

In one embodiment the following SQL statement illustrates an exemplary implementation of notifying the user using subset table and subscription table 

Unlike other existing systems the notification as described in embodiments of the present invention is not a notification based on the individual or single events such as PO Received and PO Shipped . Instead the notification is formulated as a query about the process instances based on data from both events that were pre correlated into the same activity record. Once the events were pre correlated or accumulated notification component and methods may be used to evaluate the subscription by treating each activity as composite event. Example of such notification system may include Microsoft SQL Server Notification Services. It is to be understood that other schema methods algorithms programming routines or codes may be used to implement such functions of notification component .

In another embodiment the event provider determines the subset of the records as a function of a current time a last run time and the defined condition. For example suppose the event provider is executed every 10 minutes and the current time is 12 50 P.M. In an example the event provider may move all the records that were modified since the last execution. For example the record for order will be included in the set because the record was modified at 12 41 which is modified after the previous execution of the event provider at 12 40.

In a more complex example suppose the event provider is also executed every 10 minutes the current time is 12 50 P.M. and the following condition is defined by the user for generating a notification 

In the above exemplary statements the user wishes to be notified when all Customer ABC orders between 500.00 and 1 000.00 are not shipped within two hours. At the current time of 12 50 PM no notification will be generated because the condition RECEIVED

As such embodiments of the present invention solve the problem described above by observing that a query from the user contains two parts a temporal part 

When this query is executed periodically the results from the non temporal data filter will not change that is all the records that matched the data filter at 10 00 A.M. will also match at 11 00 A.M. and the records that did not match at 10 A.M. will not match at 11 A.M. By only evaluating the non temporal data filter records will satisfy the user s query regardless of time condition. Once the temporal part of the condition is applied however the result is no longer true because a record with RECEIVED 8 55 A.M. will not match the user s query when the query is executed at 10 A.M. i.e. 8 55 A.M. is not less than 8 00 A.M. 10 00 2 hours . However at 11 00 the record with RECEIVED 8 55 A.M. will match the user s query even though no events happened in the meantime.

As such embodiments of the present invention define the subset as a function of time. In such an embodiment the event provider may be configured to define a subset of the plurality of event records as a function of a current time and the defined condition. illustrate an implementation of such embodiment. illustrates an exemplary defined condition including a plurality of data fields such as a set of temporal fields and a collection of condition fields . In the set of temporal fields data includes values such a Max Time a current time a Min Time a LastRun Time and a timeout e.g. a duration of time to measure the occurrence of the defined condition . For example the current time indicates a time when event provider is currently executed. Similarly the LastRun Time indicates a time when event provider was last executed. The collection of condition fields includes parameters of the defined condition such as the name of customer e.g. Customer ABC the range of total price e.g. between 500 and 1 000 and the status e.g. shipped . Additional fields may be added according to the defined condition without departing from the scope of the present invention.

In this embodiment event provider defines the subset table of event records as of the set of records that match the temporal part of the condition on . The event provider defines the subset table of event records in a time period specified between the Max Time and the Min Time . Therefore only the activity records that match the temporal part are seen as events in the notification system which then evaluates the whole condition i.e. including non temporal data filter . As such the work is separated between system and the notification component and the subscription queries are executed against relevant subset of the activity data.

Initially in block when event provider is defining a subset of event records for the first time at the current time of 10 00 A.M the event provider would determine the Max Time in order to define event records relating to the condition defined by user A. In this example the Max Time is 9 00 A.M. i.e. 10 00 A.M. 1 00 . As a result event provider would define a subset which may include event records that were received before 9 00 A.M. In other words event provider would generate event for each of the activity records older than 9 00 AM. Those events will be then processed by the notification system to evaluate the whole condition defined by user A i.e. purchase orders of Customer CDE received before 9 00 A.M. Consequently notification component notifies the user A when the data in the defined subset indicates the defined condition has occurred.

Next a block illustrates when event provider is executed after a time interval e.g. 10 minutes . For example if event provider is defining a subset at a current time of 10 10 A.M. event provider would need to determine the Max Time and the Min Time in order to define event records relating to the condition defined by user A. In this illustration the Max Time is 9 10 A.M. i.e. 10 10 1 00 and the Min Time is 9 00 A.M. i.e. 10 00 1 00 because the LastRun time is 10 00 A.M. . However instead of defining event records from a subset illustrated by the shaded area event provider defines a subset between the Max Time and Min Time i.e. between 9 10 and 9 00 A.M. . In other words at the current time of 10 10 A.M. event provider would not define the subset of event records that were received before 9 00 A.M. because they were already processed the last time.

Hence according to this embodiment event provider would define PO 123 according to condition defined by the user Joe as follows 

The PO 123 specifies that the order from Customer ABC was received at 10 12 A.M. with a total price of 657. In order for event provider to define PO 123 in the subset table event provider would execute at a current time of 12 20 P.M. with a LastRun time of 12 10 P.M. That is the Max Time would be 10 20 A.M. and the Min Time would be 10 10 A.M.

It is to be assumed that the time values in the above examples are measured in the same time zone. It is to be understood that time values described above may also include references to the date and the year when the time values are measured.

While the subset described above is defined by event provider with respect to time it is to be understood that the subset may be defined with respect to any parameter or value of the condition defined by the user. Consequently event provider may define the subset by comparing relevant parameters or values defined in the condition with data values in the data fields of the event records.

At event provider determines whether the condition requires a current time evaluation. If the determination is positive event provider proceeds to in with the current time evaluation. Using PO 123 again as an example as the shipping time data is unavailable according to subset table event provider would compare the received time with the current time. On the other hand if the determination is negative at event provider defines a subset of event records wherein the subset relates to the defined condition. In other words event provider defines a subset from the plurality of event records where the event records in the subset include data relating to the defined condition. The event provider will then execute on predetermined interval and each time will identify the subset of records that match the temporal condition at . For example the event provider may run every 10 minutes. At notification component determines whether the data in the subset indicates that the defined condition has occurred. If the determination is positive notification component notifies the user that the defined condition has occurred. Alternatively if notification component determines that the defined condition has not occurred the user would not be notified.

On the other hand if event provider determines that it is not the first time it has defined the subset event provider proceeds to calculate a Min Time at by subtracting the timeout from the LastRun time which is available at . In Mary s example suppose the LastRun time is 9 45 A.M. the Min Time equals to 3 45 A.M. In another embodiment the LastRun time is calculated as a function of the current time and an interval in which event provider periodically defines the subset. At event provider defines the subset of event records in a time period between the Max Time and the Min Time. In other words event provider defines the subset of event records received between 3 45 A.M. and 4 00 A.M.

The computer typically has at least some form of computer readable media. Computer readable media which include both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media may be any available medium that may be accessed by computer . By way of example and not limitation computer readable media comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media include volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. For example computer storage media include RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium that may be used to store the desired information and that may be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embody computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and include any information delivery media. Those skilled in the art are familiar with the modulated data signal which has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. Wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media are examples of communication media. Combinations of any of the above are also included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of removable and or non removable volatile and or nonvolatile memory. In the illustrated embodiment system memory includes read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. For example illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media. also shows a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that may be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a non volatile memory interface such as interface .

The drives or other mass storage devices and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components may either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into computer through input devices or user interface selection devices such as a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse trackball pen or touch pad . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are connected to processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a Universal Serial Bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers often include other peripheral output devices not shown such as a printer and speakers which may be connected through an output peripheral interface not shown .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. LAN and or WAN may be a wired network a wireless network a combination thereof and so on. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and global computer networks e.g. the Internet .

When used in a local area networking environment computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a wide area networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external is connected to system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to computer or portions thereof may be stored in a remote memory storage device not shown . By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on the memory device. The network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Generally the data processors of computer are programmed by means of instructions stored at different times in the various computer readable storage media of the computer. Programs and operating systems are typically distributed for example on floppy disks or CD ROMs. From there they are installed or loaded into the secondary memory of a computer. At execution they are loaded at least partially into the computer s primary electronic memory. The invention described herein includes these and other various types of computer readable storage media when such media contain instructions or programs for implementing the steps described below in conjunction with a microprocessor or other data processor. The invention also includes the computer itself when programmed according to the methods and techniques described herein.

For purposes of illustration programs and other executable program components such as the operating system are illustrated herein as discrete blocks. It is recognized however that such programs and components reside at various times in different storage components of the computer and are executed by the data processor s of the computer.

Although described in connection with an exemplary computing system environment including computer the invention is operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. The computing system environment is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the invention. Moreover the computing system environment should not be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or combination of components illustrated in the exemplary operating environment. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics mobile telephones network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

The invention may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules executed by one or more computers or other devices. Generally program modules include but are not limited to routines programs objects components and data structures that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

An interface in the context of a software architecture includes a software module component code portion or other sequence of computer executable instructions. The interface includes for example a first module accessing a second module to perform computing tasks on behalf of the first module. The first and second modules include in one example application programming interfaces APIs such as provided by operating systems component object model COM interfaces e.g. for peer to peer application communication and extensible markup language metadata interchange format XMI interfaces e.g. for communication between web services .

The interface may be a tightly coupled synchronous implementation such as in Java 2 Platform Enterprise Edition J2EE COM or distributed COM DCOM examples. Alternatively or in addition the interface may be a loosely coupled asynchronous implementation such as in a web service e.g. using the simple object access protocol . In general the interface includes any combination of the following characteristics tightly coupled loosely coupled synchronous and asynchronous. Further the interface may conform to a standard protocol a proprietary protocol or any combination of standard and proprietary protocols.

The interfaces described herein may all be part of a single interface or may be implemented as separate interfaces or any combination therein. The interfaces may execute locally or remotely to provide functionality. Further the interfaces may include additional or less functionality than illustrated or described herein.

The order of execution or performance of the methods illustrated and described herein is not essential unless otherwise specified. That is elements of the methods may be performed in any order unless otherwise specified and that the methods may include more or less elements than those disclosed herein. For example it is contemplated that executing or performing a particular element before contemporaneously with or after another element is within the scope of the invention.

When introducing elements of the present invention or the embodiment s thereof the articles a an the and said are intended to mean that there are one or more of the elements. The terms comprising including and having are intended to be inclusive and mean that there may be additional elements other than the listed elements.

In view of the above it will be seen that the several objects of the invention are achieved and other advantageous results attained.

As various changes could be made in the above systems and methods without departing from the scope of the invention it is intended that all matter contained in the above description and shown in the accompanying drawings shall be interpreted as illustrative and not in a limiting sense.

