---

title: Drugs and gene carrier particles that rapidly move through mucous barriers
abstract: The invention generally relates to polymeric particles suitable for transporting bioactive agents across mucosal barriers. The invention also relates to methods of making and using those polymeric particles.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08957034&OS=08957034&RS=08957034
owner: Johns Hopkins University
number: 08957034
owner_city: Baltimore
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050128
---
This application is a national stage filing under 35 U.S.C. 371 of International Application PCT US2005 002556 filed Jan. 28 2005 which claims priority from United States Provisional Application Nos. 60 539 773 filed Jan. 28 2004 and 60 579 533 filed Jun. 14 2004 the specifications of all of which are incorporated by reference herein. International Application PCT US2005 002556 was published under PCT Article 21 2 in English.

This invention was made with government support under grant number CTS0210718 awarded by the National Science Foundation. The government has certain rights in the invention.

The primary component of mucus is higher molecular weight mucin glycoproteins which form numerous covalent and noncovalent bonds with other mucin molecules and various constituents including DNA alginate and hyaluronan. Hanes et al. Gene therapy in the lung. in Pharmaceutical Inhalation Aerosol Technology 2d ed. Marcel Dekker Inc. New York 2003 pp. 489 539. Reconstituted mucus formulated from pig gastric human cervical and tracheobronchial mucins display similar mucus structures with large rod or fiberlike aggregates of 5 nm in diameter and 100 5000 nm in length. Khanvilkar et al. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2001 48 173 193. The condensed and complex microstructure of the mucus network gives rise to a highly viscoelastic gel which significantly impedes the transport rates of large macromolecules and nanoparticles. Saltzman et al. Biophys. J. 1994 66 508 515 Sanders et al. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 2002 162 1905 1911 Olmsted et al. Biophys. J. 2001 81 1930 1937. Immobilized nanoparticles are subject to bacterial and enzymatic degradation and may also be cleared from the body by normal mucus clearance mechanisms. Although clearance rates are anatomically determined mucus turnover rates in the GI tract are estimated as between 24 and 48 h. Khanvilkar et al. supra. In the lungs clearance rates are dependent on the region of particle deposition however normal tracheal mucus velocities albeit more rapid than mucus velocities in the peripheral lung range from 1 10 mm min and turnover times are less than 1 h. Cone R. A. Mucus. In Mucosal Immunology 2nd ed. Academic Press San Diego Calif. 1999 pp. 43064. As a result it is desirable to have drug and gene carriers which are capable of efficiently traversing mucus layers coating mucosal surfaces.

Accordingly the present invention provides bioactive agent carriers and methods of making and using them. In particular the carriers include polymeric or liposomal particles that are capable of efficiently traversing mucus layers coating mucosal surfaces. The polymeric particles generally comprise a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer core and a surface altering agent. The liposomal particles generally comprise a liposome core and a surface altering agent. The polymeric or liposomal particles may comprise one or more bioactive agents and or imaging agents. The polymeric or liposomal particles may also comprise a targeting moiety.

In one aspect a polymeric particle comprises a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer core and a surface altering agent that is embedded or enmeshed in the particle s surface or that is disposed e.g. by coating adsorption covalent linkage or other process on the surface of the particle. The surface altering agent may be a bioactive agent itself. For example in certain embodiment a polymeric particle may comprise a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer and a nucleic acid coating the surface of the particle. In such embodiments the nucleic acid molecule may alter the surface of the particle and make it mucus resistant. In certain other embodiments a polymeric particle comprises a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer and a protein e.g. serum albumin disposed on the surface of the particle. The protein may alter the surface of the particle and make it mucus resistant. In any of these embodiments the polymeric particle may comprise an imaging agent e.g. that may include a diagnostic agent and or a detectable label. For example the nucleic acid or the protein included in the polymeric particle may comprise an imaging agent itself e.g. a detectable label can be attached to the DNA or the protein. Alternatively the polymeric particle may comprise an imaging agent that is separate from the nucleic acid or the protein e.g. encapsulated in the core or disposed on or coupled to the surface. Additionally the polymeric particle may comprise a targeting moiety or molecule coupled to the polymeric particle and or the protein or nucleic acid and the targeting moiety can help deliver the nucleic acid the protein and or the imaging or diagnostic agent to a targeted location in a patient.

In certain embodiments a polymeric particle comprises a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer core a bioactive agent e.g. a drug or medicament encapsulated in the core and a surface altering agent that is embedded or enmeshed in the particle s surface or disposed e.g. by coating adsorption covalent linkage or other process on the surface of the particle and that alters the surface of the particle e.g. to make it mucus resistant. The polymeric particle may comprise an imaging agent e.g. a diagnostic agent and or a detectable label. The encapsulated bioactive agent may be or comprise an imaging agent itself e.g. a detectable label may be attached to a therapeutic agent. Alternatively the polymeric particle may comprise an imaging agent that is separate from the bioactive agent. Additionally the polymeric particle may comprise a targeting moiety or molecule coupled to the polymeric particle and the targeting moiety can help deliver the bioactive agent and or the imaging agent to a desirable location in a patient.

Alternatively a polymeric particle may comprise a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer core a surface altering agent e.g. a surfactant that is embedded or enmeshed in the particle s surface or disposed e.g. by coating adsorption covalent linkage or other process on the surface of the particle and that alters the surface of the particle such as by making it mucus resistant and a bioactive agent disposed on the polymeric particle. The bioactive agent may be coated or otherwise disposed on the surface of the polymeric particle or be coupled to the polymeric particle by e.g. covalent linkage complexation or other process. In certain such embodiments the surface altering agent is selected to promote adhesion or complexation of the bioactive agent to the surface of the particle. In such embodiments the surface altering agent and or the bioactive agent may contribute to mucus resistant properties of the modified particles. The polymeric particles may comprise an imaging agent such as a diagnostic agent and or a detectable label. The bioactive agent coated or disposed on the surface of the particle or coupled to the particle may be or comprise an imaging agent itself e.g. a detectable label can be attached to a therapeutic agent. Alternatively the polymeric particle may comprise an imaging agent that is separate from the bioactive agent e.g. encapsulated in the core or disposed on or coupled to its surface. Additionally the polymeric particle may comprise a targeting moiety or molecule coupled to the polymeric particle and the targeting moiety can help deliver the bioactive agent and or the imaging agent to a targeted location in a patient.

The present invention also provides a polymeric particle comprising a polymeric particle having regions of polyethylene glycol or its derivatives that are presented on the surface of the particle. The polymeric particle may optionally comprise an additional surface altering agent. The polymeric particle may further comprise a bioactive agent and or a targeting moiety.

Bioactive agents according to the invention include but are not limited to a DNA e.g. a gene therapy vector or plasmid an RNA e.g. an RNAi construct or molecule a small molecule a peptidomimetic a protein or peptide and a combination thereof.

The surface altering agent may increase charge or hydrophilicity of the polymeric or liposomal particle or otherwise decrease interactions between the particle and mucus thereby promoting motility through mucus. The surface altering agent may enhance the average rate at which the polymeric or liposomal particles or a fraction of the particles move in or through mucus. Examples of suitable surface altering agents include but are not limited to anionic protein e.g. serum albumin nucleic acids surfactants such as cationic surfactants e.g. dimethyldioctadecyl ammonium bromide sugars or sugar derivatives e.g. cyclodextrin polyethylene glycol mucolytic agents or other non mucoadhesive agents. Certain agents e.g. cyclodextrin may form inclusion complexes with other molecules and can be used to form attachments to additional moieties and facilitate the functionalization of the particle surface and or the attached molecules or moieties.

The polymeric particles of the invention have many applications. In particular they are well suited for making pharmaceutical compositions particularly those for which the route of administration involves the particles passing through a mucosal barrier. For example the polymeric particles are particularly suitable for making pharmaceutical compositions to be formulated as nasal spray such that the pharmaceutical compositions can be delivered across a nasal mucus layer. Similarly the polymeric particles are particularly suitable for making pharmaceutical compositions for delivery via gastrointestinal respiratory rectal and or vaginal tissues.

A pharmaceutically acceptable polymer may be a poly D L lactic co glycolic acid polyethylenimine dioleyltrimethyammoniumpropane dioleyl sn glycerolphosphoethianolamine polysebacic anhydride or other polymer formed from clinically acceptable or approved monomers. Examples of clinically approved monomers include but are not limited to monomers of sebacic acid and 3 bis carboxyphenoxy propane. Other polymers or copolymers described herein can also be employed to make the polymeric particles of the invention.

In certain embodiments a bioactive agent is a therapeutic agent or an imaging agent e.g. a diagnostic agent . Examples of therapeutic agents include but are not limited to a DNA an RNA a small molecule a peptidomimetic a protein and a combination thereof. In certain embodiments the imaging agent further comprises a detectable label.

In certain embodiments a polymeric particle of the invention may further comprise a targeting agent or molecule. A polymeric particle may also further or alternatively comprise an adjuvant.

In certain embodiments a polymeric particle of the invention may further comprise an agent covalently linked to the polymeric particle. The agent may be a bioactive agent such as for example a drug. The agent may preferably be a hydrophilic agent such that through its covalent linkage to the polymeric particle the agent alters charge or hydrophilicity of the particle e.g. to increase the particle s mucus resistance. The covalent linkage may be cleavable under biological conditions.

Certain embodiments provides polymeric particles that are on average less than 100 m 10 m 1 m 500 nm and more preferably 200 nm in diameter or nanoparticles.

Further the present invention provides polymeric particles that can pass through a mucosal barrier at a greater rate than certain other polymeric particles e.g. unmodified polystyrene particles. A polymeric particle of the invention may pass through a mucosal barrier at a rate that is at least 2 5 10 20 30 50 100 200 500 1000 or greater fold higher than e.g. an unmodified polystyrene particle of a similar size.

A second aspect of the invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising a polymeric particle of the invention.

A third aspect relates to a use of a polymeric particle of the invention in the manufacture of a medicament for the treatment prevention or diagnosis of a condition in a patient.

A fourth aspect relates to a method for transfecting a cell comprising contacting the cell with a polymeric particle of the invention that comprises a nucleic acid. A polymeric particle of the invention comprising a nucleic acid may transfect a cell at a higher efficiency e.g. at 2 5 10 20 50 100 or greater fold higher efficiency than the naked nucleic acid e.g. in the presence of a mucosal barrier.

A fifth aspect related to a method for treating preventing or diagnosing a condition in a patient comprising administering to the patient a pharmaceutical composition of the invention. In certain embodiments the polymeric particle in a pharmaceutical composition of the invention transports through a mucosal barrier in the patient.

A sixth aspect relates to a method for preparing polymeric particles of the invention. Any method suitable for preparing polymeric particles in particular nanoparticles may be employed. An exemplary method may include combining a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer with a surface altering agent to form a mixture in an organic solvent adding a bioactive agent to the mixture removing the solvent from the mixture and obtaining a polymeric particle suspension. The method may further include passing the polymeric particle suspension through a filter. The method may also include removing impurities from the polymeric particle suspension. The method may also comprise a centrifugation step to pellet the polymeric particles. Another exemplary method may include obtaining microparticles or preferably nanoparticles using a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer and coupling e.g. by coating covalent linkage or co localization to the surface of the microparticles or nanoparticles a surface altering agent e.g. a polyethylene glycol a nucleic acid or a protein. A method of the invention may further include coupling e.g. by coating covalent linkage or co localization to the polymeric particles an imaging agent a detectable label or a targeting moiety.

Cationic microparticles with DNA adsorbed to their surfaces have been shown to efficiently transfect cells in vitro. E.g. Singh et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000 97 811 816 Singh et al. Pharm Res 2001 18 1476 1479 Denis Mize et al. Gene Ther 2000 7 2105 2112. However obtaining high transfection efficiencies in vivo is often limited by particle transport through extracellular barriers including the mucosal barrier which has been described as the foremost barrier to transfection in mucus covered cells. See e.g. Ferrari et al. Gene Ther 2001 8 1380 1386 Yonemitsu et al. Nat Biotechnol 2000 18 970 973.

High MW poly ethylene glycol PEG has been used as a mucoadhesive added to polymeric systems for its reported ability to interpenetrate into the mucus network Bures et al. J. Controlled Release 2001 72 25 33 Huang et al. J. Controlled Release 2000 65 63 71 Peppas et al. J. Controlled Release 1999 62 81 87 and hydrogen bond to mucins Willits et al. Biomaterials 2001 22 445 452 Sanders et al. J. Controlled Release 2003 87 117 129 . However as shown in the examples below modifying the surface of different particle types formulated from polymers and liposomes with PEG decreased the adsorption of mucus components to the particle surface and allowed more rapid transport through mucus with a reduced number of adhesive particles.

Modification of particle surface with other polymers proteins surfactants sugars nucleic acids or non mucoadhesive materials may also result in increased transport in mucus and other adhesive biological fluids such as serum. For example as shown below modification of particle surface by the adsorption of hydrophilic DNA to the surface of hydrophobic PLGA DDAB nanoparticles increases transport in mucus. Additionally non specific adsorption of polylysine PLL or bovine serum albumin BSA to hydrophobic polystyrene particles increases transport in mucus. These findings also indicate that the attachment of PEG to the surface of particles formulated from a variety of materials greatly reduces the effects of mucin adsorption increases transport rates and provides increased particle stability. Other molecules such as surfactants or polymers including poly aspartic acid and proteins such as heparin may also increase transport rates in mucus.

Accordingly the present invention relates to polymeric or liposomal particles and compositions comprising them such as pharmaceutical compositions for the delivery of biologically active and or therapeutic agents e.g. for the prevention or treatment of a disease or other condition in a patient particularly for delivery across mucosal barriers in the patient. The present invention also provides a polymeric particle comprising a polymer having regions of polyethylene glycol that are presented on the surface of the particle. In certain embodiments biodegradable and biocompatible polymers may be used to transport or carry an adsorbed or encapsulated therapeutic agent across a mucosal barrier present in any mucosal surface e.g. gastrointestinal nasal respiratory rectal or vaginal mucosal tissues in a patient. Agents that may be adsorbed or encapsulated in the subject compositions include imaging and diagnostic agents such as radiopaque agents labeled antibodies labeled nucleic acid probes dyes such as colored or fluorescent dyes etc. and adjuvants radiosensitizers transfection enhancing agents chemotactic agents and chemoattractants peptides that modulate cell adhesion and or cell mobility cell permeabilizing agents vaccine potentiators inhibitors of multidrug resistance and or efflux pumps etc. . The present invention also relates to methods of making and or administering such compositions e.g. as part of a treatment regimen for example by inhalation or by injection e.g. subcutaneously intramuscularly or intravenously.

For convenience before further description of the present invention certain terms employed in the specification examples and appended claims are collected here. These definitions should be read in light of the remainder of the disclosure and understood as by a person of skill in the art.

The term access device is an art recognized term and includes any medical device adapted for gaining or maintaining access to an anatomic area. Such devices are familiar to artisans in the medical and surgical fields. An access device may be a needle a catheter a cannula a trocar a tubing a shunt a drain or an endoscope such as an otoscope nasopharyngoscope bronchoscope or any other endoscope adapted for use in the head and neck area or any other medical device suitable for entering or remaining positioned within the preselected anatomic area.

The terms biocompatible polymer and biocompatibility when used in relation to polymers are art recognized. For example biocompatible polymers include polymers that are neither themselves toxic to the host e.g. an animal or human nor degrade if the polymer degrades at a rate that produces monomeric or oligomeric subunits or other byproducts at toxic concentrations in the host. In certain embodiments of the present invention biodegradation generally involves degradation of the polymer in an organism e.g. into its monomeric subunits which may be known to be effectively non toxic. Intermediate oligomeric products resulting from such degradation may have different toxicological properties however or biodegradation may involve oxidation or other biochemical reactions that generate molecules other than monomeric subunits of the polymer. Consequently in certain embodiments toxicology of a biodegradable polymer intended for in vivo use such as implantation or injection into a patient may be determined after one or more toxicity analyses. It is not necessary that any subject composition have a purity of 100 to be deemed biocompatible. Hence a subject composition may comprise 99 98 97 96 95 90 85 80 75 or even less of biocompatible polymers e.g. including polymers and other materials and excipients described herein and still be biocompatible.

To determine whether a polymer or other material is biocompatible it may be necessary to conduct a toxicity analysis. Such assays are well known in the art. One example of such an assay may be performed with live carcinoma cells such as GT3TKB tumor cells in the following manner the sample is degraded in 1 M NaOH at 37 C. until complete degradation is observed. The solution is then neutralized with 1 M HCl. About 200 L of various concentrations of the degraded sample products are placed in 96 well tissue culture plates and seeded with human gastric carcinoma cells GT3TKB at 10 well density. The degraded sample products are incubated with the GT3TKB cells for 48 hours. The results of the assay may be plotted as relative growth vs. concentration of degraded sample in the tissue culture well. In addition polymers and formulations of the present invention may also be evaluated by well known in vivo tests such as subcutaneous implantations in rats to confirm that they do not cause significant levels of irritation or inflammation at the subcutaneous implantation sites.

Exemplary biocompatible and biodegradable polymers disclosed in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 20030086895 may be employed to make the polymeric particles of the present invention.

The term biodegradable is art recognized and includes polymers compositions and formulations such as those described herein that are intended to degrade during use. Biodegradable polymers typically differ from non biodegradable polymers in that the former may degrade during use. In certain embodiments such use involves in vivo use such as in vivo therapy and in other certain embodiments such use involves in vitro use. In general degradation attributable to biodegradability involves the degradation of a biodegradable polymer into its component subunits or digestion e.g. by a biochemical process of the polymer into smaller non polymeric subunits. In certain embodiments two different types of biodegradation may generally be identified. For example one type of biodegradation may involve cleavage of bonds whether covalent or otherwise in the polymer backbone. In such biodegradation monomers and oligomers typically result and even more typically such biodegradation occurs by cleavage of a bond connecting one or more of subunits of a polymer. In contrast another type of biodegradation may involve cleavage of a bond whether covalent or otherwise internal to sidechain or that connects a side chain to the polymer backbone. For example a therapeutic agent or other chemical moiety attached as a side chain to the polymer backbone may be released by biodegradation. In certain embodiments one or the other or both general types of biodegradation may occur during use of a polymer.

As used herein the term biodegradation encompasses both general types of biodegradation. The degradation rate of a biodegradable polymer often depends in part on a variety of factors including the chemical identity of the linkage responsible for any degradation the molecular weight crystallinity biostability and degree of cross linking of such polymer the physical characteristics e.g. shape and size of the implant and the mode and location of administration. For example the greater the molecular weight the higher the degree of crystallinity and or the greater the biostability the biodegradation of any biodegradable polymer is usually slower. The term biodegradable is intended to cover materials and processes also termed bioerodible. 

In certain embodiments wherein the biodegradable polymer also has a therapeutic agent or other material associated with it the biodegradation rate of such polymer may be characterized by a release rate of such materials. In such circumstances the biodegradation rate may depend on not only the chemical identity and physical characteristics of the polymer but also on the identity of material s incorporated therein.

In certain embodiments polymeric formulations of the present invention biodegrade within a period that is acceptable in the desired application. In certain embodiments such as in vivo therapy such degradation occurs in a period usually less than about five years one year six months three months one month fifteen days five days three days or even one day or less e.g. 4 8 hours on exposure to a physiological solution with a pH between 6 and 8 having a temperature of between 25 and 37 C. In other embodiments the polymer degrades in a period of between about one hour and several weeks depending on the desired application.

The term drug delivery device is an art recognized term and refers to any medical device suitable for the application of a drug or therapeutic agent to a targeted organ or anatomic region. The term includes without limitation those formulations of the compositions of the present invention that release the therapeutic agent into the surrounding tissues of an anatomic area. The term further includes those devices that transport or accomplish the instillation of the compositions of the present invention towards the targeted organ or anatomic area even if the device itself is not formulated to include the composition. As an example a needle or a catheter through which the composition is inserted into an anatomic area or into a blood vessel or other structure related to the anatomic area is understood to be a drug delivery device. As a further example a stent or a shunt or a catheter that has the composition included in its substance or coated on its surface is understood to be a drug delivery device.

When used with respect to a therapeutic agent or other material the term sustained release is art recognized. For example a subject composition which releases a substance over time may exhibit sustained release characteristics in contrast to a bolus type administration in which the entire amount of the substance is made biologically available at one time. For example in particular embodiments upon contact with body fluids including blood spinal fluid lymph or the like the polymer matrices formulated as provided herein and otherwise as known to one of skill in the art may undergo gradual degradation e.g. through hydrolysis with concomitant release of any material incorporated therein e.g. an therapeutic and or biologically active agent for a sustained or extended period as compared to the release from a bolus . This release may result in prolonged delivery of therapeutically effective amounts of any incorporated therapeutic agent.

The term delivery agent is an art recognized term and includes molecules that facilitate the intracellular delivery of a therapeutic agent or other material. Examples of delivery agents include sterols e.g. cholesterol and lipids e.g. a cationic lipid virosome or liposome .

The term microspheres is art recognized and includes substantially spherical colloidal structures e.g. formed from biocompatible polymers such as subject compositions having a size ranging from about one or greater up to about 1000 microns. In general microcapsules also an art recognized term may be distinguished from microspheres because microcapsules are generally covered by a substance of some type such as a polymeric formulation. The term microparticles is also art recognized and includes microspheres and microcapsules as well as structures that may not be readily placed into either of the above two categories all with dimensions on average of less than about 1000 microns. If the structures are less than about one micron in diameter then the corresponding art recognized terms nanosphere nanocapsule and nanoparticle may be utilized. In certain embodiments the nanospheres nanocapsules and nanoparticles have a size an average diameter of about 500 200 100 50 or 10 nm.

A composition comprising microparticles or nanoparticles may include particles of a range of particle sizes. In certain embodiments the particle size distribution may be uniform e.g. within less than about a 20 standard deviation of the median volume diameter and in other embodiments still more uniform e.g. within about 10 of the median volume diameter.

The phrases parenteral administration and administered parenterally are art recognized terms and include modes of administration other than enteral and topical administration such as injections and include without limitation intravenous intramuscular intrapleural intravascular intrapericardial intraarterial intrathecal intracapsular intraorbital intracardiac intradennal intraperitoneal transtracheal subcutaneous subcuticular intra articular subcapsular subarachnoid intraspinal and intrasternal injection and infusion.

The term treating is art recognized and includes preventing a disease disorder or condition from occurring in an animal which may be predisposed to the disease disorder and or condition but has not yet been diagnosed as having it inhibiting the disease disorder or condition e.g. impeding its progress and relieving the disease disorder or condition e.g. causing regression of the disease disorder and or condition. Treating the disease or condition includes ameliorating at least one symptom of the particular disease or condition even if the underlying pathophysiology is not affected such as treating the pain of a subject by administration of an analgesic agent even though such agent does not treat the cause of the pain.

Viscosity is understood herein as it is recognized in the art to be the internal friction of a fluid or the resistance to flow exhibited by a fluid material when subjected to deformation. The degree of viscosity of the polymer can be adjusted by the molecular weight of the polymer as well as by varying the proportion of its various monomer subunits other methods for altering the physical characteristics of a specific polymer will be evident to practitioners of ordinary skill with no more than routine experimentation. The molecular weight of the polymer used in the composition of the invention can vary widely depending on whether a rigid solid state higher molecular weights is desirable or whether a fluid state lower molecular weights is desired.

The phrase pharmaceutically acceptable is art recognized. In certain embodiments the term includes compositions polymers and other materials and or dosage forms which are within the scope of sound medical judgment suitable for use in contact with the tissues of human beings and animals without excessive toxicity irritation allergic response or other problem or complication commensurate with a reasonable benefit risk ratio.

The phrase pharmaceutically acceptable carrier is art recognized and includes for example pharmaceutically acceptable materials compositions or vehicles such as a liquid or solid filler diluent solvent or encapsulating material involved in carrying or transporting any subject composition from one organ or portion of the body to another organ or portion of the body. Each carrier must be acceptable in the sense of being compatible with the other ingredients of a subject composition and not injurious to the patient. In certain embodiments a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier is non pyrogenic. Some examples of materials which may serve as pharmaceutically acceptable carriers include 1 sugars such as lactose glucose and sucrose 2 starches such as corn starch and potato starch 3 cellulose and its derivatives such as sodium carboxymethyl cellulose ethyl cellulose and cellulose acetate 4 powdered tragacanth 5 malt 6 gelatin 7 talc 8 cocoa butter and suppository waxes 9 oils such as peanut oil cottonseed oil sunflower oil sesame oil olive oil corn oil and soybean oil 10 glycols such as propylene glycol 11 polyols such as glycerin sorbitol mannitol and polyethylene glycol 12 esters such as ethyl oleate and ethyl laurate 13 agar 14 buffering agents such as magnesium hydroxide and aluminum hydroxide 15 alginic acid 16 pyrogen free water 17 isotonic saline 18 Ringer s solution 19 ethyl alcohol 20 phosphate buffer solutions and 21 other non toxic compatible substances employed in pharmaceutical formulations.

The term pharmaceutically acceptable salts is art recognized and includes relatively non toxic inorganic and organic acid addition salts of compositions including without limitation analgesic agents therapeutic agents other materials and the like. Examples of pharmaceutically acceptable salts include those derived from mineral acids such as hydrochloric acid and sulfuric acid and those derived from organic acids such as ethanesulfonic acid benzenesulfonic acid p toluenesulfonic acid and the like. Examples of suitable inorganic bases for the formation of salts include the hydroxides carbonates and bicarbonates of ammonia sodium lithium potassium calcium magnesium aluminum zinc and the like. Salts may also be formed with suitable organic bases including those that are non toxic and strong enough to form such salts. For purposes of illustration the class of such organic bases may include mono di and trialkylamines such as methylamine dimethylamine and triethylamine mono di or trihydroxyalkylamines such as mono di and triethanolamine amino acids such as arginine and lysine guanidine N methylglucosamine N methylglucamine L glutamine N methylpiperazine morpholine ethylenediamine N benzylphenethylamine trihydroxymethyl aminoethane and the like. See for example J. Pharm. Sci. 66 1 19 1977 .

A patient subject or host to be treated by the subject method may mean either a human or non human animal such as primates mammals and vertebrates.

The term prophylactic or therapeutic treatment is art recognized and includes administration to the host of one or more of the subject compositions. If it is administered prior to clinical manifestation of the unwanted condition e.g. disease or other unwanted state of the host animal then the treatment is prophylactic i.e. it protects the host against developing the unwanted condition whereas if it is administered after manifestation of the unwanted condition the treatment is therapeutic i.e. it is intended to diminish ameliorate or stabilize the existing unwanted condition or side effects thereof .

The term preventing is art recognized and when used in relation to a condition such as a local recurrence e.g. pain a disease such as cancer a syndrome complex such as heart failure or any other medical condition is well understood in the art and includes administration of a composition which reduces the frequency of or delays the onset of symptoms of a medical condition in a subject relative to a subject which does not receive the composition. Thus prevention of cancer includes for example reducing the number of detectable cancerous growths in a population of patients receiving a prophylactic treatment relative to an untreated control population and or delaying the appearance of detectable cancerous growths in a treated population versus an untreated control population e.g. by a statistically and or clinically significant amount. Prevention of an infection includes for example reducing the number of diagnoses of the infection in a treated population versus an untreated control population and or delaying the onset of symptoms of the infection in a treated population versus an untreated control population. Prevention of pain includes for example reducing the magnitude of or alternatively delaying pain sensations experienced by subjects in a treated population versus an untreated control population.

The phrases systemic administration administered systemically peripheral administration and administered peripherally are art recognized and include the administration of a subject composition therapeutic or other material at a site remote from the disease being treated. Administration of an agent directly into onto or in the vicinity of a lesion of the disease being treated even if the agent is subsequently distributed systemically may be termed local or topical or regional administration other than directly into the central nervous system e.g. by subcutaneous administration such that it enters the patient s system and thus is subject to metabolism and other like processes.

The phrase therapeutically effective amount is an art recognized term. In certain embodiments the term refers to an amount of the therapeutic agent that when incorporated into a polymer of the present invention produces some desired effect at a reasonable benefit risk ratio applicable to any medical treatment. In certain embodiments the term refers to that amount necessary or sufficient to eliminate or reduce sensations of pain for a period of time. The effective amount may vary depending on such factors as the disease or condition being treated the particular targeted constructs being administered the size of the subject or the severity of the disease or condition. One of ordinary skill in the art may empirically determine the effective amount of a particular compound without necessitating undue experimentation.

The term ED is art recognized. In certain embodiments EDmeans the dose of a drug that produces 50 of its maximum response or effect or alternatively the dose that produces a pre determined response in 50 of test subjects or preparations.

The term LD is art recognized. In certain embodiments LDmeans the dose of a drug that is lethal in 50 of test subjects. The term therapeutic index is an art recognized term that refers to the therapeutic index of a drug defined as LD ED.

The terms incorporated and encapsulated are art recognized when used in reference to a therapeutic agent or other material and a polymeric composition such as a composition of the present invention. In certain embodiments these terms include incorporating formulating or otherwise including such agent into a composition that allows for release such as sustained release of such agent in the desired application. The terms contemplate any manner by which a therapeutic agent or other material is incorporated into a polymer matrix including for example attached to a monomer of such polymer by covalent ionic or other binding interaction physical admixture enveloping the agent in a coating layer of polymer and having such monomer be part of the polymerization to give a polymeric formulation distributed throughout the polymeric matrix appended to the surface of the polymeric matrix by covalent or other binding interactions encapsulated inside the polymeric matrix etc. The term co incorporation or co encapsulation refers to the incorporation of a therapeutic agent or other material and at least one other therapeutic agent or other material in a subject composition.

More specifically the physical form in which any therapeutic agent or other material is encapsulated in polymers may vary with the particular embodiment. For example a therapeutic agent or other material may be first encapsulated in a microsphere and then combined with the polymer in such a way that at least a portion of the microsphere structure is maintained. Alternatively a therapeutic agent or other material may be sufficiently immiscible in the polymer of the invention that it is dispersed as small droplets rather than being dissolved in the polymer. Any form of encapsulation or incorporation is contemplated by the present invention in so much as the release preferably sustained release of any encapsulated therapeutic agent or other material determines whether the form of encapsulation is sufficiently acceptable for any particular use.

The term biocompatible plasticizer is art recognized and includes materials which are soluble or dispersible in the compositions of the present invention which increase the flexibility of the polymer matrix and which in the amounts employed are biocompatible. Suitable plasticizers are well known in the art and include those disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 2 784 127 and 4 444 933. Specific plasticizers include by way of example acetyl tri n butyl citrate c. 20 weight percent or less acetyltrihexyl citrate c. 20 weight percent or less butyl benzyl phthalate dibutylphthalate dioctylphthalate n butyryl tri n hexyl citrate diethylene glycol dibenzoate c. 20 weight percent or less and the like.

The present invention provides polymeric particles such as microparticles or nanoparticles. In certain embodiments a polymeric particle comprises a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer a bioactive agent and a surface altering agent that makes the surface of the polymeric particle mucus resistant. In alternative embodiments a polymeric particle comprises a pharmaceutically acceptable polymer and a surface altering agent that is also a bioactive agent. In certain such embodiments the particle further comprises an adhesion promoting agent such as dimethyldioctadecyl ammonium bromide or other cation bearing additives that promotes adhesion of the surface altering agent to the surface of the particle. The surface altering agent may increase particle transport rates in mucus.

Examples of the surface altering agents include but are not limited to anionic protein e.g. bovine serum albumin surfactants e.g. cationic surfactants such as for example dimethyldioctadecyl ammonium bromide sugars or sugar derivatives e.g. cyclodextrin nucleic acids and polyethylene glycol. Surface altering agents may also include mucolytic agents e.g. rhDase or N acetylcysteine. A mucolytic agent can be administered separately or concomitantly with a polymeric particle or as a surface altering agent of the polymeric particle e.g. coated upon covalently coupled to co localized with or encapsulated within the particle of the invention to improve transport across a mucosal barrier. Certain agents e.g. cyclodextrin may form inclusion complexes with other molecules and can be used to form attachments to additional moieties and facilitate the functionalization of the particle surface and or the attached molecules or moieties.

Examples of surfactants include but are not limited to L phosphatidylcholine PC 1 2 dipalmitoylphosphatidycholine DPPC oleic acid sorbitan trioleate sorbitan mono oleate sorbitan monolaurate polyoxyethylene 20 sorbitan monolaurate polyoxyethylene 20 sorbitan monooleate natural lecithin oleyl polyoxyethylene 2 ether stearyl polyoxyethylene 2 ether lauryl polyoxyethylene 4 ether block copolymers of oxyethylene and oxypropylene synthetic lecithin diethylene glycol dioleate tetrahydrofurfuryl oleate ethyl oleate isopropyl myristate glyceryl monooleate glyceryl monostearate glyceryl monoricinoleate cetyl alcohol stearyl alcohol polyethylene glycol 400 cetyl pyridinium chloride benzalkonium chloride olive oil glyceryl monolaurate corn oil cotton seed oil and sunflower seed oil lecithin oleic acid and sorbitan trioleate.

A pharmaceutically acceptable polymer may be a poly lactic co glycolic acid PLGA poly D L lactic co glycolic acid polyethylenimine dioleyltrimethyammoniumpropane dioleyl sn glycerolphosphoethanolamine polysebacic anhydrides or other polymers formed from clinically approved monomers. Examples of clinically approved monomers include but are not limited to monomers of sebacic acid and 1 3 bis carboxyphenoxy propane.

A pharmaceutically acceptable polymer may be a polyanhydride polymer comprising repeated subunits of Formula A and Formula B and optionally subunits of Formula C as depicted below below 

In certain embodiments m n and q each independently represent a constant value throughout the polymer i.e. m n and q do not vary within a subunit of Formula A B or C or within different subunits of the same formula within a sample of polymer or a polymer chain.

In certain embodiments the polymer may contain monomeric units other than those subunits represented by Formulae A B and C. In preferred embodiments however the polymer consists essentially of subunits of Formulae A B and C.

In certain embodiments a polymer of the present invention has the formula K wherein each occurrence of K represents a subunit of Formula A or B or optionally C as set forth above. Polymer strands may be capped terminated with hydroxyl groups to form carboxylic acids acyl groups to form anhydrides alkoxy groups to form esters or any other suitable capping groups.

In certain embodiments the subunits of Formula B have a molecular weight between 200 and 1000 daltons while in other embodiments the subunits of Formula B have a molecular weight between 4000 and 10 000 daltons. In some embodiments the subunits of Formula B have molecular weights which vary throughout the polymer between 200 daltons and 10 000 or more daltons while in other embodiments the subunits of Formula B have molecular weights that vary only within a narrow range e.g. 200 300 daltons or 2 000 3 000 daltons .

In certain embodiments subunits of Formula B make up between 1 and 80 of the polymer by weight preferably between 5 and 60 . In certain embodiments subunits of Formula C if present may make up between 1 and 80 of the polymer by weight preferably between 5 and 60 . In certain embodiments subunits of Formula A make up between 10 and 99 of the polymer by weight preferably between 15 and 95 .

Each subunit may repeat any number of times and one subunit may occur with substantially the same frequency more often or less often than another subunit such that both subunits may be present in approximately the same amount or in differing amounts which may differ slightly or be highly disparate e.g. one subunit is present nearly to the exclusion of the other.

In certain instances the polymers are random copolymers in which the different subunits and or other monomeric units are distributed randomly throughout the polymer chain. In part the term random is intended to refer to the situation in which the particular distribution or incorporation of monomeric units in a polymer that has more than one type of monomeric unit is not directed or controlled directly by the synthetic protocol but instead results from features inherent to the polymer system such as the reactivity amounts of subunits and other characteristics of the synthetic reaction or other methods of manufacture processing or treatment.

In certain embodiments the polymeric chains of the subject compositions e.g. which include repetitive elements shown in any of the subject formulas have molecular weights M ranging from about 2000 or less to about 300 000 600 000 or 1 000 000 or more daltons or alternatively at least about 10 000 20 000 30 000 40 000 or 50 000 daltons more particularly at least about 100 000 daltons. Number average molecular weight M may also vary widely but generally falls in the range of about 1 000 to about 200 000 daltons preferably from about 10 000 to about 100 000 daltons and even more preferably from about 8 000 to about 50 000 daltons. Most preferably Mvaries between about 12 000 and 45 000 daltons. Within a given sample of a subject polymer a wide range of molecular weights may be present. For example molecules within the sample may have molecular weights that differ by a factor of 2 5 10 20 50 100 or more or that differ from the average molecular weight by a factor of 2 5 10 20 50 100 or more.

One method to determine molecular weight is by gel permeation chromatography GPC e.g. mixed bed columns CHClsolvent light scattering detector and off line dn dc. Other methods are known in the art.

Other polymers that may be employed to make the polymeric particles of the invention include but are not limited to cyclodextrin containing polymers in particular cationic cyclodextrin containing polymers such as those described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 509 323 poly caprolactone PCL ethylene vinyl acetate polymer EVA poly lactic acid PLA poly L lactic acid PLLA poly glycolic acid PGA poly lactic acid co glycolic acid PLGA poly L lactic acid co glycolic acid PLLGA poly D L lactide PDLA poly L lactide PLLA poly D L lactide co caprolactone poly D L lactide co caprolactone co glycolide poly D L lactide co PEO co D L lactide poly D L lactide co PPO co D L lactide polyalkyl cyanoacrylate polyurethane poly L lysine PLL hydroxypropyl methacrylate HPMA polyethyleneglycol poly L glutamic acid poly hydroxy acids polyanhydrides polyorthoesters poly ester amides polyamides poly ester ethers polycarbonates polyalkylenes such as polyethylene and polypropylene polyalkylene glycols such as poly ethylene glycol PEG polyalkylene oxides PEO polyalkylene terephthalates such as poly ethylene terephthalate polyvinyl alcohols PVA polyvinyl ethers polyvinyl esters such as poly vinyl acetate polyvinyl halides such as poly vinyl chloride PVC polyvinylpyrrolidone polysiloxanes polystyrene PS polyurethanes derivatized celluloses such as alkyl celluloses hydroxyalkyl celluloses cellulose ethers cellulose esters nitro celluloses hydroxypropylcellulose carboxymethylcellulose polymers of acrylic acids such as poly methyl meth acrylate PMMA poly ethyl meth acrylate poly butyl meth acrylate poly isobutyl meth acrylate poly hexyl meth acrylate poly isodecyl meth acrylate poly lauryl meth acrylate poly phenyl meth acrylate poly methyl acrylate poly isopropyl acrylate poly isobutyl acrylate poly octadecyl acrylate jointly referred to herein as polyacrylic acids and copolymers and mixtures thereof polydioxanone and its copolymers polyhydroxyalkanoates poly propylene fumarate polyoxymethylene poloxamers poly ortho esters poly butyric acid poly valeric acid poly lactide co caprolactone trimethylene carbonate polyvinylpyrrolidone and the polymers described in Shieh et al. 1994 J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 28 1465 1475 and in U.S. Pat. No. 4 757 128 Hubbell et al. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 654 381 5 627 233 5 628 863 5 567 440 and 5 567 435. Other suitable polymers include polyorthoesters e.g. as disclosed in Heller et al. 2000 Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 50 121 128 polyphosphazenes e.g. as disclosed in Vandorpe et al. 1997 Biomaterials 18 1147 1152 and polyphosphoesters e.g. as disclosed in Encyclopedia of Controlled Drug Delivery pp. 45 60 Ed. E. Mathiowitz John Wiley Sons Inc. New York 1999 as well as blends and or block copolymers of two or more such polymers. The carboxyl termini of lactide and glycolide containing polymers may optionally be capped e.g. by esterification and the hydroxyl termini may optionally be capped e.g. by etherification or esterification.

Copolymers of two or more polymers described above including block and or random copolymers may also be employed to make the polymeric particles of the invention.

The invention also contemplates employing copolymers of PEG or derivatives thereof such as units of Formula B above with any of the polymers described above to make the polymeric particles of the invention. In certain embodiments the PEG or derivatives may locate in the interior positions of the copolymer. Alternatively the PEG or derivatives may locate near or at the terminal positions of the copolymer. In certain embodiments the microparticles or nanoparticles are formed under conditions that allow regions of PEG to phase separate or otherwise locate to the surface of the particles. While in certain embodiments the surface localized PEG regions alone may perform the function of a surface altering agent in other embodiments these copolymeric particles comprise an additional surface altering agent.

In certain embodiments the subject polymers are soluble in one or more common organic solvents for ease of fabrication and processing. Common organic solvents include such solvents as 2 2 2 trifluoroethanol chloroform dichloromethane dichloroethane 2 butanone butyl acetate ethyl butyrate acetone ethyl acetate dimethylacetamide N methyl pyrrolidone dimethylformamide and dimethylsulfoxide.

In certain embodiments the subject polymeric particles and compositions include a bioactive agent. A bioactive agent may be a therapeutic agent a diagnostic agent or an imaging agent. Examples of therapeutic agents include but are not limited to a DNA an RNA a small molecule a peptidomimetic a protein or a combination thereof. In certain embodiments the diagnostic or imaging agent further comprises a detectable label.

A bioactive agent may be a nucleic acid e.g. a DNA useful in gene therapy. Alternatively or additionally an RNA may be employed as a bioactive agent. The RNA may be an RNAi molecule or construct. RNAi refers to RNA interference by which expression of a gene or gene product is decreased by introducing into a target cell one or more double stranded RNAs which are homologous to the gene of interest particularly to the messenger RNA of the gene of interest . RNAi may also be achieved by introduction of a DNA RNA complex wherein the antisense strand relative to the target is RNA. Either strand may include one or more modifications to the base or sugar phosphate backbone. Any nucleic acid preparation designed to achieve an RNA interference effect is referred to herein as an siRNA construct.

Alternatively an antisense nucleic acid is employed as a bioactive agent. An antisense nucleic acid may bind to its target by conventional base pair complementarity or for example in the case of binding to DNA duplexes through specific interactions in the major groove of the double helix. The antisense oligonucleotides can be DNA or RNA or chimeric mixtures or derivatives or modified versions thereof single stranded or double stranded. The oligonucleotide can be modified at the base moiety sugar moiety or phosphate backbone for example to improve stability of the molecule hybridization etc. The oligonucleotide may include other appended groups such as peptides e.g. for targeting host cell receptors or agents facilitating transport across the cell membrane see e.g. Letsinger et al. 1989 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 86 6553 6556 Lemaitre et al. 1987 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 84 648 652 PCT Publication No. W088 09810 published Dec. 15 1988 or the blood brain barrier see e.g. PCT Publication No. W089 10134 published Apr. 25 1988 hybridization triggered cleavage agents see e.g. Krol et al. 1988 BioTechniques 6 958 976 or intercalating agents see e.g. Zon 1988 Pharm. Res. 5 539 549 . To this end the oligonucleotide may be conjugated to another molecule e.g. a peptide hybridization triggered cross linking agent transport agent hybridization triggered cleavage agent etc.

 Small molecule as used herein is meant to refer to a molecule having a molecular weight of less than about 3 kD and most preferably less than about 1.5 kD. Extensive libraries of chemical and or biological mixtures comprising arrays of small molecules and or fungal bacterial or algal extracts can be screened with any of the assays known in the art to obtain a desirable bioactive agent for use in or with a polymeric particle of the invention.

Peptidomimetics are compounds in which at least a portion of a peptide such as a therapeutic peptide is modified and the three dimensional structure of the peptidomimetic remains substantially the same as that of the peptide. Peptidomimetics both peptide and non peptidyl analogues may have improved properties e.g. decreased proteolysis increased retention or increased bioavailability . Peptidomimetics generally have improved oral availability which makes them especially suited to treatment of disorders in a human or animal. It should be noted that peptidomimetics may or may not have similar two dimensional chemical structures but share common three dimensional structural features and geometry.

The term protein polypeptide and peptide are used interchangeably herein and generally refer to a polymer formed by at least two amino acids linked via a peptide bond.

Imaging agents e.g. detectable labels or bioactive agents linked to a detectable label therapeutic agents and targeting moieties such as those described in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 20030049203 are also contemplated and can be employed with the polymeric particles of the present invention.

In certain embodiments a polymeric particle of the invention comprises an imaging agent that may be further attached to a detectable label e.g. the label can be a radioisotope fluorescent compound enzyme or enzyme co factor . The active moiety may be a radioactive agent such as radioactive heavy metals such as iron chelates radioactive chelates of gadolinium or manganese positron emitters of oxygen nitrogen iron carbon or gallium K Fe Co Cu Ga Ga I I I I or Tc. A polymeric particle including such a moiety may be used as an imaging agent and be administered in an amount effective for diagnostic use in a mammal such as a human. In this manner the localization and accumulation of the imaging agent can be detected. The localization and accumulation of the imaging agent may be detected by radioscintiography nuclear magnetic resonance imaging computed tomography or positron emission tomography. As will be evident to the skilled artisan the amount of radioisotope to be administered is dependent upon the radioisotope. Those having ordinary skill in the art can readily formulate the amount of the imaging agent to be administered based upon the specific activity and energy of a given radionuclide used as the active moiety. Typically 0.1 100 millicuries per dose of imaging agent preferably 1 10 millicuries most often 2 5 millicuries are administered. Thus compositions according to the present invention useful as imaging agents comprising a targeting moiety conjugated to a radioactive moiety comprise 0.1 100 millicuries in some embodiments preferably 1 10 millicuries in some embodiments preferably 2 5 millicuries in some embodiments more preferably 1 5 millicuries.

The means of detection used to detect the label is dependent of the nature of the label used and the nature of the biological sample used and may also include fluorescence polarization high performance liquid chromatography antibody capture gel electrophoresis differential precipitation organic extraction size exclusion chromatography fluorescence microscopy or fluorescence activated cell sorting FACS assay.

In certain embodiments a bioactive agent or targeting moiety may be covalently coupled to a polymeric particle of the invention. In such embodiments the bioactive agent may preferably be a hydrophilic or charged agent such that its presence on the surface of the particle increases charge or hydrophilicity of the particle or otherwise increases the particle s mucus resistance. The covalent linkage may be selected to be cleaved under biological conditions e.g. by chemical or enzymatic hydrolysis or other cleavage processes.

In certain embodiments a polymeric particle of the invention may further comprise a targeting moiety or molecule. The targeting molecule may be covalently linked to any other component of the polymeric particle such as the polymer or a surface altering agent. The targeting molecule may also be co localized with a polymeric particle using methods known in the art. The targeting molecule may direct the particle and thus the included bioactive agent to a desirable target or location in a patient.

Covalent linkage may be effected by various methods known in the art. Moieties such as surface altering agents adhesion promoting agents bioactive agents targeting agents and other functional moieties discussed herein to be covalently linked to the surface of a particle pendant moieties may be coupled to the surface after formation of the particle or may be coupled to one or more components prior to formation of the particle such that by chance or molecular self assembly the moieties locate to the surface of the particle during particle formation and thus become embedded or enmeshed in the surface of the particle. Moieties may be coupled to the surface of a formed particle in any order or by any attachment that maintains the desired activity of each component whether in its linked state or following cleavage of a biocleavable linkage for example. Pendant moieties may be affixed to particles or components by linking functional groups present at the termini of those moieties or components or by linking appropriate functional groups present at any location on either component. Alternatively the various components may be linked indirectly through a tether molecule as is well known in the art.

Numerous chemical cross linking methods are known and potentially applicable for conjugating the various portions of the instant constructs. Many known chemical cross linking methods are non specific i.e. they do not direct the point of coupling to any particular site on the molecule. As a result use of non specific cross linking agents may attack functional sites or sterically block active sites rendering the conjugated molecules inactive.

For coupling simple molecules it is often possible to control the location of coupling by using protecting groups functional group selective reactions or the differential steric accessibility of particular sites on the molecules. Such strategies are well known to those skilled in the art of chemical synthesis. Protecting groups may include but are not limited to N terminal protecting groups known in the art of peptide syntheses including t butoxy carbonyl BOC benzoyl Bz fluoren 9 ylmethoxycarbonyl Fmoc triphenylmethyl trityl and trichloroethoxycarbonxyl Troc and the like. The use of various N protecting groups e.g. the benzyloxy carbonyl group or the t butyloxycarbonyl group Boc various coupling reagents e.g. dicyclohexylcarbodiimide DCC 1 3 diisopropylcarbodiimide DIC 1 3 dimethylaminopropyl 3 ethylcarbodiimide EDC N hydroxyazabenzotriazole HATU carbonyldiimidazole or 1 hydroxybenzotriazole monohydrate HOBT and various cleavage conditions for example trifluoracetic acid TFA HCl in dioxane hydrogenation on Pd C in organic solvents such as methanol or ethyl acetate boron tris trifluoroacetate and cyanogen bromide and reaction in solution with isolation and purification of intermediates are well known in the art of peptide synthesis and are equally applicable to the preparation of the subject compounds.

A preferred approach to increasing coupling specificity of complex molecules is direct chemical coupling to a functional group found only once or a few times in one or both of the molecules to be cross linked. For example in many proteins cysteine which is the only protein amino acid containing a thiol group occurs only a few times. Also for example if a peptide contains no lysine residues a cross linking reagent specific for primary amines will be selective for the amino terminus of that peptide. Successful utilization of this approach to increase coupling specificity requires that the molecule have the suitable reactive residues in areas of the molecule that may be altered without loss of the molecule s biological activity.

Coupling of the two constituents can be accomplished via a coupling or conjugating agent. There are several intermolecular cross linking reagents which can be utilized. See e.g. Means G. E. and Feeney R. E. Chemical Modification of Proteins Holden Day 1974 pp. 39 43. Among these reagents are for example J succinimidyl 3 2 pyridyldithio propionate SPDP or N N 1 3 phenylene bismaleimide both of which are highly specific for sulfhydryl groups and form irreversible linkages N N ethylene bis iodoacetamide or other such reagent having 6 to 11 carbon methylene bridges which relatively specific for sulfhydryl groups and 1 5 difluoro 2 4 dinitrobenzene which forms irreversible linkages with amino and tyrosine groups . Other cross linking reagents useful for this purpose include p p difluoro m m dinitrodiphenylsulfone which forms irreversible cross linkages with amino and phenolic groups dimethyl adipimidate which is specific for amino groups phenol 1 4 disulfonylchloride which reacts principally with amino groups hexamethylenediisocyanate or diisothiocyanate or azophenyl p diisocyanate which reacts principally with amino groups glutaraldehyde which reacts with several different side chains and disdiazobenzidine which reacts primarily with tyrosine and histidine .

Cross linking reagents may be homobifunctional i.e. having two functional groups that undergo the same reaction. A preferred homobifunctional cross linking reagent is bismaleimidohexane BMH . BMH contains two maleimide functional groups which react specifically with sulfhydryl containing compounds under mild conditions pH 6.5 7.7 . The two maleimide groups are connected by a hydrocarbon chain. Therefore BMH is useful for irreversible cross linking of peptides that contain cysteine residues.

Cross linking reagents may also be heterobifunctional. Heterobifunctional cross linking agents have two different functional groups for example an amine reactive group and a thiol reactive group that will cross link two proteins having free amines and thiols respectively. Heterobifunctional cross linkers provide the ability to design more specific coupling methods for conjugating two chemical entities thereby reducing the occurrences of unwanted side reactions such as homo protein polymers. A wide variety of heterobifunctional cross linkers are known in the art. Examples of heterobifunctional cross linking agents are succinimidyl 4 N maleimidomethyl cyclohexane 1 carboxylate SMCC N succinimidyl 4 iodoacetyl aminobenzoate SIAB 1 ethyl 3 3 dimethylaminopropyl carbodiimide hydrochloride EDC 4 succinimidyloxycarbonyl a methyl a 2 pyridyldithio toluene SMPT N succinimidyl 3 2 pyridyldithio propionate SPDP succinimidyl 6 3 2 pyridyldithio propionate hexanoate LC SPDP succinimidyl 4 N maleimidomethyl cyclohexane 1 carboxylate SMCC m maleimidobenzoyl N hydroxysuccinimide ester MBS and succinimide 4 p maleimidophenyl butyrate SMPB an extended chain analog of MBS. The succinimidyl group of these cross linkers reacts with a primary amine and the thiol reactive maleimide forms a covalent bond with the thiol of a cysteine residue.

Cross linking reagents often have low solubility in water. A hydrophilic moiety such as a sulfonate group may be added to the cross linking reagent to improve its water solubility. Sulfo MBS and sulfo SMCC are examples of cross linking reagents modified for water solubility.

Another reactive group useful as part of a heterobifunctional cross linker is a thiol reactive group. Common thiol reactive groups include maleimides halogens and pyridyl disulfides. Maleimides react specifically with free sulfhydryls cysteine residues in minutes under slightly acidic to neutral pH 6.5 7.5 conditions. Haloalkyl groups e.g. iodoacetyl functions react with thiol groups at physiological pH s. Both of these reactive groups result in the formation of stable thioether bonds.

In addition to the heterobifunctional cross linkers there exist a number of other cross linking agents including homobifunctional and photoreactive cross linkers. Disuccinimidyl suberate DSS bismaleimidohexane BMH and dimethylpimelimidate 2HCl DMP are examples of useful homobifunctional cross linking agents and bis 4 azidosalicylamido ethyl disulfide BASED and N succinimidyl 6 4 azido 2 nitrophenyl amino hexanoate SANPAH are examples of useful photoreactive cross linkers for use in this invention. For a review of protein coupling techniques see Means et al. 1990 Bioconjugate Chemistry 1 2 12 incorporated by reference herein.

Many cross linking reagents yield a conjugate that is essentially non cleavable under cellular conditions. However some cross linking reagents contain a covalent bond such as a disulfide that is cleavable under cellular conditions. For example dithiobis succinimidylpropionate DSP Traut s reagent and N succinimidyl 3 2 pyridyldithio propionate SPDP are well known cleavable cross linkers. The use of a cleavable cross linking reagent may permit the moiety such as a therapeutic agent to separate from the construct after delivery to the target. Direct disulfide linkages may also be useful. Additional cleavable linkages are known in the art and may be employed to advantage in certain embodiments of the present invention.

Many methods for linking compounds such as proteins labels and other chemical entities to nucleotides are known in the art. Some new cross linking reagents such as n maleimidobutyryloxy succinimide ester GMBS and sulfo GMBS have reduced immunogenicity. Substituents have been attached to the 5 end of preconstructed oligonucleotides using amidite or H phosphonate chemistry as described by Ogilvie K. K. et al. Pure and Appl Chem 1987 59 325 and by Froehler B. C. Nucleic Acids Res 1986 14 5399. Substituents have also been attached to the 3 end of oligomers as described by Asseline U. et al. Tet Lett 1989 30 2521. This last method utilizes 2 2 dithioethanol attached to a solid support to displace diisopropylamine from a 3 phosphonate bearing the acridine moiety and is subsequently deleted after oxidation of the phosphorus. Other substituents have been bound to the 3 end of oligomers by alternate methods including polylysine Bayard B. et al. Biochemistry 1986 25 3730 Lemaitre M. et al. Nucleosides and Nucleotides 1987 6 311 and in addition disulfides have been used to attach various groups to the 3 terminus as described by Zuckerman R. et al. Nucleic Acids Res 1987 15 5305. It is known that oligonucleotides which are substituted at the 3 end show increased stability and increased resistance to degradation by exonucleases Lancelot G. et al. Biochemistry 1985 24 2521 Asseline U. et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1984 81 3297 . Additional methods of attaching non nucleotide entities to oligonucleotides are discussed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 321 131 and 5 414 077.

Alternatively an oligonucleotide may include one or more modified nucleotides having a group attached via a linker arm to the base. For example Langer et al Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 78 11 6633 6637 1981 describes the attachment of biotin to the C 5 position of dUTP by an allylamine linker arm. The attachment of biotin and other groups to the 5 position of pyrimidines via a linker arm is also discussed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 711 955. Nucleotides labeled via a linker arm attached to the 5 or other positions of pyrimidines are also suggested in U.S. Pat. No. 4 948 882. Bisulfite catalyzed transamination of the N.sup.4 position of cytosine with bifunctional amines is described by Schulman et al. Nucleic Acids Research 9 5 1203 1217 1981 and Draper et al Biochemistry 19 1774 1781 1980 . By this method chemical entities are attached via linker arms to cytidine or cytidine containing polynucleotides. The attachment of biotin to the N4 position of cytidine is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 828 979 and the linking of moieties to cytidine at the N position is also set forth in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 013 831 and 5 241 060. U.S. Pat. No. 5 407 801 describes the preparation of an oligonucleotide triplex wherein a linker arm is conjugated to deoxycytidine via bisulfite catalyzed transamination. The linker arms include an aminoalkyl or carboxyalkyl linker arm. U.S. Pat. No. 5 405 950 describes cytidine analogs in which a linker arm is attached to the N4 position of the cytosine base.

Numerous cross linking reagents including the ones discussed above are commercially available. Detailed instructions for their use are readily available from the commercial suppliers. A general reference on protein cross linking and conjugate preparation is S. S. Wong Chemistry of Protein Conjugation and Cross Linking CRC Press 1991 .

Chemical cross linking may include the use of spacer arms i.e. linkers or tethers. Spacer arms provide intramolecular flexibility or adjust intramolecular distances between conjugated moieties and thereby may help preserve biological activity. A spacer arm may be in the form of a peptide moiety comprising spacer amino acids. Alternatively a spacer arm may be part of the cross linking reagent such as in long chain SPDP Pierce Chem. Co. Rockford Ill. cat. No. 21651H .

A variety of coupling or crosslinking agents such as protein A carbodiimide dimaleimide dithio bis nitrobenzoic acid DTNB N succinimidyl 5 acetyl thioacetate SATA and N succinimidyl 3 2 pyrid yldithio propionate SPDP 6 hydrazinonicotimide HYNIC NS and NScan be used in well known procedures to synthesize targeted constructs. For example biotin can be conjugated to an oligonucleotide via DTPA using the bicyclic anhydride method of Hnatowich et al. Int. J. Appl. Radiat. Isotop. 33 327 1982 .

In addition sulfosuccinimidyl 6 biotinamido hexanoate NHS LC biotin which can be purchased from Pierce Chemical Co. Rockford Ill. biocytin a lysine conjugate of biotin can be useful for making biotin compounds due to the availability of a primary amine. In addition corresponding biotin acid chloride or acid precursors can be coupled with an amino derivative of the therapeutic agent by known methods. By coupling a biotin moiety to the surface of a particle another moiety may be coupled to avidin and then coupled to the particle by the strong avidin biotin affinity or vice versa.

In certain embodiments where a polymeric particle comprises PEG moieties on the surface of the particle the free hydroxyl group of PEG may be used for linkage or attachment e.g. covalent attachment of additional molecules or moieties to the particle.

Imaging labels may be coupled to a polymeric particle by covalent bonding directly or indirectly to an atom of the polymer or surface altering agent or the label may be non covalently or covalently associated with the particle through a chelating structure or through an auxiliary molecule such as mannitol gluconate glucoheptonate tartrate and the like.

Any suitable chelating structure may be used to provide spatial proximity between a radionuclide and the particle through covalent or noncovalent association. Many such chelating structures are known in the art. Preferably the chelating structure is an NSstructure an NS structure an Nstructure an isonitrile containing structure a hydrazine containing structure a HYNIC hydrazinonicotinic acid containing structure a 2 methylthionicotinic acid containing structure a carboxylate containing structure or the like. In some cases chelation can be achieved without including a separate chelating structure because the radionuclide chelates directly to atom s in or pendant from the particle for example to oxygen atoms in the polymer or a polyethylene glycol surface altering agent.

Radionuclides may be placed in spatial proximity to a particle using known procedures which effect or optimize chelation association or attachment of the specific radionuclide to a component of the particle or a moiety pendant from the particle s surface. For example when I is the radionuclide the imaging agent may be labeled in accordance with the known radioiodination procedures such as direct radioiodination with chloramine T radioiodination exchange for a halogen or an organometallic group and the like. When the radionuclide is mTc the imaging agent may be labeled using any method suitable for attaching mTc to a ligand molecule. Preferably when the radionuclide is mTc an auxiliary molecule such as mannitol gluconate glucoheptonate or tartrate is included in the labeling reaction mixture with or without a chelating structure. More preferably mTc is placed in spatial proximity to the targeting molecule by reducing mTcOwith tin in the presence of mannitol and the targeting molecule. Other reducing agents including tin tartrate or non tin reductants such as sodium dithionite may also be used to make an imaging agent according to the invention.

In general labeling methodologies vary with the choice of radionuclide the moiety to be labeled and the clinical condition under investigation. Labeling methods using mTc and In are described for example in Peters A. M. et al. Lancet 2 946 949 1986 Srivastava S. C. et al. Semin. Nucl. Med. 14 2 68 82 1984 Sinn H. et al. Nucl. Med. Stuttgart 13 180 1984 McAfee J. G. et al. J. Nucl. Med. 17 480 487 1976 McAfee J. G. et al. J. Nucl. Med. 17 480 487 1976 Welch M. J. et al. J. Nucl. Med. 18 558 562 1977 McAfee J. G. et al. Semin. Nucl. Med. 14 2 83 1984 Thakur M. L. et al. Semin. Nucl. Med. 14 2 107 1984 Danpure H. J. et al. Br. J. Radiol. 54 597 601 1981 Danpure H. J. et al. Br. J. Radiol. 55 247 249 1982 Peters A. M. et al. J. Nucl. Med. 24 39 44 1982 Gunter K. P. et al. Radiology 149 563 566 1983 and Thakur M. L. et al. J. Nucl. Med. 26 518 523 1985.

Polymeric particles can be characterized using standard methods of high field NMR spectra as well as IR MS and optical rotation. Elemental analysis TLC and or HPLC can be used as a measure of purity. A purity of at least about 80 preferably at least about 90 more preferably at least about 95 and even more preferably at least about 98 is preferred. TLC and or HPLC can also be used to characterize such compounds.

Once prepared candidate polymeric particles can be screened for ability to carry their bioactive agent s across a mucosal barrier. The candidate particles may also be tested for ability to transfect a cell if the carried bioactive agent is a nucleic acid. In addition stability of a polymeric particle can be tested by incubating the compound in serum e.g. human serum and measuring the potential degradation of the compound over time. Stability can also be determined by administering the compound to a subject human or non human obtaining blood samples at various time periods e.g. 30 min 1 hour 24 hours and analyzing the blood samples for derived or related metabolites.

A drug therapeutic agent or medicament is a biologically physiologically or pharmacologically active substance that acts locally or systemically in the human or animal body. A subject composition may include any active substance.

Various forms of the medicaments or drug may be used which are capable of being carried by the polymeric particles across mucosal barriers into adjacent tissues or fluids. They may be acidic basic or salts. They may be neutral molecules polar molecules or molecular complexes capable of hydrogen bonding. They may be in the form of ethers esters amides and the like including prodrugs which are biologically activated when injected into the human or animal body e.g. by cleavage of an ester or amide. An analgesic agent is also an example of a medicament. Any additional medicament in a subject composition may vary widely with the purpose for the composition. The term medicament includes without limitation vitamins mineral supplements substances used for the treatment prevention diagnosis cure or mitigation of disease or illness substances which affect the structure or function of the body or pro drugs which become biologically active or more active after they have been placed in a predetermined physiological environment.

Plasticizers and stabilizing agents known in the art may be incorporated in polymeric particles of the present invention. In certain embodiments additives such as plasticizers and stabilizing agents are selected for their biocompatibility. In certain embodiments the additives are lung surfactants such as 1 2 dipalmitoylphosphatidycholine DPPC and L phosphatidylcholine PC .

In other embodiments spheronization enhancers facilitate the production of subject polymeric particles that are generally spherical in shape. Substances such as zein microcrystalline cellulose or microcrystalline cellulose co processed with sodium carboxymethyl cellulose may confer plasticity to the subject compositions as well as impart strength and integrity. In particular embodiments during spheronization extrudates that are rigid but not plastic result in the formation of dumbbell shaped particles and or a high proportion of fines and extrudates that are plastic but not rigid tend to agglomerate and form excessively large particles. In such embodiments a balance between rigidity and plasticity is desirable. The percent of spheronization enhancer in a formulation typically range from 10 to 90 w w .

In certain embodiments a subject composition includes an excipient. A particular excipient may be selected based on its melting point solubility in a selected solvent e.g. a solvent that dissolves the polymer and or the therapeutic agent and the resulting characteristics of the particles.

Excipients may comprise a few percent about 5 10 15 20 25 30 40 50 or higher percentage of the subject compositions.

Buffers acids and bases may be incorporated in the subject compositions to adjust their pH. Agents to increase the diffusion distance of agents released from the polymer matrix may also be included.

In part a polymer particle of the present invention includes a biocompatible and preferably biodegradable polymer such as any polymer discussed above optionally including any other biocompatible and optionally biodegradable polymer mentioned above or known in the art. The invention provides pharmaceutical compositions that include one or more polymeric particles. A pharmaceutical composition may be a therapeutic composition and or a diagnostic or imaging composition.

The subject polymeric particles e.g. microparticles or preferably nanoparticles comprise polymeric matrices. Microparticles typically comprise a biodegradable polymer matrix and a bioactive agent e.g. the bioactive agent is encapsulated by or adsorbed to the polymer matrix. Microparticles can be formed by a wide variety of techniques known to those of skill in the art. Examples of microparticle forming techniques include but are not limited to a phase separation by emulsification and subsequent organic solvent evaporation including complex emulsion methods such as oil in water emulsions water in oil emulsions and water oil water emulsions b coacervation phase separation c melt dispersion d interfacial deposition e in situ polymerization f spray drying and spray congealing g air suspension coating and h pan and spray coating. These methods as well as properties and characteristics of microparticles are disclosed in for example U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 652 441 5 100 669 4 526 938 WO 93 24150 EPA 0258780 A2 U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 438 253 and 5 330 768 the entire disclosures of which are incorporated by reference herein.

To prepare particles of the present invention several methods can be employed depending upon the desired application of the delivery vehicles. Suitable methods include but are not limited to spray drying freeze drying air drying vacuum drying fluidized bed drying milling co precipitation and critical fluid extraction. In the case of spray drying freeze drying air drying vacuum drying fluidized bed drying and critical fluid extraction the components stabilizing polyol bioactive material buffers etc. are first dissolved or suspended in aqueous conditions. In the case of co precipitation the components are mixed in organic conditions and processed as described below. Spray drying can be used to load the particle with the bioactive material. The components are mixed under aqueous conditions and dried using precision nozzles to produce extremely uniform droplets in a drying chamber. Suitable spray drying machines include but are not limited to Buchi NIRO APV and Lab plant spray driers used according to the manufacturer s instructions.

The shape of microparticles and nanoparticles may be determined by scanning or transmission electron microscopy. Spherically shaped nanoparticles are used in certain embodiments e.g. for circulation through the bloodstream. If desired the particles may be fabricated using known techniques into other shapes that are more useful for a specific application.

In addition to intracellular delivery of a therapeutic agent it also possible that particles of the subject compositions such as microparticles or nanoparticles may undergo endocytosis thereby obtaining access to the cell. The frequency of such an endocytosis process will likely depend on the size of any particle.

In most embodiments the subject polymers will incorporate the substance to be delivered in an amount sufficient to deliver to a patient a therapeutically effective amount of an incorporated therapeutic agent or other material as part of a diagnostic prophylactic or therapeutic treatment. The desired concentration of active compound in the particle will depend on absorption inactivation and excretion rates of the drug as well as the delivery rate of the compound from the subject compositions. It is to be noted that dosage values may also vary with the severity of the condition to be alleviated. It is to be further understood that for any particular subject specific dosage regimens should be adjusted over time according to the individual need and the professional judgment of the person administering or supervising the administration of the compositions. Typically dosing will be determined using techniques known to one skilled in the art.

Further the amounts of bioactive substances will vary depending upon the relative potency of the agents selected. Additionally the optimal concentration and or quantities or amounts of any particular therapeutic agent may be adjusted to accommodate variations in the treatment parameters. Such treatment parameters include the polymer composition of a particular preparation the identity of the therapeutic agent utilized and the clinical use to which the preparation is put e.g. the site treated the type of patient e.g. human or non human adult or child and the nature of the disease or condition.

The concentration and or amount of any therapeutic agent or other adsorbed or encapsulated material for a given subject composition may readily identified by routine screening in animals e.g. rats by screening a range of concentration and or amounts of the material in question using appropriate assays. Known methods are also available to assay local tissue concentrations diffusion rates from particles and local blood flow before and after administration of therapeutic formulations according to the invention. One such method is microdialysis as reviewed by T. E. Robinson et al. 1991 MICRODIALYSIS IN THE NEUROSCIENCES Techniques volume 7 Chapter 1. The methods reviewed by Robinson may be applied in brief as follows. A microdialysis loop is placed in situ in a test animal. Dialysis fluid is pumped through the loop. When particles according to the invention are injected adjacent to the loop released drugs are collected in the dialysate in proportion to their local tissue concentrations. The progress of diffusion of the active agents may be determined thereby with suitable calibration procedures using known concentrations of active agents.

In certain embodiments the dosage of the subject invention may be determined by reference to the plasma concentrations of the therapeutic agent or other encapsulated materials. For example the maximum plasma concentration C and the area under the plasma concentration time curve from time 0 to infinity may be used.

The polymeric compositions of the present invention may be administered by various means depending on their intended use as is well known in the art. For example if subject compositions are to be administered orally it may be formulated as tablets capsules granules powders or syrups. Alternatively formulations of the present invention may be administered parenterally as injections intravenous intramuscular or subcutaneous drop infusion preparations or suppositories. For application by the ophthalmic mucous membrane route subject compositions may be formulated as eyedrops or eye ointments. These formulations may be prepared by conventional means and if desired the subject compositions may be mixed with any conventional additive such as a binder a disintegrating agent a lubricant a corrigent a solubilizing agent a suspension aid an emulsifying agent or a coating agent.

In addition in certain embodiments subject compositions of the present invention maybe lyophilized or subjected to another appropriate drying technique such as spray drying.

The subject compositions may be administered once or may be divided into a number of smaller doses to be administered at varying intervals of time depending in part on the release rate of the compositions and the desired dosage.

Formulations useful in the methods of the present invention include those suitable for oral nasal topical including buccal and sublingual rectal vaginal aerosol and or parenteral administration. The formulations may conveniently be presented in unit dosage form and may be prepared by any methods well known in the art of pharmacy. The amount of a subject composition which may be combined with a carrier material to produce a single dose may vary depending upon the subject being treated and the particular mode of administration.

Methods of preparing these formulations or compositions include the step of bringing into association subject compositions with the carrier and optionally one or more accessory ingredients. In general the formulations are prepared by uniformly and intimately bringing into association a subject composition with liquid carriers or finely divided solid carriers or both and then if necessary shaping the product.

Particles particularly nanoparticles which may be administered in inhalant or aerosol formulations according to the invention comprise one or more agents such as adjuvants diagnostic agents imaging agents or therapeutic agents useful in inhalation therapy.

The particle size of the particulate medicament should be such as to permit inhalation of substantially all of the medicament into the lungs upon administration of the aerosol formulation and will thus desirably be less than 20 microns preferably in the range 1 to 10 microns e.g. 1 to 5 microns. The particle size of the medicament may be reduced by conventional means for example by milling or micronisation.

The final aerosol formulation desirably contains 0.005 90 w w preferably 0.005 50 more preferably 0.005 5 w w especially 0.01 1.0 w w of medicament relative to the total weight of the formulation.

It is desirable but by no means required that the formulations of the invention contain no components which may provoke the degradation of stratospheric ozone. In particular it is desirable that the formulations are substantially free of chlorofluorocarbons such as CClF CClFand CFCCl. As used herein substantially free means less than 1 w w based upon the propellant system in particular less than 0.5 for example 0.1 or less.

The propellant may optionally contain an adjuvant having a higher polarity and or a higher boiling point than the propellant. Polar adjuvants which may be used include e.g. C aliphatic alcohols and polyols such as ethanol isopropanol and propylene glycol preferably ethanol. In general only small quantities of polar adjuvants e.g. 0.05 3.0 w w may be required to improve the stability of the dispersion the use of quantities in excess of 5 w w may tend to dissolve the medicament. Formulations in accordance with the invention may preferably contain less than 1 w w e.g. about 0.1 w w of polar adjuvant. However the formulations of the invention are preferably substantially free of polar adjuvants especially ethanol. Suitable volatile adjuvants include saturated hydrocarbons such as propane n butane isobutane pentane and isopentane and alkyl ethers such as dimethyl ether. In general up to 50 w w of the propellant may comprise a volatile adjuvant for example 1 to 30 w w of a volatile saturated C1 C6 hydrocarbon.

Optionally the aerosol formulations according to the invention may further comprise one or more surfactants. The surfactants must be physiologically acceptable upon administration by inhalation. Within this category are included surfactants such as L phosphatidylcholine PC 1 2 dipalmitoylphosphatidycholine DPPC oleic acid sorbitan trioleate sorbitan mono oleate sorbitan monolaurate polyoxyethylene 20 sorbitan monolaurate polyoxyethylene 20 sorbitan monooleate natural lecithin oleyl polyoxyethylene 2 ether stearyl polyoxyethylene 2 ether lauryl polyoxyethylene 4 ether block copolymers of oxyethylene and oxypropylene synthetic lecithin diethylene glycol dioleate tetrahydrofurfuryl oleate ethyl oleate isopropyl myristate glyceryl monooleate glyceryl monostearate glyceryl monoricinoleate cetyl alcohol stearyl alcohol polyethylene glycol 400 cetyl pyridinium chloride benzalkonium chloride olive oil glyceryl monolaurate corn oil cotton seed oil and sunflower seed oil. Preferred surfactants are lecithin oleic acid and sorbitan trioleate.

The formulations of the invention may be prepared by dispersal of the particles in the selected propellant and or co propellant in an appropriate container e.g. with the aid of sonication. Preferably the particles are suspended in co propellant and filled into a suitable container. The valve of the container is then sealed into place and the propellant introduced by pressure filling through the valve in the conventional manner. The particles may be thus suspended or dissolved in a liquified propellant sealed in a container with a metering valve and fitted into an actuator. Such metered dose inhalers are well known in the art. The metering valve may meter 10 to 500 L and preferably 25 to 150 L. In certain embodiments dispersal may be achieved using dry powder inhalers e.g. spinhaler for the particles which remain as dry powders . In other embodiments nanospheres may be suspended in an aqueous fluid and nebulized into fine droplets to be aerosolized into the lungs.

Sonic nebulizers may be used because they minimize exposing the agent to shear which may result in degradation of the particles. Ordinarily an aqueous aerosol is made by formulating an aqueous solution or suspension of the particles together with conventional pharmaceutically acceptable carriers and stabilizers. The carriers and stabilizers vary with the requirements of the particular composition but typically include non ionic surfactants Tweens Pluronics or polyethylene glycol innocuous proteins like serum albumin sorbitan esters oleic acid lecithin amino acids such as glycine buffers salts sugars or sugar alcohols. Aerosols generally are prepared from isotonic solutions.

Ophthalmic formulations eye ointments powders solutions and the like are also contemplated as being within the scope of this invention.

Certain pharmaceutical compositions of this invention suitable for parenteral administration comprise one or more subject compositions in combination with one or more pharmaceutically acceptable sterile isotonic aqueous or non aqueous solutions dispersions suspensions or emulsions or sterile powders which may be reconstituted into sterile injectable solutions or dispersions just prior to use which may contain antioxidants buffers bacteriostats solutes which render the formulation isotonic with the blood of the intended recipient or suspending or thickening agents.

Examples of suitable aqueous and non aqueous carriers which may be employed in the pharmaceutical compositions of the invention include water ethanol polyols such as glycerol propylene glycol polyethylene glycol and the like and suitable mixtures thereof vegetable oils such as olive oil and injectable organic esters such as ethyl oleate. Proper fluidity may be maintained for example by the use of coating materials such as lecithin by the maintenance of the required particle size in the case of dispersions and by the use of surfactants.

Microparticle and or nanoparticle compositions may be suspended in a pharmaceutically acceptable solution such as saline Ringer s solution dextran solution dextrose solution sorbitol solution a solution containing polyvinyl alcohol from about 1 to about 3 preferably about 2 or an osmotically balanced solution comprising a surfactant such as Tween 80 or Tween 20 and a viscosity enhancing agent such as gelatin alginate sodium carboxymethylcellulose etc. . In certain embodiments the composition is administered subcutaneously. In other embodiments the composition is administered intravenously. For intravenous delivery the composition is preferably formulated as microparticles or nanoparticles on average less than about 15 microns more particularly less than about 10 microns more particularly less than about 5 microns and still more particularly less than about 5 microns in average diameter.

Formulations suitable for oral administration may be in the form of capsules cachets pills tablets lozenges using a flavored basis usually sucrose and acacia or tragacanth powders granules or as a solution or a suspension in an aqueous or non aqueous liquid or as an oil in water or water in oil liquid emulsion or as an elixir or syrup or as pastilles using an inert base such as gelatin and glycerin or sucrose and acacia each containing a predetermined amount of a subject composition as an active ingredient. Subject compositions of the present invention may also be administered as a bolus electuary or paste.

In solid dosage forms for oral administration capsules tablets pills dragees powders granules and the like the subject composition is mixed with one or more pharmaceutically acceptable carriers and or any of the following 1 fillers or extenders such as starches lactose sucrose glucose mannitol and or silicic acid 2 binders such as for example carboxymethylcellulose alginates gelatin polyvinyl pyrrolidone sucrose and or acacia 3 humectants such as glycerol 4 disintegrating agents such as agar agar calcium carbonate potato or tapioca starch alginic acid certain silicates and sodium carbonate 5 solution retarding agents such as paraffin 6 absorption accelerators such as quaternary ammonium compounds 7 wetting agents such as for example acetyl alcohol and glycerol monostearate 8 absorbents such as kaolin and bentonite clay 9 lubricants such a talc calcium stearate magnesium stearate solid polyethylene glycols sodium lauryl sulfate and mixtures thereof and 10 coloring agents. In the case of capsules tablets and pills the pharmaceutical compositions may also comprise buffering agents. Solid compositions of a similar type may also be employed as fillers in soft and hard filled gelatin capsules using lactose or milk sugars as well as high molecular weight polyethylene glycols and the like.

A tablet may be made by compression or molding optionally with one or more accessory ingredients. Compressed tablets may be prepared using a binder for example gelatin or hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose lubricant inert diluent preservative disintegrant for example sodium starch glycolate or cross linked sodium carboxymethyl cellulose surface active or dispersing agent. Molded tablets may be made by molding in a suitable machine a mixture of the subject composition moistened with an inert liquid diluent. Tablets and other solid dosage forms such as dragees capsules pills and granules may optionally be scored or prepared with coatings and shells such as enteric coatings and other coatings well known in the pharmaceutical formulating art.

Liquid dosage forms for oral administration include pharmaceutically acceptable emulsions microemulsions solutions suspensions syrups and elixirs. In addition to the subject compositions the liquid dosage forms may contain inert diluents commonly used in the art such as for example water or other solvents solubilizing agents and emulsifiers such as ethyl alcohol isopropyl alcohol ethyl carbonate ethyl acetate benzyl alcohol benzyl benzoate propylene glycol 1 3 butylene glycol oils in particular cottonseed corn peanut sunflower soybean olive castor and sesame oils glycerol tetrahydrofuryl alcohol polyethylene glycols and fatty acid esters of sorbitan and mixtures thereof.

Suspensions in addition to the subject compositions may contain suspending agents such as for example ethoxylated isostearyl alcohols polyoxyethylene sorbitol and sorbitan esters microcrystalline cellulose aluminum metahydroxide bentonite agar agar and tragacanth and mixtures thereof.

Formulations for rectal or vaginal administration may be presented as a suppository which may be prepared by mixing a subject composition with one or more suitable non irritating carriers comprising for example cocoa butter polyethylene glycol a suppository wax or a salicylate and which is solid at room temperature but liquid at body temperature and therefore will melt in the appropriate body cavity and release the encapsulated particles. An exemplary formulation for vaginal administration may comprise a bioactive agent that is a contraceptive or an anti viral anti fungal or antibiotic agent.

Formulations which are suitable for vaginal administration also include pessaries tampons creams gels pastes foams or spray formulations containing such carriers as are known in the art to be appropriate.

Dosage forms for transdermal administration include powders sprays ointments pastes creams lotions gels solutions patches and inhalants. A subject composition may be mixed under sterile conditions with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and with any preservatives buffers or propellants that may be required. For transdermal administration the complexes may include lipophilic and hydrophilic groups to achieve the desired water solubility and transport properties.

The ointments pastes creams and gels may contain in addition to subject compositions other carriers such as animal and vegetable fats oils waxes paraffins starch tragacanth cellulose derivatives polyethylene glycols silicones bentonites silicic acid talc and zinc oxide or mixtures thereof. Powders and sprays may contain in addition to a subject composition excipients such as lactose talc silicic acid aluminum hydroxide calcium silicates and polyamide powder or mixtures of such substances. Sprays may additionally contain customary propellants such as chlorofluorohydrocarbons and volatile unsubstituted hydrocarbons such as butane and propane.

The invention now being generally described it will be more readily understood by reference to the following examples which are included merely for purposes of illustration of certain aspects and embodiments of the present invention and are not intended to limit the invention.

Poly D L lactic co glycolic PLGA Medisorb High I.V. 54 46 was obtained from Alkermes Cincinnati Ohio and 1 2 diacyl palmitoyl glycerol 3 phosphocholine DPPC was purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids Alabaster Ala. . Dimethyl dioctadecyl ammonium bromide DDAB bovine serum albumin BSA pig gastric mucin PGM and deoxyribonucleic acid DNA sodium salt from salmon testes were purchased from Sigma St. Louis Mo. and used without further purification. 2 2 2 Trifluoroethanol TFE was purchased from Fluka Milwaukee Wis. . Plasmid DNA was extracted from culture strain DH5a plasmid p43 c1z1 kindly donated by Dr. Kam Leong Johns Hopkins University grown in freshly prepared Luria Bertani LB broth supplemented with 100 mg mL ampicillin Kodak Chemicals Rochester N.Y. using a Endo free Qiagen Megaprep Valencia Calif. and subsequently resuspended in sterile deionized water. The plasmid p43 c1z1 contains the galactosidase gene under the human early intermediate cytomegalovirus CMV promoter and also contains a gene for ampicillin resistance. All other solutions and reagents were of analytical grade and used without further purification.

Particles were prepared by a solvent extraction precipitation method. PLGA 3 mg ml and DDAB 10 mg ml were dissolved in TFE separately. Subsequently 3 ml PLGA solution 9 mg PLGA and 200 l of DDAB solution 2 mg DDAB were combined and added dropwise to 8 mL of filtered distilled water stirring on a magnetic plate. Next 100 L of 1 mg ml salmon testes DNA in distilled water was added to the water TFE mixture and stirred for 3 hours on a magnetic plate to allow for TFE evaporation. The final formulation was 1.1 DNA to PLGA wt wt and 5 DNA to DDAB wt wt . The nanoparticle suspension was then passed through a 1 m Watman syringe filter Kent UK to remove large impurities and subsequently spun down for 75 minutes at 15 000 g and 4 C. using a Beckman Coulter Avanti J 25 Centrifuge Fullerton Calif. to pellet nanoparticles. Spin conditions were carefully chosen as to not spin down cationic lipid DNA particles. PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles were resuspended in distilled water and lyophilized or used directly for characterization or transport studies.

The size and surface morphology of the nanoparticles were examined by transmission electron microscopy. Nanoparticles in suspension were adsorbed to carbon coated ionized formvar grids negatively stained with 2 uranyl acetate and observed with Philips 420 transmission electron microscope Eindhoven Netherlands .

The size and potential of the nanoparticles were determined by dynamic light scattering and laser Doppler anemometry respectively using a Zetasizer 3000 Malvern Instruments Southborough Mass. . Size measurements were performed at 25 C. at a scattering angle of 90 . Samples were diluted in 150 mM NaCl with or without pig gastric mucin PGM final mucin concentration was 10 mg ml . potential measurements were performed according to instrument instructions with samples diluted in 150 mM NaCl with or without PGM final mucin concentration was 2 mg ml .

Gel electrophoresis Mini sub cell GT Bio rad Hercules Calif. was used to verify the binding of DNA to particles and the necessity for cationic surfactants in the DNA adsorption process. Twenty L of sample was run on an ethidium bromide stained 1.0 agarose gel 70 V for 60 min in TAE buffer Tris Acetate EDTA .

Cos 7 cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection ATCC Rockville Md. and maintained in Dulbecco s Modified Eagle s Medium DMEM Gibco BRL containing 10 fetal bovine serum Gibco BRL Invitrogen Co. Carlsbad Calif. . Cells seeded at a density of 1.8 10cells cm2 on 35 mm 6 well plates were transfected at 50 60 confluency with PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles or plasmid DNA alone the concentration in all cases was maintained to yield 2.5 g DNA per well or 0.26 g DNA cm2 . Cells were harvested 48 hours after transfection. galactosidase activity and total protein content were assayed using the standard galactosidase spectrophotometric assay Miller J. Assay of B Galactosidase in Experiments in Molecular Genetics Miller J. Ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Cold Spring Harbor 1972 pp 352 355 and the manufacturer s given micro well protocol for the BCA assay Pierce Chemical Co. Rockford Ill. respectively. Reported values of galactosidase expression were normalized to the total protein content per sample well n 3 .

The toxicity of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles to Cos 7 cells was assayed using a propidium iodide nucleic acid stain Molecular Probes Eugene Oreg. . Cos 7 cells seeded at 1 10cells cmwere allowed to reach 60 confluency and then incubated with PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles naked DNA or PolyFect DNA particles and harvested after 48 hours. The PLGA DDAB DNA particle volume was adjusted to give final DNA amounts of 1.0 2.5 and 5.0 g per well while naked DNA and PolyFect DNA concentrations were adjusted to result in a final DNA content of 2.5 g per well. Harvested cells were resuspended in 500 g ml propidium iodide solution which intercalates with DNA released from necrotic cells. The percentage of dead cells was assayed using flow cytometry. Adsorption and emission maxima for propidium iodide are 535 and 617 nm.

Mucus was formulated from 60 mg ml PGM 3.2 mg ml DPPC and 32 mg ml BSA in sputum buffer 85 mM Na 75 mM Cl 20 mM Hepes pH 7.4 . Mucus was mixed on a stir plate for 48 hours at 4 C. and stored at 20 C. Sanders et al. Cystic fibrosis sputum a barrier to the transport of nanospheres. Am J Respir Crit. Care Med 2000 162 1905 1911.

Rheological characterization of gastric mucus was performed with a strain controlled cone and plate rheometer ARES 100 Rheometrics Piscataway N.J. as previously described. Tseng et al. Micromechanics and ultrastructure of actin filament networks crosslinked by human fascin a comparison with alpha actinin. J Mol Biol 2001 310 351 366 Dawson et al J Biol Chem 2003 278 50393 50401. Dynamic tests were performed at 25 C. and buffer evaporation was eliminated using a vapor trap. The time dependent in phase component of the stress divided by the amplitude of applied oscillatory deformation of fixed frequency G the out of phase component G and the phase angle tan 1 G G is reported. G and G are also commonly referred to as the elastic and viscous moduli respectively.

Confocal images of particles embedded in reconstituted mucus were captured with an AxioCAM HR camera attached to a Zeiss LSM 510 Meta laser scanning confocal microscope. Mucus was placed in a Bioptechs thermal regulated chamber Bioptechs Butler Pa. maintained at 37 C. Three dimensional images were reconstructed using Metamorph software Universal Imaging Corp. West Chester Pa. .

Trajectories of fluorescently labeled carboxylated polystyrene particles COOH PS Molecular Probes 5 mV potential at pH 6 200 nm diameter and PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles with condensed salmon testes DNA 35 mV 196 29 nm diameter in reconstituted PGM were recorded using a silicon intensified target camera VE 1000 Dage MTI Michigan Ind. mounted on an inverted epifluorescence microscope equipped with 100 oil immersion objective numerical aperture 1.3 . The trajectories of n 109 COOH PS and n 120 PLGA DDAB DNA particles were tracked in PGM samples contained within a microscope chamber maintained at 37 C.

The centroid of each particle was tracked with 5 nm spatial resolution determined by tracking the apparent displacements of microspheres immobilized on a glass microslide with a strong adhesive. Apgar et al. Multiple particle tracking measurements of heterogeneities in solutions of actin filaments and actin bundles. Biophys J 2000 79 1095 1106. Nanoparticle motion was tracked in 2 D by following the motion of nanoparticles in the plane of focus. For 2 D displacements to accurately represent 3 D motion the fluid must be isotropic but need not be homogeneous. Dawson et al. supra. Images of the microspheres were captured with a custom routine incorporated in the Metamorph software Universal Imaging Corp. at a frequency of 30 Hz for 20 s which gives a temporal resolution of 33 ms. The coordinates of nanoparticle centroids were transformed into families of time averaged mean squared displacements MSD time scale or time lag from which distributions of MSDs and time dependent particle diffusion coefficients D 4 were calculated as previously demonstrated. Tseng et al. Mechanics and multiple particle tracking microheterogeneity of alpha actinin cross linked actin filament networks. Biophys J 2001 81 1643 1656. Diffusion coefficients were normalized with the theoretical diffusion coefficient of 200 nm particles in water as determined by the classical Stokes Einstein equation.

Characterization PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles with sizes less than 200 nm A and B can be designed to tightly bind DNA with high efficiency C . In addition their small size compared to cationic particles in the micron range allows them to enter cells either through non specific or receptor mediated endocytosis. Similar to the results that Singh found with cationic microparticles the transfection efficiency of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles was 50 fold higher than that of naked DNA D . At the concentration used in the transfection study PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles 16.6 6.2 dead cells were less toxic than PolyFect DNA particles containing the same amount of DNA 23.9 1.2 dead cells but more toxic than naked DNA alone 4.7 2.4 dead cells . The toxicity of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles showed a dose dependency with slightly lower particle concentrations corresponding to 1 g DNA total or 2.5 fold lower concentration than used in the transfection study resulting in background levels of cell toxicity 7.2 0.6 dead cells not significantly different than naked DNA controls . Singh and coworkers reported that PLGA DDAB DNA microparticles caused no acute toxicity with particle doses resulting in the equivalent of 1 mg of DNA per animal guinea pig . Singh et al. 2000 supra.

The frequency dependent elastic and viscous moduli were used to characterize the viscoelastic nature of reconstituted pig gastric mucus PGM used in this study . The phase angle of the reconstituted mucus tan 1 G G 30 at 1 s 1 showed that the viscosity and elasticity of PGM were matched similarly to physiological mucus. Rogunova et al. supra. At low frequencies PGM had strong gel forming properties but gelation was disrupted at shear rates corresponding to a frequency of 2.5 s 1. Reconstituted mucus deforms at lower shear rates than crude mucus. However particle transport studies are performed on quiescent fluids in this work and thus mucus is not subjected to deforming shear conditions.

Following incubation in mucus the potential measured for carboxylated polystyrene COOH PS particles 17.5 mV at pH 6 was close to that for PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles 11 7 mV at pH 6 even though the initial potentials of the two particle types were quite different prior to incubation with mucus 39 6 for PLGA DDAB DNA and 5 mV for COOH PS . This result suggests that mucus components readily adsorb to the surface of each type of particle within minutes of their addition to mucus.

Confocal microscopy was used to collect three dimensional images of nanoparticles embedded in reconstituted PGM samples bead solution was 3 total volume A B D and E . COOH PS nanoparticles showed reduced aggregation when compared to PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles which indicated that PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles were either adhering as clumps to mucin fibers or aggregating via particle particle interactions mediated by mucus. Adhesion to mucus may not be surprising since DDAB which remains on the surface of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles is a cationic surfactant and mucin and other macromolecules found in PGM are strongly anionic. Norris D. Sinko P J Appl Polym Sci 63 1481 1492. Note that while COOH PS particles did not appear to aggregate heavily in mucus they may still be adherent to mucus as individual particles see next section .

The mobility of COOH PS and PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles in PGM was tracked in real time in two dimensions. Suggesting 2 D tracking represents the 3 D mobility of particles assumes that mucus is an isotropic fluid but not necessarily homogeneous. It is verified with 3 D confocal microscopy that PLGA DDAB DNA and COOH PS particle distributions in mucus are independent of location within the gel in the x y and z directions .

Twenty second trajectories of nanoparticle motion in PGM showed that PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles appeared to be considerably more mobile than COOH PS nanoparticles C and F . Individual particle MSDs were used to determine the average or ensemble average MSD allowing the variation in particle transport rates with respect to time to be directly computed. The ensemble MSD of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles was 10 fold higher than the ensemble MSD of 200 nm COOH PS nanoparticles over a range of time scales . Furthermore the ensemble MSD of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles had an almost linear dependency on time indicating that the average transport rate in PGM was dominated by diffusive carriers. Nevertheless particle motion is severely limited by the viscoelastic nature of PGM as indicated by the normalized average or effective diffusion coefficients which are 50 500 fold lower than their theoretical diffusivities in water . The normalized diffusion coefficients show that the average particle transport rate decreases slightly with respect to time which would be expected for example if a significant fraction of particles underwent sub diffusive transport for example particles adherent to mucus fibers .

The observation that PLGA DDAB DNA particles moved faster on average than COOH PS particles was somewhat counterintuitive since PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticle aggregation was expected to reduce their transport rates. Therefore to further elucidate the mode and rate of particle transport in PGM we examined the distributions of individual particle MSDs . The mode of transport of each individual particle was determined by the slope of the particle MSD versus time on a log log scale. A slope 

To quantify the degree of heterogeneity in particle transport rates the distributions of the individual MSDs of COOH PS and PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles at time scales of t 0.1 s and 1 s were normalized by their respective ensemble average MSDs C and D . In general the mean MSD of each particle type was significantly smaller than the ensemble average MSD indicating that a small percentage 10 of the particles contributed significantly to the average rate of transport. At early time scales t 0.1 s when transport of COOH PS nanoparticles was primarily sub diffusive the mean of the MSD was only 2 fold lower than the average at larger time scales t 1 s the mean was nearly 5 fold lower than the average. In contrast for all time scales PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles had mean transport rates that were 5 fold lower than the average. This result provided further evidence that a high percentage of COOH PS nanoparticles were either transiently adherent to mucus or temporarily trapped in microscopic cages in PGM over short time scales thereby leading to a more homogeneous distribution of transport rates . Given time some COOH PS particles could resume diffusion by desorbing or escaping their sub diffusive cages leading to an increase in the heterogeneity of the particle transport rates . On the other hand a higher number of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles had diffusive transport rates at short time scales leading to high heterogeneity in particle transport rates but fewer changed their mode of transport over time which was apparent in the similarities of the mean MSD at time scales of t 0.1 s and 1 s. This result suggests that following the adhesion of a fraction of the PLGA DDAB DNA particles a significant percentage of the remaining particles were able to undergo unrestricted diffusive transport. Heterogeneities in particle transport rates may be important in assessing the efficiency of particles in traversing the mucosal barrier since gene delivery may only require a small percentage of gene carriers to reach target epithelial cells. Hanes et al. supra.

There are several possible explanations for the more rapid transport of the slightly aggregated and thus larger PLGA DDAB DNA particles compared to COOH PS particles. For example Olmstead and coworkers Olmstead et al. supra demonstrated that herpes simplex virus HSV particles adhere to mucin fibers found in cervical mucus causing the fibers to collapse into coil like structures and inducing the formation of larger pores around the condensed mucus. The rearrangement of the mucus network promoted more rapid local transport of HSV particles. Similarly the observed PLGA DDAB DNA particle aggregates with mucus may have led to larger pores that promoted more rapid transport of PLGA DDAB DNA particles compared to COOH PS particles. This hypothesis is supported indirectly by the fact that a considerably higher percentage of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles 8.5 exhibited an MSD greater than 5 fold of their ensemble average MSD compared to only 2.9 for COOH PS nanoparticles each at a time scale of 0.1 s 7.7 versus 3.9 at a time scale of 1 s for PLGA DDAB DNA versus COOH PS respectively .

A second possible explanation for the increased transport rates of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles compared to the slightly smaller COOH PS nanoparticles may be related to the difference in surface chemistries of the two particle types. PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticle surfaces are coated with DNA making them relatively hydrophilic compared to COOH PS nanoparticles. Mucus is composed of a dense network of fibers that are relatively hydrophobic compared to the solution contained within the network pores. Therefore it is possible that the fraction of PLGA DDAB DNA nanoparticles that do not interact electrostatically with negatively charged mucin glycoproteins are capable of enhanced transport in the hydrophilic mucus pores compared to COOH PS particles a larger fraction of which may adhere as single particles to the mucus network. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that a larger fraction of COOH PS particles undergo sub diffusive or hindered transport compared to PLGA DDAB DNA particles . The fact that each particle type appears to adsorb mucus components as indicated by the decrease in potential for each particle upon incubation in mucus presumably makes the particle surfaces more similar. If the entire surface is coated by mucus components then the differences in initial surface chemistries may not be important thus favoring the former hypothesis.

Multiple particle tracking MPT was used to study transport rates of individual gene carriers in gastric mucus. Advantages of MPT include the ability to study individual particle transport and distributions of transport rates as well as their contributions to the average or bulk properties in complex biological environments. Dawson et al. J. Biol. Chem. 2003 278 50393 50401 Suh et al. Efficient active transport of gene nanocarriers to the cell nucleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 100 3878 3882. Transport rates of cationic nanoparticles made from PLGA DDAB DNA in PGM were measured and their transport rates were much higher 10 fold than that of slightly smaller COOH PS nanoparticles. It is possible for larger particles such as the PLGA DDAB DNA particles to move more rapidly through a porous media than smaller particles by for example altering the pore network of the mucus or by spending less time on average either physically trapped within cages formed by elastic mucus fibers or perhaps more likely adherent to mucus fibers. Regardless rapid transport through mucus and the ability to transfect cells make PLGA DDAB DNA particles interesting for further in vitro and in vivo testing as gene delivery agents.

PEG moieties were conjugated onto the surface of PEI DNA nanocomplexes at different N P ratios and PEG concentrations. Transport rates of PEI DNA complexes with N P ratio of 20 unmodified and modified with 10 PEG concentration were quantified using multiple particle tracking techniques.

PEG moieties were non specifically adsorbed to the surface of 500 nm polystyrene particles using a standard adsorption protocol accessible through Polysciences Inc. March 1999 Technical Data Sheet 238E 0304RevD Technical Data Sheet 238F . The transport rates of control particles and surface modified polystyrene particles modified with PEG 3000 PLL or BSA were measured with multiple particle tracking techniques. One dimensional diffusivity of unmodified polystyrene particles was also determined with time lapsed confocal microscopy.

Liposomal formulations of DOTAP DOPE were also modified to include PEG. DOPE PEG 2000 was combined with a cationic lipid based transfection reagent DOTAP DOPE and a fluorescent lipid NBD DOPE at ratios of 1 48 1 respectively. Briefly cationic lipids were combined and dissolved in 1 1 chloroform methanol mixture 50 mM lipid composition and rotary evaporated. The liposomes were resuspended by shaking the film in 20 mM Hepes buffer at 4 C. for 24 hours sonicating in 30 second pulses for 10 intervals and filtering solutions with 0.4 m Whatman filter. Liposomes were complexed with DNA at a 1 1 ratio final DNA concentration was 25 g ml DNA. Reduced adhesion of particles in mucus was assayed by confocal microscopy and laser Doppler anemometry.

Particles with surface chemistries that favor interaction with mucus including more hydrophobic or highly charged particles can be used as mucoadhesive particles to target drugs contraceptives or other products to mucus or biomacromolecules that are adhesive with the modified particle surface.

2.7 Effects of Surface Modification of Particles with PEG on the Rate of Particle Transport in Mucus Quantified with Real Time Multiple Particle Tracking.

Quantitative investigations of the transport of drug or gene carrying particles are currently poorly documented. MPT is a powerful method for studying particle transport rates since this method allows us to simultaneously measure the transport rates of hundreds of individual particles in real time. Particles that can effectively transport through mucus must be able to move through the mucus mesh with minimal interactions e.g. by being preferably small and resistant to adsorption to mucus.

2.8 Previous Application of Multiple Particle Tracking in Assessing Particle Transport and Adhesion in Mucus.

To improve the design of gene carriers transport rates in CF mucus were correlated with physicochemical properties of standard particles including size and surface properties. Multiple particle tracking MPT was used to determine the transport rates of polystyrene particles with different diameters in CF mucus. Dawson et al. J. Biol. Chem. 2003 278 50393 50401. As the diameter of the particles increased from 100 500 nm the mean squared displacements and effective diffusivities decreased by nearly 10 fold. The Stokes Einstein equation was used to determine the microviscosity of the mucus which is the viscosity encountered by a particle transporting through the fluid from the effective diffusivity of 100 200 and 500 nm particles. The microviscosities that the 100 500 nm particles encountered were 10 100 times lower than the macroviscosities of CF mucus as measured by cone and plate rheometry. This difference is simply explained by the fact that particles only transport in the relatively low viscosity pores of the CF mucus mesh whereas macrorheology takes into account the entire mesh. Since the microviscosities have a larger effect on the rate of gene carrier transport MPT was used to probe the effects of physiochemical properties on the microviscosities they encounter in mucus. After surface modification of polystyrene polysebacic acid DOTAP DOPE and polyethylenimine particles with PEG particles this technique was applied to assessing the effects of surface modification on transport rates in mucus.

The effect of surface modification with PEG on transport rates of polystyrene particles in mucus were quantified with multiple particle tracking . This data shows that PEG modification can greatly enhance the diffusion of PS particles into mucus .

The effect of surface modification with PEG 10 PEG on polyethylenimine particles N P ratio of 20 transport rates in CF mucus was quantified with multiple particle tracking . This data shows that PEG modification can greatly enhance the diffusion of PEI gene carriers into mucus .

2.9 Determining the Mean Squared Displacement Diffusion Coefficient and Mode of Transport of Particles as Measured by Multiple Particle Tracking MPT .

Images of particles were acquired as described Apgar et al. Biophys. J. 2000 79 1095 1106 using a SIT camera VE 1000 Dage MTI Michigan City Ind. mounted on an inverted epifluorescence microscope maintained at 37 C. and equipped with a 100 magnification 1.3 numerical aperture oil immersion lens Nikon Melville N.Y. . These images were analyzed using a custom subroutine incorporated to the software Metamorph Universal Imaging Corp. West Chester Pa. . The displacements of the centroids of individual microspheres were simultaneously tracked in the focal plane of the microscope for 20 s at a rate of 30 Hz as many times as necessary to monitor a total of 100 particles for each tested specimen. Software was available to track hundreds of particles simultaneously but the density of the microspheres was adjusted to limit the number of probe particles to 10 30 per field of view in order to reduce potential correlated interactions between neighboring particles. The spatial resolution which was evaluated by tracking the apparent displacement of latex beads firmly tethered to the coverslip was 5 nm. From the trajectories of the microspheres centroids individual time lag averaged mean squared displacements MSD were computed Palmer et al. Biophys. J. 1999 76 1063 1071 from which time lag dependent MSD distributions and distribution of the diffusion coefficient D 4t were generated. These distributions were normalized by the time lag averaged ensemble averaged MSD and subsequently analyzed by computing median standard deviation and skewness statistical parameters that describe the heterogeneity of transport through the samples. Gene vectors can be tracked a minimum distance of 2 5 m from the coverslip which should eliminate the effects of capillary forces between gene vectors and the coverslip. Since the physiochemical properties including size surface charge and composition are not independent the MPT data can be normalized using MPT data collected from standard polystyrene particles with known size and surface charge.

2.10 Effects of Surface Modification of Particles with PEG on the Diffusivity of Particles in Mucus as Observed with Time Lapsed Confocal Microscopy.

Confocal microscopy was used to measure the apparent diffusional velocity of particles or gene carriers in a mucus slab. With this technique particles are added to the surface of a mucus slab and the motion of the particle front into the fluid is assayed by determining the depth of penetration of the particles in two dimensional x y image into the fluid third dimension z . The diffusivity is calculated by one dimensional diffusion model z2 total time .

Over a 30 min period PEI YFP yellow fluorescent protein DNA complexes added to the surface of a sputum slab remained in the same x y plane slice thickness was 0.37 m while PEI PEG 10 YFP complexes translocated over several planes distance 1 m . The measured velocity of PEI PEG YFP particles was 330 nm min in 30 min.

Velocity of unmodified PEI DNA carriers was too small to measure. The effective diffusion coefficient of PEG modified PEI DNA complexes obtained by assuming Fickian diffusion was 2.7 10m s.

One dimensional diffusivities of PLGA DDAB DNA pSA PEG and PS particles in synthetic mucus formulated to model lung mucus were measured using time lapsed confocal microscopy. The diffusivity of PS particles in synthetic mucus was 5.3 10 m s since particles moved 0.4 m in 50 minutes. The diffusivity of PLGA DDAB DNA particles was 2 10 m s since particles moved 2.48 m in 50 minutes. The diffusivity of pSA PEG in mucus was 2 10 m s since particles moved 10.78 m in 86 minutes the slice thickness was increased to ensure that the motion was captured . pSA PEG particles diffused more rapidly than PLGA DDAB DNA particles which diffused more rapidly than PS. Increased mobility of pSA PEG is evidence of the increased mobility of PEG coated particles.

2.11 Determination of the One Dimensional Diffusivity of Particles in Mucus or Other Fluids Using Laser Scanning Confocal Microscopy.

Confocal images of gene vectors in CF sputum are captured with the high performance cooled digital camera AxioCAM HR attached to a Zeiss LSM 510 Meta laser scanning confocal microscope. The LSM 510 Meta is well suited for time lapsed 3 dimensional imaging since the microscope is completely motorized and fully automated through LSM software. Subroutines which allow us to repeat the experimental conditions including the thickness of the z slice laser intensity and time and bleaching intervals were developed for each application including the FRAP 4 D mobility and avidity assays. By allowing the LSM software to control the course of microscopy experiments we are able to repeat experimental conditions with great precision.

Gene vectors suspended in solution 10 l applied to the surface of a CF sputum sample on a Biophetic cover slide which is imaged with a LSM 510 Meta confocal an inverted light microscope thus vectors are moving into the plane of focus . The cover slide was placed in the Bioptechs thermal regulated chamber and allowed to heat up and equilibrate for approximately 30 minutes prior to imaging. Slice thickness is optimized to increase the depth of focus 30 m so gene vectors that move rapidly can be imaged over a long period of time 90 minutes . Four dimensional x y z and t images of CF sputum slab are collected over a 30 90 minute time period with a time interval of 5 minutes . This technique allows us to track the motion of gene vectors and determine an effective velocity and 1D diffusion coefficient of gene vectors in CF sputum before and after the addition of mucolytic agents. Although this technique does not allow high temporal resolution as seen in MPT it is an excellent complement for MPT in that it gives us a method of estimating the long range mobility of gene vectors. This method was also used to focus on immobile beads and to determine changes in mobility after the addition of mucolytic agents.

Mucus adsorption to particle surface results in large changes in the size and zeta potential of particles not modified with PEG. Dawson et al. Biotechnol. Prog. 2004 20 851 857. PEG modified particles had more neutral surface charge and underwent less extreme changes in surface charge indicating that less mucus adsorbs to the particle surfaces suggesting particles are less adhesive to mucus.

2.13 Effects of Addition of Targeting Ligand on the Uptake and Transfection of Surface Modified Particles by Lung or Gut Cells.

Particles modified with PEG are more neutrally charged than cationic particles and do not interact non specifically with cells . To improve the interactions with cells a cell specific targeting ligand was added to the particles . The addition of transferrin to the particle surface improved the interaction with cells used in the studies since they are immortalized from cancer tissues which have been known to use transferrin specificity to steal the body s nutrients and direct them to cancerous cells or tissues. The methods used were modifications of standard assays using flow cytometry to quantify the uptake of fluorescent particles or transfection with fluorescent protein. PEI PEG Tf was internalized by gut cells more efficiently than PEI PEG and had high levels of uptake even in the presence of mucus A . PLGA DDAB DNA with apo Tf transfected cells more efficiently than particles without Tf or particles with other types of Tf. In addition the transfection efficiency of C was as good as that of PEI N P 20 gene carriers and DOTAP DOPE liposomes. Since the other carriers are currently used in clinical trials and numerous studies PLGA DDAB DNA with apo Tf may also be good candidates for clinical studies.

2.14 Addition of Mucolytic Agents to Mucus Prior to Particle Administration Increases Uptake of Particles.

Using concentrations of mucolytic agents used in transport experiments the ability of mucus to increase particle uptake into cells was tested. Addition of mucolytic agents increased uptake of PS particles A in Calu 3 lung cells and uptake of cationic liposomes DOTAP DOPE B into C2BBE 1 gut cells.

2.15 Effect of Surface Modification of PS Particles with BSA on the Rate of Particle Transport in Bovine Cervical Mucus.

As shown in BSA coated particles move more rapidly in mucus than PS suggesting that coating particle surface with a protein or polymer such as PAA may also increase transport in mucus.

All publications and patents mentioned herein are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety as if each individual publication or patent was specifically and individually indicated to be incorporated by reference.

Those skilled in the art will recognize or be able to ascertain using no more than routine experimentation many equivalents to the specific embodiments of the invention described herein. Such equivalents are intended to be encompassed by the following claims.

